last updated: 7 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
farrer & farrer [2023] fedcfamc2f 538
orders
the court orders that:
parenting   the mother shall inform the father, by communicating with him using the divvito app, in relation to all major long term, non-urgent issues for the children of her proposed decision no less than 14 days prior to such decision being made, and (b) in the event that the father wishes to provide input in relation to the proposed decision, such input is to be provided to the mother by responding to her communication in the divvito app within a further 7 days from the date of the mother’s divvito communication, and (c) the mother shall consider the father’s input in making any decision in relation to major long-term issues for the children, however she will have the final authority to make decisions in this regard.   in the event that the father wishes to provide input in relation to the proposed decision, such input is to be provided to the mother by responding to her communication in the divvito app within a further 7 days from the date of the mother’s divvito communication, and (c) the mother shall consider the father’s input in making any decision in relation to major long-term issues for the children, however she will have the final authority to make decisions in this regard.   the mother shall consider the father’s input in making any decision in relation to major long-term issues for the children, however she will have the final authority to make decisions in this regard.   any medical problems or illnesses suffered by the children whilst in their care, and (b) any medication that has been prescribed for the children and shall ensure the other party is provided with this medication while the children are in the other party's care.   any medication that has been prescribed for the children and shall ensure the other party is provided with this medication while the children are in the other party's care.
property  that within seven (7) days of the date of these orders the parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to direct southern waters legal to pay to the parties the funds currently held in trust by them on behalf of the parties, being $661,224.85 to the wife and $133,461.15 to the husband, with any interest accumulated on the funds to be split as to 67.5% to the wife and 32.5% to the husband. (b) that within twenty-eight (28) days from the date of these orders the wife shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to relinquish all beneficial entitlements and/or loan accounts in c pty ltd and or the farrer family trust in favour of the husband. (c) that simultaneously with order 24(b), the husband in both his personal capacity and in his capacity as a former director of c pty ltd will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to discharge and release the wife from and indemnify the wife against any and all manner of actions, suits, causes of action, arbitrations, liabilities, debts, dues, costs, interests, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which c pty ltd and/or farrer family trust has past, present, or future. (d) that save as otherwise provided in these orders the husband shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (i) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in his possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders. (e) that save as otherwise provided in these orders the wife shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (i) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in her possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders. (f) each party will otherwise retain any other personal liabilities, loans or debts in their sole name and will indemnify the other parties in relation thereto. (g) in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument necessary to give effect to these orders then the registrars of the court are appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth), to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed or instrument.   that within twenty-eight (28) days from the date of these orders the wife shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to relinquish all beneficial entitlements and/or loan accounts in c pty ltd and or the farrer family trust in favour of the husband. (c) that simultaneously with order 24(b), the husband in both his personal capacity and in his capacity as a former director of c pty ltd will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to discharge and release the wife from and indemnify the wife against any and all manner of actions, suits, causes of action, arbitrations, liabilities, debts, dues, costs, interests, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which c pty ltd and/or farrer family trust has past, present, or future. (d) that save as otherwise provided in these orders the husband shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (i) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in his possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders. (e) that save as otherwise provided in these orders the wife shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (i) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in her possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders. (f) each party will otherwise retain any other personal liabilities, loans or debts in their sole name and will indemnify the other parties in relation thereto. (g) in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument necessary to give effect to these orders then the registrars of the court are appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth), to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed or instrument.   that simultaneously with order 24(b), the husband in both his personal capacity and in his capacity as a former director of c pty ltd will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to discharge and release the wife from and indemnify the wife against any and all manner of actions, suits, causes of action, arbitrations, liabilities, debts, dues, costs, interests, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which c pty ltd and/or farrer family trust has past, present, or future. (d) that save as otherwise provided in these orders the husband shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (i) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in his possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders. (e) that save as otherwise provided in these orders the wife shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (i) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in her possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders. (f) each party will otherwise retain any other personal liabilities, loans or debts in their sole name and will indemnify the other parties in relation thereto. (g) in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument necessary to give effect to these orders then the registrars of the court are appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth), to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed or instrument.   that save as otherwise provided in these orders the husband shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (i) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in his possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders. (e) that save as otherwise provided in these orders the wife shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (i) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in her possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders. (f) each party will otherwise retain any other personal liabilities, loans or debts in their sole name and will indemnify the other parties in relation thereto. (g) in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument necessary to give effect to these orders then the registrars of the court are appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth), to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed or instrument.   any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in his possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders.  ) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders.   that save as otherwise provided in these orders the wife shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (i) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in her possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders. (f) each party will otherwise retain any other personal liabilities, loans or debts in their sole name and will indemnify the other parties in relation thereto. (g) in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument necessary to give effect to these orders then the registrars of the court are appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth), to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed or instrument.   any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in her possession, and (ii) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders.  ) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders.   each party will otherwise retain any other personal liabilities, loans or debts in their sole name and will indemnify the other parties in relation thereto. (g) in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument necessary to give effect to these orders then the registrars of the court are appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth), to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed or instrument.   in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument necessary to give effect to these orders then the registrars of the court are appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth), to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed or instrument.
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction
the proceedings  the former matrimonial home at d street, suburb e, nsw (“the d street, suburb e property”), which since sold prior to the final hearing, (b) the value of the husband’s interest as sole shareholder in a private corporation c pty ltd pty ltd (“c pty ltd”), which was not an asset forming part of the property at the time of the final hearing, and (c) a motor vehicle 1.   the value of the husband’s interest as sole shareholder in a private corporation c pty ltd pty ltd (“c pty ltd”), which was not an asset forming part of the property at the time of the final hearing, and (c) a motor vehicle 1.   a motor vehicle 1.
the effect of the orders was that a single expert witness was identified by the parties and appointed pursuant to the rules.   pay all arrears of council rates and water rates on the d street, suburb e property and thereafter to make payments in relation to council and water rates as and when they fall due, (b) to make all payments as and when they fall due on all loans secured by way of mortgage on the d street, suburb e property, and (c) pay all instalments due and payable in relation to house and contents insurance with company f insurance on the d street, suburb e property.   to make all payments as and when they fall due on all loans secured by way of mortgage on the d street, suburb e property, and (c) pay all instalments due and payable in relation to house and contents insurance with company f insurance on the d street, suburb e property.   pay all instalments due and payable in relation to house and contents insurance with company f insurance on the d street, suburb e property.   the three children to live with their mother, (b) x to spend time with their father in accordance with her wishes, (c) y and z to spend time with their father each alternate weekend from 10:00am on saturday until 5:00pm on saturday and from 10:00am on sunday to 5:00pm on sunday, and (d) for all of the children to have electronic communication by telephone or facetime each monday, wednesday and friday between 6:30 pm and 7 pm.   x to spend time with their father in accordance with her wishes, (c) y and z to spend time with their father each alternate weekend from 10:00am on saturday until 5:00pm on saturday and from 10:00am on sunday to 5:00pm on sunday, and (d) for all of the children to have electronic communication by telephone or facetime each monday, wednesday and friday between 6:30 pm and 7 pm.   y and z to spend time with their father each alternate weekend from 10:00am on saturday until 5:00pm on saturday and from 10:00am on sunday to 5:00pm on sunday, and (d) for all of the children to have electronic communication by telephone or facetime each monday, wednesday and friday between 6:30 pm and 7 pm.   for all of the children to have electronic communication by telephone or facetime each monday, wednesday and friday between 6:30 pm and 7 pm.
changeovers were ordered to occur at the mcdonald’s family restaurant at suburb g. an injunctive order was made restraining the father from consuming alcohol in the 12 hour period prior to the children spending time with him and at all during the time the children were in his care. a suite of other interim ancillary parenting orders were made in fairly standard terms. an order was made under section 68l of the act appointing an icl to represent the interests of all three children in the proceedings.   the time y and z would spend with their father over the christmas period, on father’s day, the children’s birthday and the father’s birthday, and with their mother on mother’s day, the children’s birthdays and the mother’s birthday, (b) the father undertaking a liver function test and carbohydrate deficient transfer (cdt test) upon request from the mother’s solicitor, and (c) that in the event that the father failed to pay arrears of school fees in future of school fees on the date they were payable, the mother was permitted to enrolled the children in the nearest public school relative to her home.   the father undertaking a liver function test and carbohydrate deficient transfer (cdt test) upon request from the mother’s solicitor, and (c) that in the event that the father failed to pay arrears of school fees in future of school fees on the date they were payable, the mother was permitted to enrolled the children in the nearest public school relative to her home.   that in the event that the father failed to pay arrears of school fees in future of school fees on the date they were payable, the mother was permitted to enrolled the children in the nearest public school relative to her home.   the costs of x’s “braces”, (b) $2000 for x’s school laptop for 2021, (c) $50,000 to the husband’s then solicitors, j law firm, (d) $50,000 to the wife or as she may direct, and (e) the balance into a trust account with southern waters legal, the wife’s solicitors.   $2000 for x’s school laptop for 2021, (c) $50,000 to the husband’s then solicitors, j law firm, (d) $50,000 to the wife or as she may direct, and (e) the balance into a trust account with southern waters legal, the wife’s solicitors.   $50,000 to the husband’s then solicitors, j law firm, (d) $50,000 to the wife or as she may direct, and (e) the balance into a trust account with southern waters legal, the wife’s solicitors.   $50,000 to the wife or as she may direct, and (e) the balance into a trust account with southern waters legal, the wife’s solicitors.   the balance into a trust account with southern waters legal, the wife’s solicitors.
an order was made that “the adjustment of council and water rates on settlement be treated as an interim distribution to the husband and recorded as such on any balance sheet at a final hearing or to be considered when the parties finalise a property settlement”. a notation was made that the council rates owing at the date of the orders were $6,812.67 and the arrears of water rates at the date of the orders were $2,150.15. an order was made for the wife to retain certain items of personal property listed in an annexure to the orders, to be delivered to the wife by the husband, and an order was made for the sale of a dog trailer with the proceeds of sale to be paid into the trust account of southern waters legal to be held on behalf of both parties.
noting that the applicant wife’s case is that the first respondent husband is not entitled to any of the monies held in the southern waters legal trust account, if the court orders that any of the monies are to be paid to the first respondent husband by way of property settlement, each of the parties consent to an order that the first $65,458.66 of the amount ordered to be paid to the first respondent husband, or any such lesser amount ordered to be paid to the first respondent husband by way of property settlement, is to be paid to [j law firm].
materials relied upon at hearing  outline of case document filed on 18 october 2022, and the outline of case document filed on 21 march 2022 only relation to the “applicant’s proposed minute of order” attached thereto, (g) initiating application filed on 11 december 2018, (h) affidavit of the mother adopted by electronic signature pursuant to the then current practice direction and filed on 30 september 2022, (i) affidavit of mr m (mothers partner) adopted by electronic signature pursuant to the then current practice direction on 20 october 2022 and filed on 21 october 2022, and (j) financial statement of the mother adopted by electronic signature in accordance with the then current practice direction and filed on 30 september 2022,   initiating application filed on 11 december 2018, (h) affidavit of the mother adopted by electronic signature pursuant to the then current practice direction and filed on 30 september 2022, (i) affidavit of mr m (mothers partner) adopted by electronic signature pursuant to the then current practice direction on 20 october 2022 and filed on 21 october 2022, and (j) financial statement of the mother adopted by electronic signature in accordance with the then current practice direction and filed on 30 september 2022,   affidavit of the mother adopted by electronic signature pursuant to the then current practice direction and filed on 30 september 2022, (i) affidavit of mr m (mothers partner) adopted by electronic signature pursuant to the then current practice direction on 20 october 2022 and filed on 21 october 2022, and (j) financial statement of the mother adopted by electronic signature in accordance with the then current practice direction and filed on 30 september 2022,   affidavit of mr m (mothers partner) adopted by electronic signature pursuant to the then current practice direction on 20 october 2022 and filed on 21 october 2022, and (j) financial statement of the mother adopted by electronic signature in accordance with the then current practice direction and filed on 30 september 2022,   financial statement of the mother adopted by electronic signature in accordance with the then current practice direction and filed on 30 september 2022,   exhibit a1 – being three binder folders of containing exhibits attached to the mother’s affidavit sworn 30 september 2022. (b) exhibit a2 – being nsw police force criminal history record documents in the name of mr farrer notes paginated as pages 60 and 61 inclusive, (c) exhibit a3 – being nsw health region n local health district patient notes in the father’s name paginated as pages 62-66 inclusive, (d) exhibit a4 – being ms o clinical counselling notes with y dated 3 october 2019, 5 march 20, 24 january 2020. notes with z dated 3 october 2019 and notes with x 5 september 2019 paginated as pages 3, 4, 5, 6 and 11 inclusive, and (e) exhibit a5 – being a letter from dr p to dr q dated 18 july 2018 paginated as pages 20 and 21 inclusive.   exhibit a2 – being nsw police force criminal history record documents in the name of mr farrer notes paginated as pages 60 and 61 inclusive, (c) exhibit a3 – being nsw health region n local health district patient notes in the father’s name paginated as pages 62-66 inclusive, (d) exhibit a4 – being ms o clinical counselling notes with y dated 3 october 2019, 5 march 20, 24 january 2020. notes with z dated 3 october 2019 and notes with x 5 september 2019 paginated as pages 3, 4, 5, 6 and 11 inclusive, and (e) exhibit a5 – being a letter from dr p to dr q dated 18 july 2018 paginated as pages 20 and 21 inclusive.   exhibit a3 – being nsw health region n local health district patient notes in the father’s name paginated as pages 62-66 inclusive, (d) exhibit a4 – being ms o clinical counselling notes with y dated 3 october 2019, 5 march 20, 24 january 2020. notes with z dated 3 october 2019 and notes with x 5 september 2019 paginated as pages 3, 4, 5, 6 and 11 inclusive, and (e) exhibit a5 – being a letter from dr p to dr q dated 18 july 2018 paginated as pages 20 and 21 inclusive.   exhibit a4 – being ms o clinical counselling notes with y dated 3 october 2019, 5 march 20, 24 january 2020. notes with z dated 3 october 2019 and notes with x 5 september 2019 paginated as pages 3, 4, 5, 6 and 11 inclusive, and (e) exhibit a5 – being a letter from dr p to dr q dated 18 july 2018 paginated as pages 20 and 21 inclusive.   exhibit a5 – being a letter from dr p to dr q dated 18 july 2018 paginated as pages 20 and 21 inclusive.   respondent’s case outline prepared by mr havenstein of counsel dated 23 october 2022, (b) minute of orders sought by the father (exhibit r1), (c) amended response filed on 13 may 2020, (d) affidavit of the father sworn and filed on 18 october 2022 (incorrectly marked on the front as sworn on 8 march 2022), and (e) financial statement of the father sworn or affirmed on 14 october 2022 and filed on 18 september 2022.   minute of orders sought by the father (exhibit r1), (c) amended response filed on 13 may 2020, (d) affidavit of the father sworn and filed on 18 october 2022 (incorrectly marked on the front as sworn on 8 march 2022), and (e) financial statement of the father sworn or affirmed on 14 october 2022 and filed on 18 september 2022.   amended response filed on 13 may 2020, (d) affidavit of the father sworn and filed on 18 october 2022 (incorrectly marked on the front as sworn on 8 march 2022), and (e) financial statement of the father sworn or affirmed on 14 october 2022 and filed on 18 september 2022.   affidavit of the father sworn and filed on 18 october 2022 (incorrectly marked on the front as sworn on 8 march 2022), and (e) financial statement of the father sworn or affirmed on 14 october 2022 and filed on 18 september 2022.   financial statement of the father sworn or affirmed on 14 october 2022 and filed on 18 september 2022.   outline of case document filed 21 march 2022, and (b) minute of proposed orders sought by the icl (exhibit icl 2).   minute of proposed orders sought by the icl (exhibit icl 2).
the competing proposals of the parties and the icl
property that within 7 days of the date of the orders the parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to direct southern waters legal to pay to the wife the funds currently held in trust by them on behalf of the parties. that within 7 days of the date of the orders the parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to close any jointly held bank accounts with any balance therein to be equally divided between the parties. that within twenty-eight (28) days from the date of these orders the wife shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to relinquish all beneficial entitlements and/or loan accounts in [c pty ltd] and/or the [farrer] family trust in favour of the husband. that simultaneously with order 3, the husband in both his personal capacity and in his capacity as a former director of [c pty ltd] will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to discharge and release the wife from and indemnify the wife against any and all manner of actions, suits, causes of action, arbitrations, liabilities, debts, dues, costs, interests, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which [c pty ltd] and/or [farrer] family trust has past, present or future. that save as otherwise provided in these orders the husband shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (a) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in his possession, and (b) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders that save as otherwise provided in these orders the wife shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (a) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in her possession, and (b) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders. each party will otherwise retain any other personal liabilities, loans or debts in their sole name and will indemnify the other parties in relation thereto. in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument necessary to give effect to these orders then the registrar of the court is appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act, to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed or instrument. parenting that the parenting orders made by the court on 3 february 2020 and 10 june 2020 be discharged. that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children, [x], born 2005 (“x”), [y], born 2008 (“[y]”) and [z], born 2011 (“z”) (“the children”). in exercising sole parental responsibility: (a) the mother shall inform the father, by communicating with him using the divvito app, in relation to all major long term, non-urgent issues for the children of her proposed decision no less than 14 days prior to such decision being made, and (b) in the event that the father wishes to provide input in relation to the proposed decision, such input is to be provided to the mother by responding to her communication in the divvito app within a further 7 days from the date of the mother’s divvito communication, and (c) the mother shall consider the father’s input in making any decision in relation to major long-term issues for the children, however she will have the final authority to make decisions in this regard. that the children live with the mother. that the children spend time with the father in accordance with their wishes. that the father be restrained from consuming alcohol in the 12 hour period prior to [y] and [z] spending time with him pursuant to these orders, and during the time the children are in his care pursuant to these orders. that the parties shall ensure that at all times they have a current version of the divvito app installed and working on their personal phones and shall communicate with each other in relation to the children using the divvito app. it is noted in this regard that the mother currently has the divvito app installed on her phone and that the father will need to reinstall the app using his initial email details he used to set up the app on his phone so that he can connect with the mother via the app. that the children be permitted to travel outside of the commonwealth of australia without the written consent of the father. that the mother be at liberty to sign passport applications and renewal of passport applications for the children without the consent, input or execution of the father. each of the parents is restrained from denigrating the other parent, any member of the other parent’s family, or any member of the other parent’s household in the presence of the children or within the hearing of the children. each of the parents is restrained from allowing the children, or either of them, to remain in the presence of any third party who is denigrating the other parent, any member of the other parent’s family, or any member of the other parent’s household in the presence of the children, or within the hearing of the children. pursuant to s.65da(2) and s.62b, the particulars of the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may follow if a person contravenes these orders and details of who can assist the parties adjust to and comply with an order are set out in the fact sheet attached hereto and these particulars are included in these orders.   any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in his possession, and (b) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders   any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders   any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are, as at the date of the orders, in her possession, and (b) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders.   any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders.   the mother shall inform the father, by communicating with him using the divvito app, in relation to all major long term, non-urgent issues for the children of her proposed decision no less than 14 days prior to such decision being made, and (b) in the event that the father wishes to provide input in relation to the proposed decision, such input is to be provided to the mother by responding to her communication in the divvito app within a further 7 days from the date of the mother’s divvito communication, and (c) the mother shall consider the father’s input in making any decision in relation to major long-term issues for the children, however she will have the final authority to make decisions in this regard.   in the event that the father wishes to provide input in relation to the proposed decision, such input is to be provided to the mother by responding to her communication in the divvito app within a further 7 days from the date of the mother’s divvito communication, and (c) the mother shall consider the father’s input in making any decision in relation to major long-term issues for the children, however she will have the final authority to make decisions in this regard.   the mother shall consider the father’s input in making any decision in relation to major long-term issues for the children, however she will have the final authority to make decisions in this regard.
parenting orders: that all previous parenting orders be discharged. that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children [x] born 2005, [y] born 2008 and [z] born 2011. that the children live with the mother. that [x] spend time with the father in accordance with her wishes. that [y] and [z] spend time with the father as follows: school terms:
5.1 until 31 december 2022 from 9:00am to 5:00pm on saturday in week 1 of each fortnight. 5.2 from 9:00am on saturday to 5:00pm on sunday in week 1 of each fortnight from 1 january 2023.
school holidays: unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties that the children shall spend time with the father for half of all school holiday periods being the first half in even-numbered years and with the mother for the second of all school holidays periods in even-numbered years commencing in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter. unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties that the children shall spend time with the mother for half of all school holiday periods being the first half in odd-numbered years and with the father for the second of all school holidays periods in odd-numbered years commencing in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. 8. that for the purposes of these orders school holidays are defined as follows:
8.1 the school holidays commence from the conclusion of the school on the last day of the school term, 8.2 changeovers shall occur on the middle day of the school holiday period at 5:00pm, 8.3 in the event that there are an uneven number of days in the school holidays the parent with the care of the child during the first half of the school holidays shall have an additional day, 8.4 the school holidays end at 5:00pm on the sunday before the commencement of the first day of the new school term, 8.5 in the even there is a pupil free day on the first or last day of school term the pupil free day will be treated as part of the school holidays. unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties that the children’s time with the father pursuant to order 5 herein shall be suspended during school holidays and shall resume on the first saturday after the new school term commences.
significant time: notwithstanding any other orders in relation to special occasions the children shall spend time with their parents as follows:
a. christmas:
i. in even numbered years: from 10:00am to 4:00pm on 25 december with the father. from 4:00 pm on 25 december until 4:00 pm on 26 december with the mother. ii. in odd numbered years: from 10:00 am on 25 december until 4:00 pm on 25 december with the mother. from 4:00pm on 25 december until 4:00 pm on 25 december with the father,
b. easter time: in odd numbered years with the father from 5:00pm on easter thursday until before school on the tuesday immediately following easter monday, in even numbered years with the mother from 5:00pm on easter thursday until before school on the tuesday immediately following easter monday. children’s birthdays: on each child’s birthday if the children are not otherwise in the care of a parent at all on their birthday then with the non-carer parent from the end of school until 8:00pm if the child’s birthday falls on a school day and from 9:00am until 2:00pm if the child’s birthday falls on a non-school day. father’s birthday: c. from 9:00am to 5:00pm on the father’s birthday. father’s day: d. from 9:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day each year. mother’s day: the father’s time shall be suspended on the mother’s day weekend from after school on the friday immediately preceding mother’s day until the start of school on the monday immediately following mother’s day,
11. at any other time as agreed between the parties. changeover: any changeover that does not occur at the children’s school/s is to occur by the father attending upon the public pathway at the front of the mother’s residence to collect and deliver the children and the mother is to attend upon the public pathway at the front of the father’s residence to collect and deliver the children. communication: that the children have liberal communication with the father. the parties shall communicate with each other by email or text message in relation to matters affecting the welfare or wellbeing of the children and that communication such be civil and respectful. passports: both parents are to do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to enable each child to have an australian passport at all times including doing all acts and things and signing all documents to renew the children’s passports at least 6 months before they expire. that each parent shall provide the other parent with the passport for the child for whom they usually retain the passport at least 48 hours before any travel with the other parent and the other parent shall return the passport to the parent who usually retains that passport within 48 hours of his return to australia. travel: that both parents must obtain the other parent’s written consent to travel outside of the commonwealth australia at least 42 days before the trip except in the event of an emergency (such as a death in the family) in which case the parents must obtain the other parent’s written consent to travel outside of the commonwealth australia at least 48 hours before the trip. that neither parent travel with the child to or through a non-hague convention country without the authenticated written consent of the other parent. that neither parent unreasonably withhold consent to the child travelling through a non-hague convention country. if either parent intends taking the child out of the commonwealth of australia with the written consent of the other parent they are to advise the other parent in writing not less than eight (8) weeks prior to the planned departure date and are to provide the other parent with a full itinerary including documentary evidence of return airfares, proof of any inoculations recommended by the child’s gp and contact details including details of all accommodation and telephone numbers at which the child are to stay whilst overseas. that each parent notify the other parent at least one week in advance of the proposed departure date of any interstate travel and provide each other with a copy of the itinerary and proposed return date and details of all accommodation and telephone numbers at which the child are to stay whilst interstate. other orders: each of the parties is restrained from making comments derogatory of the other parent, any member of other parent’s family or any member of the other parent’s household in the presence or within the hearing of any of the children. each of the parties is restrained from allowing any of the children to remain in the presence of or within the hearing of any other person making comments derogatory of the other parent, any member of the other parent’s family or any member of the other parent’s household. the father is restrained from consuming more than the legal limit of alcohol for driving a motor vehicle 24 hours prior to and during his time with the children. both parents are to do all things to ensure that during the times the children are in their care that the children participate in the extracurricular activities in which the children or either of them are enrolled. each party is to notify the other parent within 24 hours of there being any change in their residential address, email address or contact telephone number. in the event that the child suffers a medical emergency requiring medical attention while spending time or living with either parent the other parent is to be notified as soon as possible and provided with full details of the medical practitioner or medical facility which the child attends and the medical practitioner or facility is to provide access to both parents to the child’s medical information or records retained by them by request. that the mother and father attend family therapy to improve their co-parenting relationship and the cost of the therapy is to be paid by the mother and father in equal shares. each party is restrained from discussing these proceedings with the children or either of them or in the children’s (or either of them) presence or hearing and from allowing any other person to discuss these proceedings in the presence of or within the hearing or children or either of them with the exception of the independent children’s lawyer discussing these proceedings with the children in the proper course of their duties. property settlement: the court notes that the parties have sold the property known as and situate at [d street, suburb e] being folio identifier ... (“the former matrimonial home”) and that the nett proceeds are held in the trust account of southern waters legal. that the nett proceeds of the sale of the former matrimonial home be paid as follows in the following order: - payment of legal fees in the sum of $65,458.66 to [mr j], the balance of the nett proceeds such as to effect an overall division of the nett asset pool as to 45% to the husband, the balance of the nett proceeds of the sale to the wife. bank accounts: that within 28 days of the date of these orders the husband and wife shall do all such acts and things and sign all documents necessary to close all joint bank accounts and divide the proceeds equally between them. motor vehicles: that the wife retain all her right, title and interest in the [motor vehicle 2] registration number [...] to the exclusion of the husband. that the husband retain all his right, title and interest in the [motor vehicle 1]. that the husband retain all his right, title and interest in the [motor vehicle 3]. that the husband retain all his right, title and interest in the [motor vehicle 4]. that the husband retain all his right, title and interest in the caravan. that the wife retain all his right, title and interest in the dog trailer. superannuation: that the husband shall retain all his right, title and interest in the [super fund 1]. that the wife shall retain all her right, title and interest in her [super fund 2]. liabilities: the husband and wife shall be solely responsible for all liabilities held in their own names as at the date of these orders and shall indemnify and keep indemnified the other party from any liability in relation thereto. the husband and wife shall be solely responsible for any past, present or future taxation liability payable to the australian taxation office including any capital gains tax liabilities and shall indemnify and keep indemnified the other party from any liability in relation thereto. remainder: that, subject to these orders, each party be declared to be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other of all other shares, bank accounts, furniture, personalty, jewellery, property and chattels of whatsoever nature and kind in the possession of such party as at the date of the making of these orders and for that purpose bank accounts are deemed to be in the possession of the person whose name appears on the bank records thereof, insurance policies are deemed to be in the possession of the registered owner thereof and any entitlement to the benefit pursuant to the superannuation policy or superannuation fund shall be deemed to be in the possession of the person in whose name such entitlement stands. other orders: that the parties intend, pursuant to section 81 family law act 1975, that these orders shall finally determine the financial relationship between them and avoid any proceedings between them. that pursuant to section 106a family law act 1975, if an order under this act has directed a person to execute a deed and instrument and should either party refuse or neglect to comply with the direction or, for any other reason, the court considers it necessary to exercise the powers of the court under this subsection then the court may appoint an officer of the court or other person to execute the deed or instrument in the name of the person to whom the direction was given and to do all acts and things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed or instrument.
recitals and definitions: "father" means [mr farrer] born 1977. "mother" means [ms farrer] born 1979. "[x] " means [x] born 2005. "children" means [y] born 2008 and [z] born 2011. the mother and father commenced cohabitation in 2000. final separation occurred 7 may 2018. the parties consent to the making of the following orders and to those orders being of the same force and validity as if they had been made after a hearing by the court. parenting that all previous parenting orders be discharged. parental responsibility equal shared parental responsibility the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for [x] born 2005, [y] born 2008 and [z] born 2011 and for the purpose of this order the following shall apply:
2.1. the mother is to contact the father via the devitto app in respect of any proposal concerning major long term issues in respect of the children. 2.2. within 7 days thereafter, the father respond to the mother via devvito app in respect of the proposal. 2.3. both the mother and the father shall make a genuine effort to consult with one another and reach agreement in respect of the proposal. 2.4. in the event that:
2.4.1. the father does not comply with order 2, or 2.4.2. following compliance with order 2, including for non-urgent matters, that the parties participate in family dispute resolution,
the mother shall make the final decision. 2.5. in cases of an emergency, order 2 hereof shall be dispensed with and the mother will make the decision and inform the father of the decision as soon as practicable thereafter.
living arrangements significant and substantial time the children live with the mother. [x] shall spend time with the father as per her wishes. subject to the parties compliance with orders 13, 14 and 18 the children spend time with the father as follows:
5.1. from 12.00pm until 2.00pm saturday, commencing the first saturday following the parties compliance with orders 13, 14 and 18, and continuing each saturday for 8 occasions. 5.2. from 12.00pm until 5.00pm saturday, commencing the first saturday following the conclusion of order 5.1 and continuing each alternate week for 6 occasions. 5.3. from the 9.00am until 5.00pm saturday, commencing the first saturday following the conclusion of order 5.2 and continuing each alternate week thereafter.
special occasions
5.4. subject to the commencement of order 5.2, the children shall spend time with the father on the following special occasions if the children are not already in the father's care:
5.4.1. from 9.00am until 5:00pm father's day. 5.4.2. from 9:00am until 2:00pm christmas day in even number years. 5.4.3. from 2:00pm until 7.00pm christmas day in odd numbered years. 5.4.4. from 9.00am until 5:00pm on the friday, and saturday immediately preceding easter sunday in odd numbered years. 5.4.5. from 9.00am until 5:00pm on the easter sunday and easter monday in even numbered years. 5.4.6. for a period on the children's birthdays as agreed and failing agreement as follows:
5.4.6.1. if the child's birthday falls on a school day from the conclusion of school until 6:30pm. 5.4.6.2. if the child's birthday falls on a non-school day from 9:00am until 2:00pm.
5.4.7. from 9.00am to 5.00pm on the father's birthday.
5.5. at any other time agreed between the parties. the children shall spend time with the mother on the following special occasions if the children are not already in the mother's care: 6.1. from 9:00am until 5:00pm mother's day. 6.2. from 9:00am until 2.00pm christmas day in odd number years. 6.3. from 2:00pm until 7:00pm christmas day in even numbered years. 6.4. from 9.00am until 5:00pm on the friday, and saturday immediately preceding easter sunday in even numbered years. 6.5. from 9.00am until 5:00pm on the easter sunday and easter monday in odd numbered years. 6.6. for a period on the children's birthdays as agreed and failing agreement as follows:
6.6.1. if the child's birthday falls on a school day from 6:30pm until 9.30pm. 6.6.2. if the child's birthday falls on a non-school day from 3:00pm until 7:00pm.
changeover for the purposes of this order, changeover shall occur at the children's school or when not appropriate changeover will occur at mcdonalds [suburb g]. communication phone time the parties are at liberty to communicate with the children at all reasonable times. the father shall provide his work roster to the mother, no less then 3 weeks prior to its commencement, in order to facilitate availabilities for the children to contact the father. the mother shall discuss with the children the father's communication availabilities in relation to his provided work schedule, no less than 1 week prior to his work schedule commencing. both parties shall facilitate any request by the children to telephone, or otherwise contact the parent with whom they are not currently spending time. 12. for the purposes of orders 8 and 11 herein:
12.1. the parties shall ensure that the phone which the other parent uses to call the children is on, charged and placed in an area with reception. 12.2. the parties shall ensure that the children are afforded privacy during the phone call. 12.3. the telephone calls not occur by way of speaker phone. 12.4. the father is at liberty to contact [x] and/or [y] via their own mobile phone.
counsellor prior to the commencement of the father's time under order 5, the father shall engage with a counsellor to draft a letter to each of the children, and [x], addressing:
13.1. the father's history and acknowledgement of his alcohol abuse, 13.2. the father's current circumstances, both generally and surrounding alcohol, 13.3. any other aspects that the counsellor deems relevant. the father will communicate with the mother via the devvito app, upon the finalisation of these letters, to convey that the letters are finalised, and to provide the mother with the contact details of the counsellor. within 14 days of receipt of the communication with the father pursuant to order 143, the mother will do all acts and things necessary to secure an appointment with the counsellor for the children and [x] upon receiving communication from the father that the letters have been finalised.
communication between the parties via app all communications between the mother and father, except in the case of an emergency, shall take place via the 'devvito parenting app'(" devvito app") and for the purposes of this order the mother and father shall within seven (7) days from the date of these orders both do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to cause the devvito app to be downloaded onto their respective mobile phones, at their own cost, and for the devvito app to be made available for their use at all times. exchange of information each party advise the other party and keep the other party advised of their current contact numbers (including both landline and mobile phone numbers if applicable) and advised the other party of any changes to these details within seven days of such change occurring. the father shall advise the mother of his current residential address and keep the mother advised of any changes to these details within seven days of such change occurring. prior to the commencement of the father's time under order 5, the father shall provide to the mother evidence of his current residence within residential housing. that in the event that the father ceases to reside in residential housing, the father's time with the children shall be suspended until the father can provide evidence of relocation to a residential property. 20. the parties shall ensure that the other is kept informed of:
20.1. any medical problems or illnesses suffered by the children while in their care, 20.2. any medication that has been prescribed for the children and shall ensure the other party is provided with this medication while the children are in the other party's care. 20.3. any social, school, or religious functions which the children are to attend. the parties shall each inform the other party in writing as soon as practicable of any specialist medical appointments with any medical consultant, psychologist, psychiatrist, counsellor, or therapist (hereinafter referred to as 'consultant') in relation to the children. each party shall do all acts and all things to ensure that the other party is provided with all reports by any such consultant. the other party be permitted to attend on such appointments, such attendance or attendance to be at the sole discretion of any such consultant. within fourteen (14) days of the children's subsequent enrolment at any school the parties do all acts and things and sign all irrevocable authorities necessary to ensure that whichever school the children may attend from time to time, that school forward directly to the father copies of all of each child's school reports and merit cards, any written material pertaining to each child's academic and extra-curricular activities. within fourteen (14) days of the children's subsequent enrolment at any school the parties do all acts and things and sign all irrevocable authorities necessary to ensure that whichever school the children may attend from time to time, that school forward directly to the father copies of the children's school photos at the father's own cost. during any periods referred to in these orders, in the event of the children being hospitalised or receiving medical attention, the parent spending time with the children shall notify the other parent as soon as practicable after the first contact with either the medical practitioner, medical centre or hospital and that both parents shall be permitted to attend upon the medical facility the child/children is attending as a result of their medical condition irrespective whether the children are in their care pursuant to these orders.
restraints non-denigration the mother is restrained from denigrating the father or the paternal family in the presence or hearing of the children and shall ensure that no other person denigrates the father or the paternal family in the presence or hearing of the children. the father is restrained from denigrating the mother or the maternal family in the presence or hearing of the children and shall ensure that no other person denigrates the mother or the paternal family in the presence or hearing of the children. discipline the parties be restrained from physically disciplining the children or allowing or authorising any third party to physically discipline the children. drugs/prescription mediation the parties are restrained from consuming any prescription medication not prescribed to them whilst the children are in their care or for 12 hours prior the children coming into their care, and will remove the children from any place where a third party is under the influence of illicit substances/prescription medication not prescribed to them. alcohol the father is restrained from consuming alcohol 12 hours prior to the children coming into their care and at all times the children are in their care. the parties are restrained from consuming alcohol whilst the children are in their care to an extent that they would not legally be able to drive a motor vehicle, and will remove the children from any place where a third party has consumed alcohol to an extent where they would not legally be able to drive a motor vehicle. drug testing carbohydrate deficient transferrin (cdt test) the father make an appointment and attend for a carbohydrate deficient transferrin (cdt test) for alcohol testing purposes. collection is to be conducted by a qualified and certified collector. chain-of-custody procedure is to be applied to the sample. testing is to be conducted at an approved laboratory, accredited to conduct cdt testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body for that laboratory. to give effect to this order:
33.1. within seventy-two (72) hours of the date of these orders, the father is required to make an appointment for the purpose of providing a blood sample for testing alcohol purposes, 33.2. within seventy-two hours prior to any cdt test, the father must inform the mother of the company and location performing the cdt testing, 33.3. each party or their legal representatives is at liberty to provide the cdt testing service with a copy of these orders, 33.4. the father is to attend at an cdt collection service and submit to the supervised collection of a blood sample from the father no less than every 3 months, 33.5. the father is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each blood collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising the cdt collection service to provide the results of each test to both parties, the father and the mother, and their legal representatives upon receipt of such test results, 33.6. the cdt test may screen for alcohol etg and any other drug specified in this order as required. 33.7. the cdt testing service is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, 33.8. the costs of each cdt test is to be met by the father.
34. in relation to the cdt test pursuant to order 33:
34.1. the father is only required to submit to cdt testing not more frequently than once per three (3) calendar months 34.2. if the father does not produce a cdt test results of less than or equal to 1.7, then children's time with the father is suspended until the father produces a 2 consecutive cdt test results, obtained no less than 3 weeks apart, of less than or equal to 1.7, 34.3. upon the father's compliance with order 34.2, the father's time with the children pursuant to order 5.1 recommences.
35. that in the event that:
35.1. a cdt test result of the father detects a result of 1.7 or higher, or 35.2. the father fails to provide a blood sample in accordance with these orders within the timeframe provided for in these orders,
then the following apply:
35.3. then children's time with the father is suspended until the father produces a 2 consecutive cdt test results, obtained no less than 3 weeks apart, of less than or equal to 1.7
costs the parties shall pay their own costs of and incidental to these proceedings. the parties shall pay the independent children's lawyer's costs of and incidental to these proceedings.
the evidence
during the marriage the whole of my income and that of [ms farrer] was applied to the acquisition of assets, payment of debts and the support of the family.   $685.08 from x’s and y’s accounts respectively, (b) $686.18 from z’s account, (c) $7.65 from c pty ltd’s nab account, (d) $23.01 from the parties joint nab account, (e) $28.64 from the mother’s nab account,   $686.18 from z’s account, (c) $7.65 from c pty ltd’s nab account, (d) $23.01 from the parties joint nab account, (e) $28.64 from the mother’s nab account,   $7.65 from c pty ltd’s nab account, (d) $23.01 from the parties joint nab account, (e) $28.64 from the mother’s nab account,   $23.01 from the parties joint nab account, (e) $28.64 from the mother’s nab account,   $28.64 from the mother’s nab account,
being a total of $2,115.64.   the dirtbike was given away free to the person who purchased the golf buggy for $500 and that the whole sum was applied to payment of debts owed by c pty ltd, (b) the caravan was forfeited to the region ae caravan park due to arrears of site fees, (c) the motorcycle 2 was sold for $11,200 and the whole of the sale proceeds paid to company aj who had acquired the husband’s nab credit card debt, (d) the motor vehicle 8 was sold to the paternal grandfather for $4,500 and the whole of the sale proceeds applied to purchase of a motor vehicle 4, (e) the motor vehicle 9 was traded-in to company ak when the paternal grandfather purchased a motor vehicle 10 for $20,000 and that thereafter the paternal grandfather paid the husband $20,000 and the whole of the sale proceeds were applied to payment of debts owed by c pty ltd as the vehicle had been owned by c pty ltd, and (f) the boat and trailer was sold for $27,000 and the whole of that sum applied to purchase of a caravan for that amount.   the caravan was forfeited to the region ae caravan park due to arrears of site fees, (c) the motorcycle 2 was sold for $11,200 and the whole of the sale proceeds paid to company aj who had acquired the husband’s nab credit card debt, (d) the motor vehicle 8 was sold to the paternal grandfather for $4,500 and the whole of the sale proceeds applied to purchase of a motor vehicle 4, (e) the motor vehicle 9 was traded-in to company ak when the paternal grandfather purchased a motor vehicle 10 for $20,000 and that thereafter the paternal grandfather paid the husband $20,000 and the whole of the sale proceeds were applied to payment of debts owed by c pty ltd as the vehicle had been owned by c pty ltd, and (f) the boat and trailer was sold for $27,000 and the whole of that sum applied to purchase of a caravan for that amount.   the motorcycle 2 was sold for $11,200 and the whole of the sale proceeds paid to company aj who had acquired the husband’s nab credit card debt, (d) the motor vehicle 8 was sold to the paternal grandfather for $4,500 and the whole of the sale proceeds applied to purchase of a motor vehicle 4, (e) the motor vehicle 9 was traded-in to company ak when the paternal grandfather purchased a motor vehicle 10 for $20,000 and that thereafter the paternal grandfather paid the husband $20,000 and the whole of the sale proceeds were applied to payment of debts owed by c pty ltd as the vehicle had been owned by c pty ltd, and (f) the boat and trailer was sold for $27,000 and the whole of that sum applied to purchase of a caravan for that amount.   the motor vehicle 8 was sold to the paternal grandfather for $4,500 and the whole of the sale proceeds applied to purchase of a motor vehicle 4, (e) the motor vehicle 9 was traded-in to company ak when the paternal grandfather purchased a motor vehicle 10 for $20,000 and that thereafter the paternal grandfather paid the husband $20,000 and the whole of the sale proceeds were applied to payment of debts owed by c pty ltd as the vehicle had been owned by c pty ltd, and (f) the boat and trailer was sold for $27,000 and the whole of that sum applied to purchase of a caravan for that amount.   the motor vehicle 9 was traded-in to company ak when the paternal grandfather purchased a motor vehicle 10 for $20,000 and that thereafter the paternal grandfather paid the husband $20,000 and the whole of the sale proceeds were applied to payment of debts owed by c pty ltd as the vehicle had been owned by c pty ltd, and (f) the boat and trailer was sold for $27,000 and the whole of that sum applied to purchase of a caravan for that amount.   the boat and trailer was sold for $27,000 and the whole of that sum applied to purchase of a caravan for that amount.   the children to live with their mother, (b) for x to spend time with her father in accordance with her wishes, (c) for y and z to spend daytime only time with their father each alternate weekend from 10:00am until 5:00pm on saturday and 10:00am until 5:00pm on sunday, (d) for the children to have electronic communication by telephone or facetime with their father each monday, wednesday and friday that they are not with him between 6:30pm and 7:00pm, (e) for changeovers to occur at the mcdonald’s family restaurant at suburb g, (f) permitting both parents to attend any extracurricular activities the children may participate in from time to time, (g) restraining the father from consuming alcohol for a period of 12 hours prior to the children coming into his care or at all during the time they are in his care, and (h) usual orders in relation to the parents exchanging and obtaining information about the children.   for x to spend time with her father in accordance with her wishes, (c) for y and z to spend daytime only time with their father each alternate weekend from 10:00am until 5:00pm on saturday and 10:00am until 5:00pm on sunday, (d) for the children to have electronic communication by telephone or facetime with their father each monday, wednesday and friday that they are not with him between 6:30pm and 7:00pm, (e) for changeovers to occur at the mcdonald’s family restaurant at suburb g, (f) permitting both parents to attend any extracurricular activities the children may participate in from time to time, (g) restraining the father from consuming alcohol for a period of 12 hours prior to the children coming into his care or at all during the time they are in his care, and (h) usual orders in relation to the parents exchanging and obtaining information about the children.   for y and z to spend daytime only time with their father each alternate weekend from 10:00am until 5:00pm on saturday and 10:00am until 5:00pm on sunday, (d) for the children to have electronic communication by telephone or facetime with their father each monday, wednesday and friday that they are not with him between 6:30pm and 7:00pm, (e) for changeovers to occur at the mcdonald’s family restaurant at suburb g, (f) permitting both parents to attend any extracurricular activities the children may participate in from time to time, (g) restraining the father from consuming alcohol for a period of 12 hours prior to the children coming into his care or at all during the time they are in his care, and (h) usual orders in relation to the parents exchanging and obtaining information about the children.   for the children to have electronic communication by telephone or facetime with their father each monday, wednesday and friday that they are not with him between 6:30pm and 7:00pm, (e) for changeovers to occur at the mcdonald’s family restaurant at suburb g, (f) permitting both parents to attend any extracurricular activities the children may participate in from time to time, (g) restraining the father from consuming alcohol for a period of 12 hours prior to the children coming into his care or at all during the time they are in his care, and (h) usual orders in relation to the parents exchanging and obtaining information about the children.   for changeovers to occur at the mcdonald’s family restaurant at suburb g, (f) permitting both parents to attend any extracurricular activities the children may participate in from time to time, (g) restraining the father from consuming alcohol for a period of 12 hours prior to the children coming into his care or at all during the time they are in his care, and (h) usual orders in relation to the parents exchanging and obtaining information about the children.   permitting both parents to attend any extracurricular activities the children may participate in from time to time, (g) restraining the father from consuming alcohol for a period of 12 hours prior to the children coming into his care or at all during the time they are in his care, and (h) usual orders in relation to the parents exchanging and obtaining information about the children.   restraining the father from consuming alcohol for a period of 12 hours prior to the children coming into his care or at all during the time they are in his care, and (h) usual orders in relation to the parents exchanging and obtaining information about the children.   usual orders in relation to the parents exchanging and obtaining information about the children.
an order was also made under section 68l appointing an independent children’s lawyer to represent the interests of the children in the proceedings and ultimately, mr holmes was allocated that role through legal aid nsw.   stated he felt much calmer about not going to dad’s housed [sic] – he said he has not had to hide. he stated that he sometimes hides at dad’s house when he has been drinking as he yells and gets angry. [y] stated that his dad drinks and drives, but he calls it, his juice but will never share any.
the other significant issue for [mr farrer] has been his alcohol misuse. he acknowledged that for a number of years he had been consuming too much alcohol, and at one point he was drinking excessively every day. he described clear withdrawal symptoms, experiencing shaking and sweats as well as increased tolerance. he stated that initially he would drink with clients at work when he was working in [the building industry]. he stated that he has now cut down and does not drink monday to thursday, but will still consume up to 10 or 12 standard drinks each day over the weekend.   farrer]was adamant that excessive alcohol consumption has not been and is not currently an issue for him. he advised that [mr farrer] raised it as an issue during the relationship and as a result, he felt “pressured” to attend the gp and say it was an issue. ...he acknowledged he submitted fraudulent cdt test result but was resolute that it was not because he had been consuming alcohol but because he found it “ridiculous” that he had to pay $90 per month to “satisfy” [ms farrer]’s false allegations. [mr farrer] then said that him having to undertake cdt testing was “a crock of shit” and that [mr farrer] has been “lying for two years”.
...reported that he was concerned that [ms farrer] was possibly using ‘ice’ as she is friends with a person who uses it, she had lost weight and presented as very angry. he acknowledged that he has never observed [ms farrer] take illicit drugs.
during his cross examination the father was asked about the assertion he made to ms k about the mother using ice, and when referred to the mother’s evidence in paragraph 69 of her trial affidavit he conceded that the reasons given by the mother for losing weight – the stress she experienced toward the end of their cohabiting relationship due to financial pressure and the father’s behaviour toward her and excessive alcohol consumption – could well be the cause of the mother’s rapid weight loss. the father’s attempt to assert to the family consultant a suspicion that the mother was using ice was, when all the evidence is weighed, entirely disingenuous, if not deliberately dishonest.
it seems that [mr farrer] also consumed alcohol on father’s day, with the children present, despite the court order prohibiting him from doing so. [mr farrer] downplayed this, stating that it was one drink, which may indicate [mr farrer]’s lack of respect for court orders or his utter frustration with the situation and inability to regulate his actions and emotions.
the father conceded that on father’s day 2020, the occasion being referred to, he had consumed a couple of alcoholic drinks while the children were with him and when it was put to him that at the relevant time there was a court order restraining him from consuming alcohol while the children were in his care, he responded, “there might’ve been.” he then conceded that he had knowingly disobeyed that order, though when asked, “do you consider that you are justified in having a beer with your father?”, he responded, “yes.” when asked if he understood why the mother was concerned about his willingness to follow court orders he replied, “yes”, but he only considered that the mother was “somewhat” justified in having a concern.
a mental health assessment has not been done as yet, it is being completed through my work and are backlogged, however given my job requires the work [undertaken] i believe i am aware of mental health and their part in day to day life.
during his cross examination by the mother’s counsel, the father was taken to that part of his trial affidavit, and the fact that he had not undertaken a mental health assessment, despite the recommendation in the family report from 28 january 2021 – one year and 9 months prior – and it was then put to him that he considered any such mental health assessment to be “a waste of time”, to which the father replied, “correct.” he conceded during his cross examination that at the time of the final hearing he was still taking the antidepressant medication that he had been prescribed in 2018.
the evidence of the family consultant – ms k ] [x] said she has no relationship with her father, and she refers to him as ‘[mr farrer]. she said that she could not remember a time when they had a positive relationship, which she attributed to her father not being available to her as he was either working, drinking alcohol or sleeping... [x]advised that she has no relationship with ‘[ms r]’ as she has never met her. [68] [x] said that when she did spend time with [mr farrer], that ‘[mr farrer]’ frequently blamed her mother for “manipulating” the children but [x] insisted that she has never heard her mother speak negatively about ‘[mr farrer]’. [x] said that she has never felt unsafe with her mother as with ‘[mr farrer]’, particularly when he reportedly “yelled” at her when she said that she wanted to return to her mother or when he took her mobile phone. [x] alleged that ‘[mr farrer]’ often blamed her when her mother called the police on him. [69] [x] said that she does not want to see ‘[mr farrer]’ but she would like to collect her belongings from ‘[mr farrer]’s house’ (bed, toys, desk and coin collection), when ‘[mr farrer]’ is not present. she was adamant that she is not open to any form of counselling or family therapy to address the issues with her relationship with ‘[mr farrer]’ but that she is happy to continue to attend ‘[ms ax]’ (ms ax). [71] [y] said that his relationship with his father is “good” that his father makes an effort to play [games] but that it upsets him that his father is an “alcoholic and he smokes”. he said that his father has not drank as much the last year as his father is “not allowed to drink when we are there...but he does now and again”. [y] said that his father tells him it is “juice” but that he knows the smell of alcohol. [y] said when his father’s drinking alcohol he gets angry easily “for no reason” but emphasised that he has never hurt them. [72] [y] said that he thinks that his mother would like to keep things as they are, and that if he and [z] want to spend time with their father she will support them to do this as she tells them that they have to have a relationship with their father... [y] said that he likes spending every second saturday and sunday daytime only with his father. he explained that he does not like spending overnights due to his father’s drinking alcohol...[y] expressed some disappointment that his father is allowed to call them, but that he does not. [73] [y] said that his mother does not speak negatively about his father but that his father speaks negatively about his mother and “[mr m]”. [y] advised that he has never felt unsafe with his mother but that he has felt unsafe spending overnights with his father “quite a few times” when his father is drinking alcohol and sleeping a lot. [y] said that he also did not like it when his father did not have the correct uniform for them on mondays and being late for school often. [y] said he would really like his father to stop drinking alcohol and smoking. i note that during cross examination of the father by counsel for the mother, he was asked if there would be a problem getting the children to school on monday, to which the father replied “no”. [74] [z] said that her relationship with her father is “good, i guess”. [z] explained that “we don’t do anything with him, he falls asleep on the couch. [75] [z] said that she would like to see her father daytime only every second weekend and some extra time on school holidays.  ] [x] said that when she did spend time with [mr farrer], that ‘[mr farrer]’ frequently blamed her mother for “manipulating” the children but [x] insisted that she has never heard her mother speak negatively about ‘[mr farrer]’. [x] said that she has never felt unsafe with her mother as with ‘[mr farrer]’, particularly when he reportedly “yelled” at her when she said that she wanted to return to her mother or when he took her mobile phone. [x] alleged that ‘[mr farrer]’ often blamed her when her mother called the police on him. [69] [x] said that she does not want to see ‘[mr farrer]’ but she would like to collect her belongings from ‘[mr farrer]’s house’ (bed, toys, desk and coin collection), when ‘[mr farrer]’ is not present. she was adamant that she is not open to any form of counselling or family therapy to address the issues with her relationship with ‘[mr farrer]’ but that she is happy to continue to attend ‘[ms ax]’ (ms ax). [71] [y] said that his relationship with his father is “good” that his father makes an effort to play [games] but that it upsets him that his father is an “alcoholic and he smokes”. he said that his father has not drank as much the last year as his father is “not allowed to drink when we are there...but he does now and again”. [y] said that his father tells him it is “juice” but that he knows the smell of alcohol. [y] said when his father’s drinking alcohol he gets angry easily “for no reason” but emphasised that he has never hurt them. [72] [y] said that he thinks that his mother would like to keep things as they are, and that if he and [z] want to spend time with their father she will support them to do this as she tells them that they have to have a relationship with their father... [y] said that he likes spending every second saturday and sunday daytime only with his father. he explained that he does not like spending overnights due to his father’s drinking alcohol...[y] expressed some disappointment that his father is allowed to call them, but that he does not. [73] [y] said that his mother does not speak negatively about his father but that his father speaks negatively about his mother and “[mr m]”. [y] advised that he has never felt unsafe with his mother but that he has felt unsafe spending overnights with his father “quite a few times” when his father is drinking alcohol and sleeping a lot. [y] said that he also did not like it when his father did not have the correct uniform for them on mondays and being late for school often. [y] said he would really like his father to stop drinking alcohol and smoking. i note that during cross examination of the father by counsel for the mother, he was asked if there would be a problem getting the children to school on monday, to which the father replied “no”. [74] [z] said that her relationship with her father is “good, i guess”. [z] explained that “we don’t do anything with him, he falls asleep on the couch. [75] [z] said that she would like to see her father daytime only every second weekend and some extra time on school holidays.  ] [x] said that she does not want to see ‘[mr farrer]’ but she would like to collect her belongings from ‘[mr farrer]’s house’ (bed, toys, desk and coin collection), when ‘[mr farrer]’ is not present. she was adamant that she is not open to any form of counselling or family therapy to address the issues with her relationship with ‘[mr farrer]’ but that she is happy to continue to attend ‘[ms ax]’ (ms ax). [71] [y] said that his relationship with his father is “good” that his father makes an effort to play [games] but that it upsets him that his father is an “alcoholic and he smokes”. he said that his father has not drank as much the last year as his father is “not allowed to drink when we are there...but he does now and again”. [y] said that his father tells him it is “juice” but that he knows the smell of alcohol. [y] said when his father’s drinking alcohol he gets angry easily “for no reason” but emphasised that he has never hurt them. [72] [y] said that he thinks that his mother would like to keep things as they are, and that if he and [z] want to spend time with their father she will support them to do this as she tells them that they have to have a relationship with their father... [y] said that he likes spending every second saturday and sunday daytime only with his father. he explained that he does not like spending overnights due to his father’s drinking alcohol...[y] expressed some disappointment that his father is allowed to call them, but that he does not. [73] [y] said that his mother does not speak negatively about his father but that his father speaks negatively about his mother and “[mr m]”. [y] advised that he has never felt unsafe with his mother but that he has felt unsafe spending overnights with his father “quite a few times” when his father is drinking alcohol and sleeping a lot. [y] said that he also did not like it when his father did not have the correct uniform for them on mondays and being late for school often. [y] said he would really like his father to stop drinking alcohol and smoking. i note that during cross examination of the father by counsel for the mother, he was asked if there would be a problem getting the children to school on monday, to which the father replied “no”. [74] [z] said that her relationship with her father is “good, i guess”. [z] explained that “we don’t do anything with him, he falls asleep on the couch. [75] [z] said that she would like to see her father daytime only every second weekend and some extra time on school holidays.  ] [y] said that his relationship with his father is “good” that his father makes an effort to play [games] but that it upsets him that his father is an “alcoholic and he smokes”. he said that his father has not drank as much the last year as his father is “not allowed to drink when we are there...but he does now and again”. [y] said that his father tells him it is “juice” but that he knows the smell of alcohol. [y] said when his father’s drinking alcohol he gets angry easily “for no reason” but emphasised that he has never hurt them. [72] [y] said that he thinks that his mother would like to keep things as they are, and that if he and [z] want to spend time with their father she will support them to do this as she tells them that they have to have a relationship with their father... [y] said that he likes spending every second saturday and sunday daytime only with his father. he explained that he does not like spending overnights due to his father’s drinking alcohol...[y] expressed some disappointment that his father is allowed to call them, but that he does not. [73] [y] said that his mother does not speak negatively about his father but that his father speaks negatively about his mother and “[mr m]”. [y] advised that he has never felt unsafe with his mother but that he has felt unsafe spending overnights with his father “quite a few times” when his father is drinking alcohol and sleeping a lot. [y] said that he also did not like it when his father did not have the correct uniform for them on mondays and being late for school often. [y] said he would really like his father to stop drinking alcohol and smoking. i note that during cross examination of the father by counsel for the mother, he was asked if there would be a problem getting the children to school on monday, to which the father replied “no”. [74] [z] said that her relationship with her father is “good, i guess”. [z] explained that “we don’t do anything with him, he falls asleep on the couch. [75] [z] said that she would like to see her father daytime only every second weekend and some extra time on school holidays.  ] [y] said that he thinks that his mother would like to keep things as they are, and that if he and [z] want to spend time with their father she will support them to do this as she tells them that they have to have a relationship with their father... [y] said that he likes spending every second saturday and sunday daytime only with his father. he explained that he does not like spending overnights due to his father’s drinking alcohol...[y] expressed some disappointment that his father is allowed to call them, but that he does not. [73] [y] said that his mother does not speak negatively about his father but that his father speaks negatively about his mother and “[mr m]”. [y] advised that he has never felt unsafe with his mother but that he has felt unsafe spending overnights with his father “quite a few times” when his father is drinking alcohol and sleeping a lot. [y] said that he also did not like it when his father did not have the correct uniform for them on mondays and being late for school often. [y] said he would really like his father to stop drinking alcohol and smoking. i note that during cross examination of the father by counsel for the mother, he was asked if there would be a problem getting the children to school on monday, to which the father replied “no”. [74] [z] said that her relationship with her father is “good, i guess”. [z] explained that “we don’t do anything with him, he falls asleep on the couch. [75] [z] said that she would like to see her father daytime only every second weekend and some extra time on school holidays.  ] [y] said that his mother does not speak negatively about his father but that his father speaks negatively about his mother and “[mr m]”. [y] advised that he has never felt unsafe with his mother but that he has felt unsafe spending overnights with his father “quite a few times” when his father is drinking alcohol and sleeping a lot. [y] said that he also did not like it when his father did not have the correct uniform for them on mondays and being late for school often. [y] said he would really like his father to stop drinking alcohol and smoking. i note that during cross examination of the father by counsel for the mother, he was asked if there would be a problem getting the children to school on monday, to which the father replied “no”. [74] [z] said that her relationship with her father is “good, i guess”. [z] explained that “we don’t do anything with him, he falls asleep on the couch. [75] [z] said that she would like to see her father daytime only every second weekend and some extra time on school holidays.
i note that during cross examination of the father by counsel for the mother, he was asked if there would be a problem getting the children to school on monday, to which the father replied “no”. [74] [z] said that her relationship with her father is “good, i guess”. [z] explained that “we don’t do anything with him, he falls asleep on the couch. [75] [z] said that she would like to see her father daytime only every second weekend and some extra time on school holidays.  ] [z] said that her relationship with her father is “good, i guess”. [z] explained that “we don’t do anything with him, he falls asleep on the couch. [75] [z] said that she would like to see her father daytime only every second weekend and some extra time on school holidays.  ] [z] said that she would like to see her father daytime only every second weekend and some extra time on school holidays.   was noted to be engaged, playful and affectionate towards [mr farrer] and he was responsive to this. while [mr farrer] tried to engage [y], this interaction felt more awkward with [y] appearing to communicate to his father and/or the family consultant that he was not overly keen to engage with [mr farrer].   farrer] has firmly emphasised that her primary concern regarding [mr farrer] is his alleged alcohol misuse and the impact that this has on his mental health, his parenting capacity and in turn his ability to maintain relationships with the children. [mr farrer] is adamant that this is not an issue, repeating numerous times throughout the interview that he has done nothing wrong. if [mr farrer]’s allegations are valid, this is concerning as [mr farrer] has not acknowledged the issue, which indicates his lack of insight into how his reported alcohol misuse is impacting the parental conflict and more importantly his relationship with the children. if it were found that [mr farrer] does have alcohol misuse issues, for this situation to improve [mr farrer] would need to accept any difficulties he is experiencing and meaningfully engage in support for this. this would be important for the children to know and understand, because [x] and [y] are firmly of the belief that the father is an alcoholic and they may require specific therapeutic support in respect of this.
... it seems that [x]’s relationship with [mr farrer] is fractured. if [ms farrer] and [x]’s accounts are accurate then [x]’s rejection of the father may be justified and required to protect her mental health. however, without the aid of some therapeutic support, to explore the issues within their relationship and assist [mr farrer] to acknowledge his part in the deterioration, this rejection could possibly lead to long-term mental health issues for [x]. from what the family consultant witnessed in [y] and [z]’s observation with [mr farrer], it would seem that [y] and [mr farrer]’s relationship is at risk of deteriorating. if this was to occur this too could lead to [y] experiencing some long-term mental health difficulties, which could impact other aspects of his educational, social and behavioural development. it may be appropriate for the entire family, including partners (given the alleged issues in the children’s relationships with [ms r]) if determined appropriate by a family therapist, to participate in the family therapy, to address the various relationship dynamics and issues arising within the family. for this to have the opportunity to be successful it would require both parents being fully in support of it occurring, encouraging the children’s participation, being honest regarding their behaviours and employing any strategies and feedback provided.   farrer]’s alleged alcohol misuse has been a concern for [ms farrer], [x] and [y] for some time, with [x] and [y] being very clear about the upset it causes them during the cic. it is worrying that, [mr farrer] went to the trouble of forging four cdt results between august and october 2020. this indicates either that [mr farrer]’s alcohol misuse is an ongoing issue that he has either refused or struggles to address or that [mr farrer] has difficulty in regulating his emotions and actions to enable him to do what is required of him, due to being angered by having to “satisfy” [ms farrer] by undertaking these cdt tests...unfortunately, due to [mr farrer]’s actions, it is not possible accept [sic] that alcohol is not a significant issue for him. it seems that [mr farrer] also consumed alcohol on father’s day, with the children present, despite the court order prohibiting him from doing so. [mr farrer] downplayed this, stating that it was one drink, which may indicate [mr farrer]’s lack of respect for court orders or his utter frustration with the situation and inability to regulate his actions and emotions. however, it may also indicate that [mr farrer] engages in such problematic use of alcohol that he is unable to abstain, even when he has court ordered restraints in place.
...the children’s emotional and physical safety are at risk due to a possible exposure to their father driving under the influence of alcohol, [mr farrer] allegedly easily becoming angered and frustrated and being unable to demonstrate a consistent interest in undertaking activities or parenting tasks, due to being intoxicated or hung over.  ] if the parents are unable to work towards improving their co-parenting relationship, and every decision to be made regarding the children causes further parental conflict, it may be that the court needs to consider granting sole parental responsibility to one parent, which is likely to be [ms farrer], as she has been and continues to be, the children’s primary carer. [95] ideally, it would be hoped that family therapy, in conjunction with individual therapeutic support, may assist in positively progressing the various relationships along with the parents’ capacity to reach agreement. if this was the case, the parents, with the aid of the family therapist, may be able to decide upon a plan to progress to children’s time to alternate weekends and block periods during school holidays. this situation would be more easily achieved it [mr farrer] could provide evidence that he is refraining from consuming alcohol with the children present, particularly since this is a concern for the children. however, given the lack of progress in the family situation since the cic assessment in december 2019, there is a significant chance that the family therapy will not be successful, the co-parenting relationship will not improve and that [x] and [y]’s (and possibly in time [z]’s) relationship with [mr farrer] will continue to deteriorate. if the situation continues as it is, the family consultant does not think it would be positive for the children to recommence overnight time on alternate weekends and for block periods during school holidays as per [mr farrer]’s proposal. particularly given that both [z] and [y] have reported that they do not want this to occur and the concerns regarding [mr farrer]’s reported alcohol misuse. another option that could be considered is that the children spend no time with [mr farrer]. however, this could have detrimental impact on [y] and [z]’s long-term relationship with [mr farrer] and their emotional well-being in the long-term...fortnightly, day only time and day only time on special occasions seems to be the most suitable option at this stage. however, over the course of time between the preparation of the family report in january 2021 and the final hearing in october 2022 the father did not provide evidence that he had refrained from consuming alcohol with the children present. both y and z began to refuse to spend any time with, or communicate at all, with their father.  ] ideally, it would be hoped that family therapy, in conjunction with individual therapeutic support, may assist in positively progressing the various relationships along with the parents’ capacity to reach agreement. if this was the case, the parents, with the aid of the family therapist, may be able to decide upon a plan to progress to children’s time to alternate weekends and block periods during school holidays. this situation would be more easily achieved it [mr farrer] could provide evidence that he is refraining from consuming alcohol with the children present, particularly since this is a concern for the children. however, given the lack of progress in the family situation since the cic assessment in december 2019, there is a significant chance that the family therapy will not be successful, the co-parenting relationship will not improve and that [x] and [y]’s (and possibly in time [z]’s) relationship with [mr farrer] will continue to deteriorate. if the situation continues as it is, the family consultant does not think it would be positive for the children to recommence overnight time on alternate weekends and for block periods during school holidays as per [mr farrer]’s proposal. particularly given that both [z] and [y] have reported that they do not want this to occur and the concerns regarding [mr farrer]’s reported alcohol misuse. another option that could be considered is that the children spend no time with [mr farrer]. however, this could have detrimental impact on [y] and [z]’s long-term relationship with [mr farrer] and their emotional well-being in the long-term...fortnightly, day only time and day only time on special occasions seems to be the most suitable option at this stage. however, over the course of time between the preparation of the family report in january 2021 and the final hearing in october 2022 the father did not provide evidence that he had refrained from consuming alcohol with the children present. both y and z began to refuse to spend any time with, or communicate at all, with their father.
however, over the course of time between the preparation of the family report in january 2021 and the final hearing in october 2022 the father did not provide evidence that he had refrained from consuming alcohol with the children present. both y and z began to refuse to spend any time with, or communicate at all, with their father.
the law - parenting  whether the child spending equal time with each parent would be in the best interest of the child,[3] and (b) whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[4]   whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[4]
a discretionary judgment concerning the parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.[6]  ] in considering an allegation of sexual abuse, the court should not make a positive finding that the allegation is true unless the court is so satisfied according to the civil standard of proof, with due regard to the factors mentioned in briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 at 362 ... [23] no doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a positive finding that the allegation is well-founded. in all but the most extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be made respecting custody and access. there will be cases also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless ... [24] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child's welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  ] no doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a positive finding that the allegation is well-founded. in all but the most extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be made respecting custody and access. there will be cases also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless ... [24] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child's welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  ] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child's welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  ] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  1] ... we accept as a matter of practice, a trial judge will almost inevitably be required in a case where sexual abuse allegations are raised to consider whether abuse has been proven on the balance of probabilities as well as considering whether or not an unacceptable risk of abuse exists ...  ] in his recent paper entitled ‘unacceptable risk – a return to basics’ the hon. john fogarty a.m. set out his summary of the principles emerging from m and m as follows:
1 the decisive issue is and always remains the best interests of that child. all other issues are subservient. 2 the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term ‘unacceptable risk’. it is an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable. 3 where past abuse of a child is alleged it is usually neither necessary nor desirable to reach a definitive conclusion on that issue. where, however, that is done the briginshaw civil standard of proof applies. 4 the circumstance, if it be so, that the allegation of past abuse is not proved in accordance with briginshaw, does not impede reliance upon those circumstances in determining whether there is an unacceptable risk. 5 the concentration in these cases should normally be upon the question whether there is an unacceptable risk to the child. 6 the onus of proof in reaching that conclusion is the ordinary civil standard. 7 but the components which go to make up that conclusion need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of unacceptable risk from the accumulation of factors, none or some only of which, are proved to that standard.
and thereafter expanded some points contained in the summary.  ] frequently, (i would respectfully venture, too frequently) “risk” is referred to as an all-embracing term, a “general” finding of which can (purportedly) be seen to have some form of “ipso facto consequences” for the orders made. yet, “risk” is, without more, but a convenient description, orders must, surely, address its constituent components which must, axiomatically, vary according to the circumstances of each case. [72] in that respect, it is both interesting and instructive to refer to what has been said about this issue first by the honourable john fogarty am, and, secondly, by an english author, (the latter qualified as both a psychiatrist and a barrister.) [73] the latter said:  ] in that respect, it is both interesting and instructive to refer to what has been said about this issue first by the honourable john fogarty am, and, secondly, by an english author, (the latter qualified as both a psychiatrist and a barrister.) [73] the latter said:  ] the latter said:
risk assessment in any situation involves, in essence, the asking of the following questions: (1) what harmful outcome is potentially present in this situation? (2) what is the probability of this outcome coming about? (3) what risks are probable in this situation in the short, medium and long term? (4) what are the factors that could increase or decrease the risk that is probable? (5) what measures are available whose deployment could mitigate the risks that are probable? (b. mahendra, 'psychiatric risk assessment in family and child law' (2008) 38 family law 569).  ] mr fogarty, writing in the australian journal of family law said this (20 ajfl 249 at 254-5):
... the reality is that all courts deal with issues of "risk" and degrees of risk (however described) in various situations and that concept is increasingly used in legislation. risk is difficult to define in a way which is not ultimately circular. but it is an inevitable part of life at all its levels. it is inherently risky to breathe, eat, drink, walk, drive, work, invest and play. the world is full of different risks and consequences and everyone is prone to dangers. we confront varying levels of risk everyday. people frequently face potentially dangerous situations, not many live at home in complete isolation to avoid getting in harms way. most people try to avoid what they perceive to be risk, some willingly take on high risk activities. risk involves two component, the degree of "likelihood" of the happening of an event, and the possible consequences (good or bad) if it does [cases and citations omitted]. individuals in their assessment of some risks may focus more on one than the other of these components. but at some point it usually becomes necessary for that person to make a judgment of the risk and whether it can/should be taken. where the risk relates to a third person to whom one owes a responsibility, it is likely in the nature of things that the estimate will be conservative. risks are relative and usually involve trade-offs. crossing the road with oncoming traffic to catch the last connection to the airport involves the risk of being hit by a car or the risk of missing the plane. very much a balancing exercise of facts, experience and intuition, but essentially which risk carries the greater detriment (usually the car). then there is the common experience of a mother watching her child cross a road to go to school. the risk is seen as greater (although it may not be) because the consequences may be death or injury to the child and because the responsibilities of the mother will be seen by her as greater than for herself or another adult .... at times the courts and the legislature have attempted to give an indication of the content or quality of the risk -- otherwise “risk” may mean any risk, however small or unlikely. hence the use of adjectives such as “serious”, “grave”, “real”, “appreciable” and “unacceptable”.  ] i respectfully agree, as i also do with mr fogarty's statement (which also has echoes in the english author's statement earlier quoted) that:
... unacceptable risk in the high court's formulation [in m v m (1988) 166 clr 69] requires two separate steps. is there a risk, and is it unacceptable? the concentration by the high court is upon both the nature and the degree of risk in the particular case. its formulation is all about balance. in some cases a risk is "acceptable" when balanced against other factors and other orders. the object of safeguards is to convert an unacceptable situation to an acceptable one where that is feasible and is of "benefit to the child". it is, as i suggested earlier, calibrated to its use in individual cases. it is unrelated to the exoneration or otherwise of the alleged abuser, it is all about the bests interests of the child and protection from risk
in napier & hepburn, the full court emphasised that it is not for the court to find a solution which will eliminate any chance of serious harm. rather, it is to balance the harm that will follow if the risk is not minimised or removed, as against a normal, healthy relationship between a parent and a child not being permitted to prosper.
section 60cc – the primary considerations
section 60cc – the additional considerations
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as each child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to each child’s views.
the nature of the relationship of each of the children with each of their parents and other persons.
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to each child, to spend time with the child, and to communicate with each child.
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain each of the children.
the likely effect of any changes in each of the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect on a child of any separation from either of his or her parents or any other person with whom the child has been living.
the practical difficulty and expense of y and/or z spending time with and communicating with their father and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect their right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.
the capacity of each of the children’s parents to provide for the needs of each of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs.
the attitude to each of the children, and the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the children’s parents.
any family violence involving any of the children or a member of the children’s family.
after [mr farrer] left, i sat in the shower shaking and crying. i recall thinking if he came back and didn’t get what he wanted from me, i would be the next thing he hit.
4ab(1) for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful.
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to any of the children.
parental responsibility – section 61da
conclusions in relation to the parenting orders property be made in the best interests of the children with those interests as the paramount consideration
the law – alteration of property  the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in property, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, (b) the existing liabilities of the parties, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, and (c) the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 75(2) of the act, to which section 79(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[12]   the existing liabilities of the parties, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, and (c) the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 75(2) of the act, to which section 79(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[12]   the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 75(2) of the act, to which section 79(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[12]
in many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife. no less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. that is, any express or implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing arrangements of marital property interests were sufficient or appropriate during the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the ending of the marital relationship. and the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4).[14]   first, “the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities, and financial resources of the parties at the date of the hearing”,[16]   second, “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b), and (c), and determine the contribution-based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”, [17] (c) third, “the court should identify and assess the relevant matters ... (“the other factors”) including...the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant...”,[18] (d) fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[19]   third, “the court should identify and assess the relevant matters ... (“the other factors”) including...the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant...”,[18] (d) fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[19]   fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[19]
... indeed, the authorities are consistent in finding that assessing contributions is not an accounting exercise but a holistic one (brandt & brandt [1997] famca 21, (1997) flc 92-758, norbis & norbis (1986) 161 clr 513).[22]  ] as is plain from earlier decisions of this court, regard must be had to the use made of contributions of various types so as to compare the contributions made by each of the parties during the course of, and over the length of, their relationship (see, for example, in the marriage of pierce (1998) flc 92-844) but that is an entirely different proposition to, as it were, causally linking contributions with their asserted financial “product” or “value”. the former recognises that the nature, form and extent of contributions made by each of the parties might differ, the latter suggests that the absence of a causal link counts as no contribution at all. [15] the search for a causal link might be seen to come instinctively to the necessary inquiry and all the more so when regard is had to s 79(4)(a) which refers to financial contributions made “...directly or indirectly...” “...to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property ...” and goes on to also refer to the financial contribution made “...otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property...” the terms of that sub-paragraph might, naturally enough, be seen to suggest a causal link between those contributions and the “financial product” which those contributions of that type are said to have produced. that same requirement might also be seen to suggest that relevant contributions of that type can be seen to be quantifiable – or, at least, conceptualised – in monetary terms, in contradistinction to contributions made pursuant to s 79(4)(c). [16] while that apparent “causal connection” might be seen in s 79(4)(a) (and (b)), no such connection is apparent from the terms of s 79(4)(c), contributions of that latter type are not linked by the words of the sub-paragraph to the “...acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property...” or, indeed, to “property” at all. this is not a legislative oversight, the 1983 amendments to the act which inserted the current s 79(4)(c) were specifically intended, relevantly, to remove any suggestion that there needed to be a causal link between contributions of that type and any particular asset or property. the explanatory memorandum to the family law act amendment bill 1983 provides, at clause 36, that a specific purpose of the re-casting of s 79(4) was, relevantly, to: ... revise sub-section 79(4) to remove the possibility of an interpretation of the sub-section requiring that there be a nexus between a spouse’s contribution and a specific item of property in section 79 proceedings ...[24]
...the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial, and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by section 79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.[26]
as the chief justice points out, with those principles in mind, the trial judge adopted a broad-brush approach to the parties’ respective expenditure. nowhere error is established by reason alone of that approach, authority eschews “overly pernickety analysis” and section 79 demands neither an audit nor an exercise in accounting. however, when significant sums of money are said by one party or the other to have been “wasted” or to amount to a unilateral “premature distribution of property” and the evidence is suggestive of either or both, an analysis of the relevant sums and their use is needed.[27]
is it just and equitable to make an order altering the interests of the parties in the property?
addbacks ] to date, three clear categories of cases have emerged where the court has determined that it is appropriate to notionally add back to the pool of assets, that is, assets that no longer exist. they are: (a) where the parties have expended money on legal fees. in djm v jlm [1998] famca 97, (1998) 23 fam lr 396 the full court said (at 410-411):
11.6 for reasons set out in farnell, s 117 provides that each party to proceedings under the family law act shall bear their own costs unless the court otherwise orders. failing to add back monies expended by parties on costs frequently has the effect of defeating the policy of s 117 by permitting the pool of available assets for distribution between the parties to be diminished by any monies that either of the parties have managed to spend on their costs up to the date of trial. we are of the view that the normal approach ought be to add costs already paid back into the pool. whilst there may be cases where that approach is inappropriate, the reasons why it is not taken ought normally be spelt out.   where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets. in in marriage of townsend [1994] famca 144, (1994) 18 fam lr 505 nicholson cj as he then was with whom fogarty and jordan jj agreed, said (at 509):
in my view, what occurred in this case, as i said during the course of argument was, in fact, a premature distribution of a proportion of the matrimonial assets. what the husband did was to distribute to himself an asset in which the wife had a legitimate interest. in such circumstances i consider that it would be unjust in the extreme to simply treat such conduct by the husband as a matter to which regard should be had under section 75(2). it seems to me that the husband has had the benefit of that money. had he retained, for example, the taxi licence instead of selling it, that would have been brought into account as an item of property which would have been dealt with in the same way as the remaining items of property in this case. accordingly, i am of the view that the correct way in which to deal with the husband’s receipt of those moneys is to bring them into the pool of assets on a notional basis and make a distribution accordingly.   in the circumstances outlined by baker j in in marriage of kowaliw [1981] famca 70, [1981] flc 91-092 at 76,644: as a statement of general principle, i am firmly of the view that financial losses incurred by parties or either of them in the course of a marriage whether such losses result from a joint or several liability, should be shared by them (although not necessarily equally) except in the following circumstances: (a) where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value. conduct of the kind referred to in para. (a) and (b) above having economic consequences is clearly in my view relevant under sec 75(2)(o) to applications for settlement of property instituted under the provisions of sec 79. [31] as the full court said in browne v green [1999] famca 1483, [1999] flc 92-873 at 86,360:  ] we agree with her honour that the principles stated by baker j in kowaliw certainly do not constitute any form of fixed code. they are no more than guidelines for use in the exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction conferred by s 79 of the family law act 1975. nevertheless, they have over the considerable period of time since they were enunciated, become a well accepted guideline in this jurisdiction — a guideline the use of which assists in the achievement of the important goal of consistency within the jurisdiction.[30]
where one party unilaterally distributes to themselves property which no longer exists and which, but for that premature distribution, would be susceptible to section 79 orders, justice and equity may require the court to take account of the dissipated property by adding it back as against the dissipating party (townsend & townsend [1994] famca 144, (1995) flc 92-569). whether that should occur, or whether the dissipation should be taken into account pursuant to section 75(2)(o), or indeed at all, are all matters requiring the exercise of a trial judge’s discretion (in the marriage of ad and ac townsend [1994] famca 144, (1995) flc 92-569, omacini & omacini, cerini & cerini [1998] famca 143).[32]  7] at [50] to [65] of the first reasons under the heading “add-backs,” the trial judge held that $25,000 withdrawn by the husband from the parties’ bank accounts post-separation should be added back into the pool of assets, and further concluded that $50,000 which the husband had, post-separation, paid to his parents, purportedly in repayment of a loan from them, should also be added back. [138] there is no error committed per se in adjusting the parties’ actual property interests by a calculation involving notionally adding back into the pool sums which have been dissipated by the parties. we reject any suggestion that the decision of bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) flc 93-545 – or, more particularly, the decision of the high court in stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108 - is authority for any necessary contrary solution. some statements made by the high court may lead to the conclusion that references to “notional property” as have been referred to in decisions of this court and at first instance may need to be reconsidered. [139] the decisions referred to seek to remind the court that, however the exercise of discretion might seek to deal with property that is said to be the subject of “add back”, proper consideration must be given to existing interests in property, and the question posed by s 79(2) as a separate inquiry from any adjustment to property interests by reference to s 79(4) if a consideration of s 79(2) reveals that it is just and equitable to alter existing interests in property.[33]  ] we observe that “notional property”, which is sometimes “added back” to a list of assets to account for the unilateral disposal of assets, is unlikely to constitute “property of the parties to the marriage or either of them”, and thus is not amenable to alteration under section 79. it is important to deal with such disposals carefully, recognising the assets no longer exist, but that the disposal of them forms part of the history of the marriage – and potentially an important part. as the question does not arise here, we need say nothing more on this topic, save to note that section 79(4) and in particular section 75(2)(o) gives ample scope to ensure a just and equitable outcome when dealing with the unilateral disposal of property.[34]  ] ... the way in which non-existent property is to be treated remains a matter for judicial discretion (see townsend & townsend flc 92-569) ... the provision of an agreed balance sheet providing for the inclusion of notional property would not mandate his honour’s acceptance of it or that he would treat the notional property in the same way as had the parties.[35]  0] ... a court cannot create property for the purposes of alteration. section 79 empowers a court to alter interests of the parties to the proceedings in property. property is defined in section 4 of the act to mean:
... [in] relation to the parties to a marriage or either of them – means property to which those parties are, or that party is, as the case may be, entitled, whether in possession or reversion.  1] as french cj said in kennon & spry [2008] hca 56, (2008) 238 clr 366 at 390, “‘property’ in section 79 is to be read as part of the collocation ‘property of the parties to the marriage’”. it is to be read widely and conformably with the purposes of the act. gummow and hayne jj said at 397 that “the term ‘property’ is not a term of art with one specific and precise meaning”. the purpose of the act as set out in section 79(1) is to alter interests in property to which a party has an interest in possession or reversion.[36]
guidelines for adding back to the property available at trial (a) dissipation of property and expenditure other than on legal fees [27] the full court held in omacini and omacini[37] that addbacks fall into “three clear categories”: where the parties have expended money on legal fees, where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets, and “waste” or wanton, negligent, or reckless dissipation of assets.[38] [28] however, the full court also made it clear that an addback does not necessarily occur whenever “a party has expended money realised from the disposition of assets that existed as at the date of separation”, the full court describing such a proposition as “unduly simplistic”.[39] an earlier full court made the same point, saying that adding back is “the exception rather than the rule”.[40] [29] the fundamental precept that addbacks are exceptional, reflected in the decisions just referred to, also mirrors what has been said in earlier decisions of the full court that, for example, “the family court must take the property of a party to the marriage as it finds it”[41] at trial. an important parallel proposition is that the parties do not “go into a state of suspended economic animation” after separation.[42] thus, reasonably incurred expenditure does not usually come within accepted categories of addback. [30] two fundamental premises emerge from omacini and the authorities preceding it. first, “adding back” is a discretionary exercise. when the discretion is exercised in favour of adding back, it reflects a decision that, exceptionally, in the particular circumstances of a case, justice and equity requires it. the second premise is its corollary: in cases that are not “exceptional” justice and equity can be achieved, not by adding back, but by the exercise of a different discretion – usually by taking up the same as a relevant s 75(2) factor. indeed, it has been said that the latter is “a course which is, perhaps, technically more correct” than adding back to the list of existing interests in property.[43] (b) expenditure on legal fees [31] to the considerations just discussed must be added the propositions emerging from authority that paid legal fees as a category of addback is imbued with considerations specific to that expenditure. the full court said in chorn:  ] in summary, we consider that the above mentioned decisions of the full court establish that, while the treatment of funds used to pay legal costs remains ultimately a matter for the discretion of the trial judge, in determining how to exercise that discretion, regard should be had to the source of the funds. [57] if the funds used existed at separation, and are such that both parties can be seen as having an interest in them (on account, for example, of contributions), then such funds should be added back as a notional asset of the party, who has had the benefit of them. [58] if funds used to pay legal fees have been generated by a party post‑separation from his or her own endeavours or received in his or her own right (for example, by way of gift or inheritance), they would generally not be added back as a notional asset, nor would any borrowing undertaken by a party post-separation to pay legal fees be taken into account as a liability in the calculation of the net property of the parties. funds generated from assets or businesses to which the other party had made a significant contribution or has an actual legal entitlement may need to be looked at differently from other post‑separation income or acquisitions.  ] those passages can be seen as an attempt to establish “guidelines”,[44] undertaken after a detailed examination of earlier authorities,[45] for the treatment of paid legal fees within s 79 proceedings. there can be little doubt that the statements made in that case have been applied by trial judges ever since. [33] the word “guidelines” is used advisedly so as to distinguish the same from “binding principles of law”.[46] the distinction is important. failure to follow a binding principle of law is an error of law. by contrast, the failure of a trial judge to follow a guideline:[47]
...does not of itself amount to error, for it may appear that the case is one in which it is inappropriate to invoke the guideline or that, notwithstanding the failure to apply it, the decision is the product of sound discretionary judgment. [however] [t]he failure to apply a legitimate guideline to a situation to which it is applicable may ... throw a question mark over the trial judge’s decision and ease the appellant’s burden of showing that it is wrong...  ] the guidelines emerging from chorn should be read together and read conformably with the full court authorities upon which they are based. that being so, the delineations there referred to — “the funds used existed at separation ... such that both parties can be seen as having an interest in them”, or “funds used to pay legal fees have been generated by a party post-separation from his or her own endeavours” or received by a party “in his or her own right (for example, by way of gift or inheritance)” - cannot be seen as determinative of the exercise of discretion but, rather, as informing it. [35] again, the matters just referred to have important ramifications in an appellate context. they may ease the appellant’s burden of showing that “although the nature of the error may not be discoverable ... a substantial wrong has in fact occurred”,[48] or that the decision is “plainly wrong, [the] decision being no proper exercise of [the] judicial discretion”.[49] equally, they may ease the burden of establishing that irrelevant considerations have been taken into account or that relevant considerations have not been taken into account. [36] paid legal fees occupy a particular position in the consideration of addbacks by reason of s 117(1) of the act, a matter not relevant to any other form of expenditure or dissipation of property the subject of an addback claim. [37] an order failing to addback legal costs is a pre-emptive decision about one party paying the other’s legal costs. the statutorily prescribed default position is that neither party pays all or some of the other party’s costs.[50] [38] if, contrary to the demands of that section, there is to be a payment of costs, the award is dependent upon a finding of justifying circumstances which, in turn, is dependent upon (non-exhaustive) considerations all of which are informed by antecedent events - for example, whether one party has been “wholly unsuccessful” and “the conduct of the parties to the proceedings”.[51] an award of the costs of trial, if any, is in the usual run of events made after the respective entitlements of the parties to a settlement of property have been assessed and, importantly, any awarded costs are paid from the assessed entitlement to property received by the paying party. [39] as has been said, legitimate guidelines “guide the exercise of a discretion”, they do not replace it.[52] guidelines, must “[preserve], so far as it is possible to do so, the capacity ... to do justice according to the needs of the individual case”.[53] the decision to addback or not addback paid legal fees remains a matter of discretion. but, a finding that it is just and equitable to not addback an amount of legal fees so paid is a finding that it is just and equitable for the other party to contribute to the costs of the first party in that proportion as part of an overall assessment of the justice and equity governing their property division. [40] the considerations just referred to are plainly always important and central to the exercise of that discretion in respect of paid legal fees. [41] the passages from chorn, quoted above, draw a distinction between legal costs met from property that would otherwise be available at trial and legal costs met from funds “generated by a party post-separation from his or her own endeavours or received in his or her own right (for example, by way of gift or inheritance)”. the proposition there advanced, that such expenditure “would generally not be added back”, also needs to be seen as a guideline informing the relevant discretion rather than determining it. a further distinction is suggested in chorn between funds generated in that manner and “[f]unds generated from assets or businesses to which the other party had made a significant contribution or has an actual legal entitlement”. [42] the latter suggestion recognises the discretion inherent in the task and also, perhaps, that in the particular circumstances of a case, adding back sums generated post-separation in the different manners suggested might create injustice as much as it might cure it.[54] ... [46] in stanford v stanford,[55] the high court emphasised as fundamental that a consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order begins by “identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property”.[56] [47] the essence of a claim for addbacks is that the asserted sum/s should be added to the value of the existing property interests of the parties and, subsequent to the assessment of contributions, credited to the spending party as part of the value of their assessed entitlements. doing so does not offend what was emphasised by the high court. adding back does not seek to create property interests that do not exist. rather, doing so emphasises that satisfying the respective requirements of ss 79(2) and (4) of the act to do justice and equity can require an “accounting” or “balance sheet” exercise for the purposes of s 79(2) and (4), so as to include the value of the dissipated property or expended sums within the total value of the parties’ existing interests in property, and to credit the value of same against the assessed entitlement of the dissipating or spending party.[57]
the property  the wife’s westpac choice account ending #...82 - the wife asserts a value of $1,975 and the husband asserts a value of $1,852. given that the account is the property of the wife and she asserts the higher value, being an effect on admission against interest, i accept her evidence, (b) the husband’s motor vehicle 1 was owned by him at the commencement of the parties’ cohabitation and i accept the evidence that substantial sums of money were expended on improvement of that vehicle to the standard of a “show car” during the cohabitation. i have the advantage of the valuation referred to earlier in these reasons that values the vehicle at between $89,500 and $90,500. the wife asserts it has the greater of those values, whilst the husband asserts it has a value of $65,000. i also accept the evidence that the husband sought to sell that vehicle through facebook at an offered price of $95,000. i find that the value of the vehicle is the midpoint of the formal valuation range, being $90,000, (c) item 9 on the balance sheet refers to “jewellery” owned by the “wife/husband” and is asserted by the wife to be valued at $2,500 and by the husband to be valued at $6,000. there is no evidence to substantiate either asserted value and there is no evidence to indicate what the “jewellery” is composed of or who has possession. i will not include “jewellery” in the property.   the husband’s motor vehicle 1 was owned by him at the commencement of the parties’ cohabitation and i accept the evidence that substantial sums of money were expended on improvement of that vehicle to the standard of a “show car” during the cohabitation. i have the advantage of the valuation referred to earlier in these reasons that values the vehicle at between $89,500 and $90,500. the wife asserts it has the greater of those values, whilst the husband asserts it has a value of $65,000. i also accept the evidence that the husband sought to sell that vehicle through facebook at an offered price of $95,000. i find that the value of the vehicle is the midpoint of the formal valuation range, being $90,000, (c) item 9 on the balance sheet refers to “jewellery” owned by the “wife/husband” and is asserted by the wife to be valued at $2,500 and by the husband to be valued at $6,000. there is no evidence to substantiate either asserted value and there is no evidence to indicate what the “jewellery” is composed of or who has possession. i will not include “jewellery” in the property.   item 9 on the balance sheet refers to “jewellery” owned by the “wife/husband” and is asserted by the wife to be valued at $2,500 and by the husband to be valued at $6,000. there is no evidence to substantiate either asserted value and there is no evidence to indicate what the “jewellery” is composed of or who has possession. i will not include “jewellery” in the property.
item owner description value $ assets 1. joint proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property, in trust 794,686 2. husband car trailer 3000 3. wife westpac choice account #...82 1975 4. wife motor vehicle 2 11,000 5. husband cba smart access account #...93 1217 6. husband motor vehicle 1 90,000 7. husband dog trailer 2500 9. husband motor vehicle 3 19,000 10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
assets 1. joint proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property, in trust 794,686 2. husband car trailer 3000 3. wife westpac choice account #...82 1975 4. wife motor vehicle 2 11,000 5. husband cba smart access account #...93 1217 6. husband motor vehicle 1 90,000 7. husband dog trailer 2500 9. husband motor vehicle 3 19,000 10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
1. joint proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property, in trust 794,686 2. husband car trailer 3000 3. wife westpac choice account #...82 1975 4. wife motor vehicle 2 11,000 5. husband cba smart access account #...93 1217 6. husband motor vehicle 1 90,000 7. husband dog trailer 2500 9. husband motor vehicle 3 19,000 10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
2. husband car trailer 3000 3. wife westpac choice account #...82 1975 4. wife motor vehicle 2 11,000 5. husband cba smart access account #...93 1217 6. husband motor vehicle 1 90,000 7. husband dog trailer 2500 9. husband motor vehicle 3 19,000 10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
3. wife westpac choice account #...82 1975 4. wife motor vehicle 2 11,000 5. husband cba smart access account #...93 1217 6. husband motor vehicle 1 90,000 7. husband dog trailer 2500 9. husband motor vehicle 3 19,000 10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
4. wife motor vehicle 2 11,000 5. husband cba smart access account #...93 1217 6. husband motor vehicle 1 90,000 7. husband dog trailer 2500 9. husband motor vehicle 3 19,000 10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
5. husband cba smart access account #...93 1217 6. husband motor vehicle 1 90,000 7. husband dog trailer 2500 9. husband motor vehicle 3 19,000 10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
6. husband motor vehicle 1 90,000 7. husband dog trailer 2500 9. husband motor vehicle 3 19,000 10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
7. husband dog trailer 2500 9. husband motor vehicle 3 19,000 10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
9. husband motor vehicle 3 19,000 10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
10. husband motor vehicle 4 4000 11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
11. husband interim property distribution 50,000 12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
12. wife interim property distribution 50,000 13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
13. wife super fund 2 entitlements 69,000 14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
14. husband super fund 1 entitlements 76,000 total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
total 1,172,378 liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
liabilities 15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
15. wife company ah car debt 2839 16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
16. wife visa credit card debt 2837 total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
total 5676 net value of the property $1,166,702
net value of the property $1,166,702
assessment of contributions
consideration of any adjustment between the parties under section 79(4)(d) to (g) – the matters in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant.  the monies received by the husband on sale of various items of property post separation, (b) the husband’s failure to comply with interim orders to make payments in relation to council and water rates on the d street, suburb e property, thereby reducing the net proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property by the relevant amounts, and (c) the husband’s redraw and overdraw post separation on the loan account secured by mortgage on the d street, suburb e property, also having a negative effect on the net proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property.   the husband’s failure to comply with interim orders to make payments in relation to council and water rates on the d street, suburb e property, thereby reducing the net proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property by the relevant amounts, and (c) the husband’s redraw and overdraw post separation on the loan account secured by mortgage on the d street, suburb e property, also having a negative effect on the net proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property.   the husband’s redraw and overdraw post separation on the loan account secured by mortgage on the d street, suburb e property, also having a negative effect on the net proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property.
i find that all of those are facts and circumstances that the justice of the case requires the court to take into account in assessing any adjustment between the parties under section 75(2)(o) of the act.
conclusion in relation to the alteration of the interests of the parties in the property.
what orders are proper be made altering the interests of the parties in the property so as to do justice and equity between them?
associate: dated: 12 may 2023
dated: 12 may 2023
[1] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(2).[2] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(4).[3] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(a).[4] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(b).[5] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(c).[6] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21, [18].[7] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79.[8] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(1)(a).[9] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(1)(d).[10] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(2).[11] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108.[12] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108; see, especially, [37].[13] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108, [37].[14] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108, [42].[15] hickey & hickey & attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (‘hickey’) [2003] famca 395, [39].[16] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[17] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39]. see also family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(4)(a)-(c):(4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party ... the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party ...; the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ... including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent; ...[18] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[19] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[20] hickey [2003] famca 395, [47].[21] fontana & fontana [2018] famcafc 63.[22] fontana & fontana [2018] famcafc 63, [27].[23] see, eg, jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78.[24] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, [14]-[16].[25] in the marriage of harris [1991] famca 124; (1991) 104 flr 458, 464.[26] fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57, [168].[27] grier & malphas [2016] famcafc 84; (2017) 55 fam lr 107, [129].[28] family law act 1975 (cth) s 75(2)(o).[29] ajo v gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 191 flr 317.[30] ajo v gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 191 flr 317, [30]-[31].[31] see especially, ajo v gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 191 flr 317, [30](b).[32] talbot & talbot [2015] famcafc 132, [31].[33] vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51, [137]-[139] (emphasis in original). [34] bevan v bevan, [2013] famcafc 116; (2013) 279 flr 1, [79].[35] masoud & masoud [2016] famcafc 24, [97].[36] shan & prasad [2018] famcafc 12, [130]-[131].[37] [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) flc 93-218 (“omacini”).[38] omacini at 79,617 [30], referencing in particular kowaliw and kowaliw [1981] famca 70; (1981) flc 91-092 (“kowaliw”); townsend and townsend [1994] famca 144; (1995) flc 92-569 (“townsend”). [39] omacini at 79,619 [39]. [40] cerini & cerini sub nom c & c [1998] famca 143 (“cerini”) at [46].[41] ascot investments pty ltd v harper (1981) 148 clr 337 at 355. see also, stanford v stanford (2012) 247 clr 108.[42] marker & marker sub nom m & m [1998] famca 42 at [2.11].[43] line and line [1996] famca 145; (1997) flc 92-729 at [4.72] as quoted in chorn at 79,317 [38] (noting that, at [4.71], legal fees were said, in obiter, to be different and there is reference to the “notional property” approach). it has also been said that premature expenditure might be taken up in the assessment of contributions, for example by a party making a disproportionately greater indirect contributions to the existing property by reason of other property having been dissipated (see, watson & ling [2013] famca 57; (2013) flc 93-527 at 86,924 [33]).[44] see, the comment to that effect in the earlier decision of browne v green [1999] famca 1483; (1999) flc 92-873 at 86,360 [44].[45] chorn at [32] – [55] referencing: farnell and farnell [1995] famca 140; (1996) flc 92-681; line and line; a and a (unreported, 23 december 1997, lindenmayer, kay & dessau jj); marker & marker sub nom m & m [1998] famca 42; djm v jlm [1998] famca 97; (1998) flc 92-816; c v c [1998] famca 114; (1998) flc 92-824; ibrahim and beavis [1999] famca 765; gartner & gartner [2000] famca 793; clifford and lodge [2000] famca 1666; finlayson v finlayson and gillam [2002] famca 898; (2002) flc 93-121. [46] see, norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17; (1986) 161 clr 513 (“norbis”) at 520 (mason & deane jj); at 537-8 (brennan j); mallet v mallet [1984] hca 21; (1984) 156 clr 605 at 608-9 (gibbs cj). see also, the discussion in hoffman & hoffman [2014] famcafc 92; (2014) flc 93-591 at [21]–[44].[47] norbis at 520 (mason & deane jj).[48] house v the king (1936) 55 clr 499 at 505 (dixon, evatt and mctiernan jj).[49] gronow v gronow [1979] hca 63; (1979) 144 clr 513 at 519 (stephen j).[50] family law act 1975 (cth) s 117(1).[51] family law act 1975 (cth) s 117(2a), specifically sub-paragraphs (e) and (c), respectively.[52] norbis at 537 (brennan j); 519-520 (mason & deane jj).[53] norbis at 520 (mason & deane jj).[54] see, doolan, p., “now you see it, now you don’t: notional property and add-backs in family law”, families, broken, blended, mended: conference handbook: 13th national family law conference, p 255 at [2.3]ff. the paper itself provides examples of the potential injustice and inequity that can occur by a strict adherence to the “source of funds” distinction referred to in chorn.[55] (2012) 247 clr 108 (“stanford”). [56] stanford at 120 [37] (emphasis in original) (french cj, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[57] see, eg, bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116; (2013) flc 93-545 at [79]; vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51; (2015) 53 fam lr 373 and pre‑stanford statements to similar effect in milankov & milankov [2002] famca 195; (2002) flc 93-095.