last updated: 31 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
aldrich & harling [2023] fedcfamc2f 606
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
live with
spend time arrangements  during 2023 school terms: (i) 10 july to 31 july 2023, (ii) 28 august to 18 september 2023, and (iii) 16 october to 6 november 2023. (b) 2023 christmas holiday period: (i) for a three (3) week period ending two (2) clear days before x starts school. (c) in the event that the mother is able to travel to the greater city b region the mother provide the father with 28 days written notice of the dates she intends to be in the greater city b region and x will spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties. (d) such further and other time as may be expressly agreed in writing between the parties. (e) once x commences primary school in 2024 as follows:   10 july to 31 july 2023, (ii) 28 august to 18 september 2023, and (iii) 16 october to 6 november 2023.  ) 28 august to 18 september 2023, and (iii) 16 october to 6 november 2023.  i) 16 october to 6 november 2023.   2023 christmas holiday period: (i) for a three (3) week period ending two (2) clear days before x starts school. (c) in the event that the mother is able to travel to the greater city b region the mother provide the father with 28 days written notice of the dates she intends to be in the greater city b region and x will spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties. (d) such further and other time as may be expressly agreed in writing between the parties. (e) once x commences primary school in 2024 as follows:   for a three (3) week period ending two (2) clear days before x starts school.   in the event that the mother is able to travel to the greater city b region the mother provide the father with 28 days written notice of the dates she intends to be in the greater city b region and x will spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties. (d) such further and other time as may be expressly agreed in writing between the parties. (e) once x commences primary school in 2024 as follows:   such further and other time as may be expressly agreed in writing between the parties. (e) once x commences primary school in 2024 as follows:   once x commences primary school in 2024 as follows:
in school term holidays 1 and 3:  from the first saturday of the holiday period until the second monday.
in school terms holidays term 2: ) odd numbered years – from the first saturday of the holiday period until the second saturday of the holiday period, and (iii) even numbered years – from the second saturday of the holiday period until the last saturday of the holiday period.  i) even numbered years – from the second saturday of the holiday period until the last saturday of the holiday period.
christmas holiday periods: ) even numbered years – from the first saturday of the holiday period until 7 january, and (v) odd numbered years – from 7 january until the last saturday of the holiday period.   odd numbered years – from 7 january until the last saturday of the holiday period.
additional time:  ) in the event that the mother is able to travel to the greater city b region, that the mother provide the father with 28 days written notice of the dates she intends to be in the greater city b region and x will spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties.
changeover
telephone contact
current contact details  their respective residential address. (b) any mobile telephone numbers and/or email addresses that each of them has available from time to time. (c) at least one telephone number at which they can each be contacted at all hours. (d) the mother and father must notify the other in writing or by text message of any change of such particulars within 24 hours of change.   any mobile telephone numbers and/or email addresses that each of them has available from time to time. (c) at least one telephone number at which they can each be contacted at all hours. (d) the mother and father must notify the other in writing or by text message of any change of such particulars within 24 hours of change.   at least one telephone number at which they can each be contacted at all hours. (d) the mother and father must notify the other in writing or by text message of any change of such particulars within 24 hours of change.   the mother and father must notify the other in writing or by text message of any change of such particulars within 24 hours of change.
medical
school information
international travel  any such travel does not exceed more than 21 consecutive days or non‑consecutive days per calendar year with each parent, (b) unless otherwise expressly agreed in writing by the parents and subject to the approval of x’s school, any period of proposed international travel will take place during the school holidays as exercised by the school that x attends, (c) no less than 42 days prior to the departure date the travelling parent must provide the non-travelling parent with details of the international travel including the proposed itinerary, (d) the travelling parent is to use their best endeavours to facilitate x having reasonable telephone and/or skype and/or email communication with the non‑travelling parent while they are overseas.   unless otherwise expressly agreed in writing by the parents and subject to the approval of x’s school, any period of proposed international travel will take place during the school holidays as exercised by the school that x attends, (c) no less than 42 days prior to the departure date the travelling parent must provide the non-travelling parent with details of the international travel including the proposed itinerary, (d) the travelling parent is to use their best endeavours to facilitate x having reasonable telephone and/or skype and/or email communication with the non‑travelling parent while they are overseas.   no less than 42 days prior to the departure date the travelling parent must provide the non-travelling parent with details of the international travel including the proposed itinerary, (d) the travelling parent is to use their best endeavours to facilitate x having reasonable telephone and/or skype and/or email communication with the non‑travelling parent while they are overseas.   the travelling parent is to use their best endeavours to facilitate x having reasonable telephone and/or skype and/or email communication with the non‑travelling parent while they are overseas.
in the event that the mother lives within a 50 km radius of the city b area:  by consent, each alternate week from 9.00am (or the commencement of school) on friday until 9.00am (or the commencement of school) on the following friday. (b) during christmas school holidays as follows: (i) even numbered years – from 12.00 noon on the first saturday of the holiday period until 12.00 noon on 7 january with the father and from 12.00 noon on 7 january until 12.00 noon on the last saturday of the holiday period with the mother, and (ii) odd numbered years – from 12.00 noon on the first saturday of the holiday period until 12.00 noon on 7 january with the mother and from 12.00 noon on 7 january until 12.00 noon on the last saturday of the holiday period with the father.   during christmas school holidays as follows: (i) even numbered years – from 12.00 noon on the first saturday of the holiday period until 12.00 noon on 7 january with the father and from 12.00 noon on 7 january until 12.00 noon on the last saturday of the holiday period with the mother, and (ii) odd numbered years – from 12.00 noon on the first saturday of the holiday period until 12.00 noon on 7 january with the mother and from 12.00 noon on 7 january until 12.00 noon on the last saturday of the holiday period with the father.   even numbered years – from 12.00 noon on the first saturday of the holiday period until 12.00 noon on 7 january with the father and from 12.00 noon on 7 january until 12.00 noon on the last saturday of the holiday period with the mother, and (ii) odd numbered years – from 12.00 noon on the first saturday of the holiday period until 12.00 noon on 7 january with the mother and from 12.00 noon on 7 january until 12.00 noon on the last saturday of the holiday period with the father.  ) odd numbered years – from 12.00 noon on the first saturday of the holiday period until 12.00 noon on 7 january with the mother and from 12.00 noon on 7 january until 12.00 noon on the last saturday of the holiday period with the father.
father’s day
mother’s day
x  any such travel does not exceed more than 21 consecutive days or non-consecutive days per calendar year with each parent, (b) unless otherwise expressly agreed in writing by the parents and subject to the approval of x’s school, any period of proposed international travel will take place during the school holidays as exercised by the school that x attends, (c) the travelling parent must provide the non-travelling parent no less than 42 days prior to the departure date with details of the international travel including the proposed itinerary, (d) the travelling parent is to use their best endeavours to facilitate x having reasonable telephone and/or skype and/or email communication with the non-travelling parent while they are overseas.   unless otherwise expressly agreed in writing by the parents and subject to the approval of x’s school, any period of proposed international travel will take place during the school holidays as exercised by the school that x attends, (c) the travelling parent must provide the non-travelling parent no less than 42 days prior to the departure date with details of the international travel including the proposed itinerary, (d) the travelling parent is to use their best endeavours to facilitate x having reasonable telephone and/or skype and/or email communication with the non-travelling parent while they are overseas.   the travelling parent must provide the non-travelling parent no less than 42 days prior to the departure date with details of the international travel including the proposed itinerary, (d) the travelling parent is to use their best endeavours to facilitate x having reasonable telephone and/or skype and/or email communication with the non-travelling parent while they are overseas.   the travelling parent is to use their best endeavours to facilitate x having reasonable telephone and/or skype and/or email communication with the non-travelling parent while they are overseas.
reasons for judgment
judge betts
overview:
the hearing:
chronology of events:
the father:
the mother & her partner:
the relationship between the parents:
post-separation parenting arrangements:
the relocation:
i know you probably don't know any details, but if you had a timeframe you were thinking about, it would be great to know. obviously very hard for me to consider so soon after finding out, but without [x] here, there is nothing keeping me in [city b]. it might take me a while to find the right job, but i would consider moving. i assume you would head to [city h/town c] area. even if it was to brisbane, or something, just to make it easier to see [x], it would all revolve around me finding the right job.
yeh we were thinking around [town c] but also considering up towards [city k]. but being in the same state would make it a lot easier definitely and only one flight or an easier drive. who knows what might come up job-wise for you, could be a nice change. of course wouldn't expect you to move and if you didn't i would want [x] to see you as much as she could. if we do decide to go we would like to be moved before the babies are born [...].
[my underlining]  harling], i appreciate you raising the issue of you relocating to queensland. i want to be clear that i do not consent to [x] moving with you at this point in time, as this impacts our current arrangement that provides me with 50 per cent custody. happy to have further discussions about it to see if we can come to an agreement. thanks.
i advised [mr aldrich] on this occasion that [mr e] and i had decided that relocating was our best option, and that i wanted to ensure that any arrangements as to [x’s] living arrangements allowed [x] to continue to spend significant time with [mr aldrich].
hey i really wanted to talk to you again about us moving to qld. we have more details of what we would like to do and i feel like sending a txt will give you a better idea of the details and you can let me know your thoughts etc. we are thinking we would like to spend 6 - 8 months in [town c] with [mr e's] family. the twins are due [...] but most likely will be here early so ideally we would like to be there some time [earlier] so we can settle in. we are definitely not planning on staying there long term, we just feel like that we will have the best support at the start there and will re evaluate. i want you to be able to see [x] whenever you want as much as possible so not sure if that would be a regular time we stick to eg fortnightly or monthly or work around your work schedule, whatever you would be comfortable with. i know my family will be able to support you when she is with you in [city b] and perhaps we can look at getting her casual days at school when she is there? i completely understand and i am well aware that this is not the easiest thing for you to contemplate but i want to make this as easy as possible and i wouldn't be bringing this to you if i didn't think it would be the best thing for us at this time. i really would like it if you would give me your honest feelings and thoughts and that nothing is closed door and that we're open to discussing this based on what you want as-well.
the mediation people are going to call you to get some details. i assume it will likely be today but may be tomorrow. there are costs associated with mediation that we will need to work out also.
okay thanks. i am curious though what do you wish to achieve from mediation? do you want full custody of her? you have no grounds for stopping us moving, so i'm not sure what you expect the outcome to be? i'm not restricting you seeing her and there is no abuse of any form.
my main priority is what's best for [x’s] well being and development. i'm not pursuing full custody as i don't think that's in [x’s] best interests as i think it is vitally important for her to have a relationship with both her parents. should the situation or determination ever occur that i have full custody i would have no hesitation in accepting if that was in her best interest
excellent so in you being concerned about what the best option for her would be in regard to her fostering relationships with family and her development than [sic] realistically the best option would be for her to be with me the majority of the time because if she was with you she would spend her entire week in care or in the care of someone else. which will be fine for her 50 per cent of the time maximum. therefore the only thing to figure out for us is the terms of when you want to see her when we move. as i have stated in my emails and in person, you can see her whenever you wish within our 50/50 arrangement if that is less i am happy to accommodate this. you do not have to tell me dates now you can tell me as we go when you would like me to bring her back but [mr e] starts work in early feb so we will be leaving [in] feb. if you feel we need mediation to work out the exact dates you want to see her...
moving for employment i don't require your 'consent' as i am still allowing full agreed access to her. you can either start working together as her parents or continue along this unhappy path you are creating for yourself. it's your call. [my underlining]
11. the mother proposed initially that [x] could continue to spend time between [city b] and [town c] on a fortnightly rotating arrangement. when quizzed about the prospect of this from a practicable aspect in considering [x’s] enrolment in schooling next year, the mother explained that she believed the father would have agreed to her residing in her primary care in [town c] due to his past history of being unavailable to care for her at times. the mother also explained that the father works full-time and she considered that he would see that she was better placed to offer primary care to [x] due to her availability.
as i know that is not my decision to make, has nothing to do with me but it does effect [x] and that is my concern. without knowing the details of your planned relocation i can see that it will be harder to do with [x] in your care so she can remain here with me while you're relocating and then we can work out the details once you are settled.
if it makes you feel more comfortable for you to have her for the first two weeks while we move i am happy with that. i would like to work out the details though for when i would like to see her and that is 2 weeks after we leave and that will be to meet at brisbane airport as previously discussed.
interim orders of 17/03/22:
spend time that [x] spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties, but failing agreement as follows: (a) for 4 x 3 week periods each year with the mother providing one (1) month's notice to the father of the dates she intends to spend with [x] and the father will do all such acts and things to facilitate the spend time, (b) for up to seven (7) nights in the event that the mother is in the [city b] area with the mother is to collect [x] from the father's residence at the commencement of time and return [x] to the father's residence at the conclusion of such time, and with the mother to give the father at least one month's notice of her intention to travel to [city b] and spend time with [x], (c) any such further time as agreed between the mother and the father.   for 4 x 3 week periods each year with the mother providing one (1) month's notice to the father of the dates she intends to spend with [x] and the father will do all such acts and things to facilitate the spend time, (b) for up to seven (7) nights in the event that the mother is in the [city b] area with the mother is to collect [x] from the father's residence at the commencement of time and return [x] to the father's residence at the conclusion of such time, and with the mother to give the father at least one month's notice of her intention to travel to [city b] and spend time with [x], (c) any such further time as agreed between the mother and the father.   for up to seven (7) nights in the event that the mother is in the [city b] area with the mother is to collect [x] from the father's residence at the commencement of time and return [x] to the father's residence at the conclusion of such time, and with the mother to give the father at least one month's notice of her intention to travel to [city b] and spend time with [x], (c) any such further time as agreed between the mother and the father.   any such further time as agreed between the mother and the father.
parties are at loggerheads:
father's day 2022 / apprehended violence order:
...visibly distraught, crying, and struggling to speak with police about the incident.
...as ordered by this or another court about contact with children.
there was also an additional order that:
you must not go within 100 metres of (a) any place where the father or [ms j] live or (b) any place where they work or (c) any of the following places – [z street, suburb t]
which is where the father and ms j were living at the time.
interim orders of 13/10/22:
interim orders by consent:   from 31 october to 21 november 2022, (b) from 19 december 2022 to 9 january 2023, (c) from 6 february 2023 to 21 february 2023 -   from 19 december 2022 to 9 january 2023, (c) from 6 february 2023 to 21 february 2023 -   from 6 february 2023 to 21 february 2023 -
[i pause here to observe that this was a typographical error. it ought to have been a three (3) week holiday. to the credit of the father, he later agreed to the mother's request that the holiday run from 6 february to 28 february on the basis of this typo. that is to say, he showed flexibility.]  from 27 march 2023 to 17 april 2023 -
[this being the last trip to queensland before the final hearing was to take place], and  from 22 may 2023 to 12 june 2023.
the law:
...all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authorities which, by law, parents have in relation to children.
section 65dac obliges parents who share parental responsibility to consult with each other about major long-term issues and to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision.
...the way in which the parent who properly has custody of a child may choose in a reasonable manner to order his or her way of life is one of those things which the parent who has not been given custody may well have to bear. as kirby j also points out, that central proposition has been reinforced by curial statements to the effect that, for example: [w]hen one parent has been given custody it is a very strong thing for this court to make an order which will prevent the following of a chosen career by the parent who has custody. and: [t]his line of authority shows that where the custodial parent herself, it was the mother in all those cases, has a genuine and reasonable desire to emigrate then the court should hesitate long before refusing permission to take the children.
45. his honour went on to say:
this court, and other courts of australia, are not bound by the decisions of foreign courts on this or any other subject. however, where (as here) australian legislation has substantially followed a precedent in english legislation, it is obviously sensible to take into account the course of judicial authority in that country dealing with the same legislation. so much was acknowledged in ams, where the decision in poel was examined in my reasons with which, on the decisive point, gleeson cj, mchugh and gummow jj agreed. however, as his honour was also anxious to point out, and as is clear from the terms of the act itself, the application of those propositions does not give rise to any presumption or additional onus. rather, they posit the acute issues as to the best interests of the children within legitimate parental expectations and desires consequent upon marriage breakdown and the need to construct lives for parents and children consequent thereto. all applications for parenting orders before the court involve a situation that, axiomatically, is not in the children’s best interests. what is best for children is that their parents co-parent by agreement and without conflict and as selflessly as circumstances reasonably allow. when parents are unable to agree, the parents’ proposals embraced in competing applications involve, again axiomatically, advantages and disadvantages for the children, each and all of which have ramifications for the children’s best interests. concomitantly, gummow and callinan jj said in u v u: ...the reality is that maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents: obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement have been incurred. “relocation cases” are no different from other applications for parenting orders in that respect. like all applications for parenting orders, an application to have the children live with a parent significantly geographically remote from the other parent is to be determined by the children’s best interests. however, the issues in a “relocation case” are, by reason of the proposed geographical separation of parents from their children, often significantly more acute and all the more so in cases of proposed international relocation. and, of course, that same factor will usually render more acute the burden or burdens to be borne by one parent or the other, including restrictions on their freedoms. ...conformably with what had been said by the high court in [ams v. aif]
...only defer to the paramount consideration of a child's best interests where those interests would be so adversely affected as to justify such interference, and then the interference is legitimate only to the extent ... necessary to avoid such adverse effects.
...changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.
best interests findings:
section 60cc primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
in direct contrast, after spending time in queensland with [ms harling], [x] appears much more relaxed, and her health picks up, her cough clears, eyes are brighter, and the [skin condition] starts to clear. upon returning to [city b], [x’s] health starts to suffer again in what appears to be a vicious cycle for such a young child.
during this time, i became -
[i think it should say "came"]
to know [mr aldrich] very well and enjoyed being with [y] and [x] and minding both children on many occasions.
since [ms harling] commenced her relationship with [mr e] and i have gotten to know him -
[which is pretty much all she says about the father. but she then goes on to say -]
i have found him to be a kind, thoughtful and caring person. i have observed [x] and [mr e] to enjoy a relaxed and loving relationship.
i say no more about the maternal grandmother's affidavit. it does not assist me in any serious way.  is a confident, outgoing and friendly child who was able and willing to engage in play and a discussion with the court child expert with ease.
that is to say, they agree that she is a confident, outgoing and friendly child at paragraph 17 of the child impact report.
neither parent raised any concern as to [x’s] developmental achievements, and she was described by the mother as a happy, social, caring and creative child who loves craft and dancing.
the statutory pathway:
conclusion & orders:
associate: dated: 12 may 2023
dated: 12 may 2023