last updated: 28 june 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
solberg & markwell [2023] fedcfamc2f 552
orders
the court declares that:
contraventions, pleas, and findings
contravention application filed 22nd july 2022  contravention 3 set out in the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 was admitted but with reasonable excuse. the court finds the contravention is with reasonable excuse. (ii) contravention 4 set out in the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 was admitted but with reasonable excuse. the court finds the contravention is with reasonable excuse. (iii) contravention 5 set out in the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is not established.  ) contravention 4 set out in the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 was admitted but with reasonable excuse. the court finds the contravention is with reasonable excuse. (iii) contravention 5 set out in the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is not established.  i) contravention 5 set out in the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is not established.
contravention application filed 7th march 2023 ) contravention 1 set out in the contravention application filed 7 march 2023 was admitted but with reasonable excuse. the court finds the contravention is established without reasonable excuse. (v) contravention 2 set out in the contravention application filed 7 march 2023 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is established. (vi) contravention 3 set out in the contravention application filed 7 march 2023 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is established. (vii) contravention 4 set out in the contravention application filed 7 march 2023 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is established.   contravention 2 set out in the contravention application filed 7 march 2023 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is established. (vi) contravention 3 set out in the contravention application filed 7 march 2023 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is established. (vii) contravention 4 set out in the contravention application filed 7 march 2023 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is established.  ) contravention 3 set out in the contravention application filed 7 march 2023 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is established. (vii) contravention 4 set out in the contravention application filed 7 march 2023 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is established.  i) contravention 4 set out in the contravention application filed 7 march 2023 was not admitted. the court finds the contravention is established.
on a final basis, the court orders that:  commencing 2 july 2023, for a period of 6 months, for one weekend per month, from 5:00pm on friday until 5:00pm on sunday on the first weekend of each month, unless otherwise agreed in writing (b) absent any reports by the respondent mother to care and protection within the following 6 months, and absent any adverse application by the second applicant father against the respondent mother regarding parenting within the following 6 months, commencing 2 january 2024, each alternate weekend from 5:00pm on friday until 5:00pm on sunday. (c) once the mother’s time with the child moves to each alternate weekend as provided for in order 10(b), the final orders of 30th june 2020 regarding holiday time will apply thereafter.   absent any reports by the respondent mother to care and protection within the following 6 months, and absent any adverse application by the second applicant father against the respondent mother regarding parenting within the following 6 months, commencing 2 january 2024, each alternate weekend from 5:00pm on friday until 5:00pm on sunday. (c) once the mother’s time with the child moves to each alternate weekend as provided for in order 10(b), the final orders of 30th june 2020 regarding holiday time will apply thereafter.   once the mother’s time with the child moves to each alternate weekend as provided for in order 10(b), the final orders of 30th june 2020 regarding holiday time will apply thereafter.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
chronology
exhibits
no. of exhibit
description of exhibit
party who submitted exhibit
witness who proved exhibit
notes
dcj-1
letter from the new south wales department of communities and justice dated 22 november 2022
mother
n/a
at contravention hearing 24 march 2023
dcj-2
letter from the new south wales department of communities and justice dated 14 december 2022
second applicant father – mr ranwick
sr-1
timing notice, interim family violence order, application for a family violence order and transcript dated 8 march 2023
outline of principle
rice & apslund ] in my view, reflection on the rule shows that:   what the application of the rule can achieve if dealt with as a preliminary matter is different from what it can achieve if dealt with at the end of a full hearing. (ii) in its original formulation, the rule is directed to application as a preliminary matter. yet, contemporaneously with that formulation the court in rice and asplund determined that the rule could equally be applied at the end of a full custody hearing. the consequences of that determination have received little attention. (iii) at whatever stage of a hearing the rule is applied, its application should remain merely a manifestation of the “best interests principle”. (iv) discussion in terms that the rule may be applied as a “preliminary matter” or the primary application be first heard “on the merits” may be unhelpful, particularly because of the implication that, if the rule is applied as a preliminary matter, the parenting application is not then dealt with “on the merits”. (v) the application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of, change sought to the earlier order. (vi) “shorthand” statements of the rule may contribute to its misapplication. (vii) any application of the rule must now measure the evidence against the principles set out in part vii of the act, in particular the objects of the part, the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the steps required by the act consequent upon an order made or to be made in that regard.  ] ...in my view when the threshold question described in rice and asplund is determined as a preliminary matter, it remains a determination “on the merits”. where an application is dismissed at a preliminary stage, it is not dismissed for some technical reason, such as the failure of a party to appear or some lack of compliance with form and procedure but rather because, assuming the evidence of the applicant is accepted, there is an insufficient change of circumstance shown to justify embarking on a hearing. though sometimes unstated, the underlying conclusion will or ought be that the interests of the child in not being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s welfare than to allow the application to continue.
it may be, however, that neither the expressions “summary dismissal” or “striking out” is the best term to describe the procedure when, in a parenting case, the rule in rice and asplund is considered at a preliminary stage. this is because, as we seek to emphasise, at whatever stage the rule in rice and asplund is applied, the court is bound to take into account best interests considerations and also because specific requirements, including legislative requirements, apply.  ] in our view, that passage [at [81] in sps & pls] need not be taken as saying that the only way in which the rule in rice and asplund can be applied at a preliminary stage is on the basis that the case of the applicant for parenting orders is taken at its highest. [82] ... the qualitative question of whether a change that has occurred is or is not sufficiently significant to justify a full further hearing of a parenting issue may be one much more difficult to answer in a preliminary hearing involving resolution of only some disputed facts. [83] this observation may be behind the approach that either the case of the applicant for parenting orders is, at a preliminary stage, taken at its highest, or the hearing embarked upon is an enquiry into all matters relating to the best interests of the child or children. [84] on the other hand, there is authority to suggest that these are not the only legitimate procedures....
nevertheless, there are significant changes that occur and which do require a court to reconsider decisions previously made. whether in a particular case a court should be willing to embark upon another hearing concerning the child and parent, or whether to do so would itself be demonstrably contrary to the best interests of the child, is a decision to be made in each particular case. how is that decision to be made? the court must look at:
1) the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based. 2) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. 3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.
if applied on a preliminary basis, the issue is whether the circumstances as disclosed by the evidence reveal a change of such significance that the best interests of the child require a revisiting of earlier orders.
... we are far from persuaded that the hurdles that have to be overcome to found a successful challenge on the basis of the weight afforded to the evidence have been scaled. it has consistently been held that where no error of fact or law is present, disagreement only on matters of weight cannot alone justify appellate interference....
this analysis leads us to the view that where the principle in rice & asplund is being considered, it will not be appropriate or necessary to discretely address many of the factors in section 60cc of the act in determining where the best interests of the child might lie.
in a case where the principle in rice arises for consideration, there are two circumstances which are central to the decision. first, there will already exist a parenting order and, axiomatically, the terms of that order will reflect the best interests of the child or children at the time of its making. second, the fact that an order has been made reflects that disputation between parties to a parenting dispute, such dispute being inherently contrary to the best interests of the child whilst it exists, has been brought to an end by a curial order. those twin circumstances dictate the conclusion that it cannot logically be in the best interests of the child to embark upon further litigation enquiring as to the child’s best interests unless it is first demonstrated that a sufficient change in circumstances has occurred since the parenting order was made.
thus, it is entirely understandable, and in our view, not erroneous, for his honour to address the issue of “best interests” by reference to whether it is in the interests of the child for there to be the further litigation proposed by the mother. indeed, we note that this was how the issue was framed in the mother’s outline of argument presented to his honour at the commencement of the hearing. she said this (at paragraph 3):
the central question for consideration by the court was encapsulated by warnick j in the following terms (para 81, at page 310):
“... though sometimes unstated, the underlying conclusion will or ought to be that the interests of the child in not being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s welfare than to allow the application to continue.” ] where the question of whether a sufficient change in circumstances has occurred is to be determined as a matter preliminary to the hearing of the application, it is accepted that the applicant’s evidence should be taken at its highest. [52] it was argued for the mother that his honour erred in finding that she had failed to demonstrate a sufficient change in circumstances to justify re-opening the parenting proceedings. [53] his honour concluded at [100] that the facts did not establish “a new and vital change in the circumstances”, and found that it was “obvious” that amber had been anxious for some time and that anxiety had from time to time manifested itself in her refusing to go to school. he went on to offer what he considered to be the reasons for this, including that she had recently commenced high school. he thus found at [111] that the mother’s evidence did not establish a material change of circumstances in the necessary sense. [54] the bar to appellate intervention where the challenge is to a judge’s fact finding is set high. see edwards v noble (1971) 125 clr 296. [55] in order to succeed in challenging his honour’s finding that there had been no change in circumstances, it is necessary to demonstrate that the finding was not open to his honour on the evidence before him. [56] thus it was argued that, had his honour indeed taken the mother’s evidence at its highest it was not open to him to find that there had been no material change in circumstances. it was further argued that both his honour’s conclusion that the child had always been anxious, and that her present refusal to attend school was a manifestation of a pre-existing condition and was probably due to her attending a new school, were findings unsupported by the evidence. [57] his honour’s finding that the child’s present anxiety and refusal to attend school was unsupported by the evidence. however, it was a conclusion reasonably open to his honour given the accepted increase in her refusing to attend school and anxiety generally with the beginning of a new school regime. it could not be said that the conclusion was not open to his honour. his honour’s findings clearly accept the parties’ position that amber’s anxiety and school refusal had escalated. the issue for his honour was whether these circumstances led to the conclusion that there had been a material change in circumstances. his honour found that they did not. that was a determination open to him and i find no error in his conclusion. this challenge is not made out.  ] in any event, while the arguments in support of the contention are framed as challenges to “principles” relating to the rule, they are, in essence, challenges to the weight which his honour attached to aspects of the evidence. [84] in my view, the findings made by his honour were entirely open to him on the evidence and it was entirely open to his honour to include the matters to which his honour made reference in reaching a determination that a material change in circumstances was not established.  ] in that respect, it has been held recently that:
... plainly a circumstance can only constitute a relevant 'change' if it is a circumstance which was outside or beyond the contemplation or consideration of the parties and the court at the time the original parenting orders were made. put another way, if the current circumstances were within the contemplation of the parties and were considered by the court at the time the original parenting orders were made, there is no basis upon which they can be said to constitute a change which would justify the prospect of continuing litigation with respect to parenting arrangements, given the adverse effect which uncertainty and unpredictability with respect to parenting arrangements can be assumed to have upon the interests of the child concerned...[10] ] in my view his honour made no error as asserted on behalf of the mother.  0] the exercise of those discretions will depend, like all discretionary decisions, on a multiplicity of factors. however, the decisions will include a consideration of the nature and cogency of the evidence as to material change and the nature and extent of the orders sought to be changed. the decisions will also ordinarily involve a consideration of the notorious fact – accepted as such both by authority and by mr north in his arguments – that continued litigation and the re-agitation of contested issues about children has the potential to cause significant harm to them. [111] in some cases, those factors, and perhaps others, will persuade a court that further evidence is required before reaching a decision on the rice & asplund question. the obtaining of a family report in an appropriate case might be an example of such further evidence, although it once again needs to be pointed out that family reports do not decide cases, courts do. [112] however, the court’s decision as to the evidence necessary to decide the application of “the rule in rice & asplund” as a preliminary matter also involves the exercise of discretion. the exercise of that discretion will also have as its central question whether it is “more powerfully in the child[ren’s] welfare” to permit the obtaining of the further evidence – and what might be involved for the children in doing so – than to determine the application of the rule as a preliminary matter without that evidence. that can be seen to have particular importance when the evidence sought is a family report or the interventions of other experts that involve the participation of the children. [113] it should also be pointed out (as it was by this court in miller & harrington), that the relevant discretions must now be exercised within the mandatory principles and other provisions contained within division 12a of the act. in that respect two of the mandatory principles which must be applied by a court by reference to s 69zn of the act bear quotation:   the first principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings. (4) the second principle is that the court is to actively direct, control and manage the conduct of the proceedings.  4] in my view, contrary to the submissions made by mr north, well settled authority is entirely consistent with his honour having the power to apply “the rule in rice & asplund” as a preliminary matter “... even where the evidence demonstrates a material change since the previous order”. [115] secondly, again contrary to mr north’s submissions, it is in my view not correct to characterise his honour’s actions or decisions as a failure or refusal to exercise jurisdiction in proceedings for parenting orders properly invoked by the mother. the refusal by his honour to contemplate the obtaining of a family report (or, perhaps, other evidence) so as to inform the rule at a preliminary stage was not a failure of judicial process but a discretionary decision performed within a mandatory statutory context and arrived at by reference to the children’s best interests for reasons which his honour gave. [116] it is not established that his honour erred in law, that he failed to take account of relevant considerations, that he took account of irrelevant considerations or committed any other discretionary error. no error in the exercise of his honour’s discretion is pleaded nor can any be seen in his honour’s reasons.
i consider any differences between the two phrases as semantic and not substantial. as the authorities make clear, the essential point in the application of the rule in rice and asplund is the balancing of the new circumstances against the undesirability of further litigation involving the child. the nature of that exercise will depend very much upon the nature of the changes relied upon. obviously enough, if there are no changes or if the changes are insignificant or unsubstantial, there will be little to justify reconsideration of the earlier orders.
these authorities make clear that a change in circumstances is not itself the answer to the question as to whether the earlier parenting orders should be reconsidered, but that those new matters, in all of the circumstances, must be sufficient to justify or to provide for such a hearing.  ] the first thing to note is that although there is no doubt that the rule in rice & asplund is a “manifestation of the best interests principle” (sps & pls [2008] famcafc 16, (2008) 39 fam lr 295 at [48]), his honour’s task under the rule was to determine whether there had been a significant change in circumstances since the initial order was made such that it would be in the best interests of the children to reopen the litigation. that process involves the weighing of the significance or sufficiency of the changes against the potential detriment to the children caused by the litigation itself. that potential detriment extends to all that would be involved in reopening the litigation, including the exercise of obtaining a family report.
... we should emphasise that the magnitude of the variation of the parenting orders sought to be achieved in the fresh proceedings, necessarily informs the nature of change of circumstances sufficient to justify that re-litigation. here, the mother was seeking a complete reversal of the child’s living arrangements, rather than merely some minor tinkering or slender change to the new zealand orders. therefore, the nature of the change in circumstances needed to be of sufficient gravity to warrant the wholesale re-litigation of the child’s living arrangements. on no view did the mother’s claims come close to demonstrating a sufficient change. taking her case at its highest, it had no reasonable likelihood of success.
contravention
the circumstances in which a person may be taken to have had, for the purposes of this division, a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act affecting children include, but are not limited to, the circumstances set out in subsections (2), (4), (5), (6) and (7).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to spend time with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not spending time together as provided for in the order if, a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to spend time together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).
a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to spend time together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).
b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).
...   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to which section 65p applies by acting contrary to section 65p if: a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).
a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).
b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).  ] as earlier seen, s 70nae(1) is to the effect that the circumstances described in the following subsections are not the only circumstances in which reasonable excuse may be found. while it is clear that a set of circumstances quite different in character to those set out in any of the subsections could constitute reasonable excuse, a much more difficult question is whether, if the circumstances seem to fit within the character of those set out in a subsection, that subsection describes the limits within which reasonable excuse may be found. for example, could a respondent who genuinely believed that contravention was necessary to protect a child’s health, but who had no reasonable grounds for that belief, nonetheless be found to have had a reasonable excuse for contravention or, might a person who contravened an order to protect a child’s health be found to have had a reasonable excuse for contravention, notwithstanding that the retention was for longer than was necessary to protect the child’s health. [23] the first example might be addressed by regarding the term “reasonable excuse” in s 70nae(1) as being an objective test, albeit one that might include “subjective” aspects. thus, the term “reasonable excuse” in subsection (1) would match the term “on reasonable grounds” in subsection (5). if this approach was taken, the same result would be achieved whether subsection (5) was expressly relied upon or not. while this conclusion does not mean that subsection (5) must be applied whenever it can “fit” the circumstances, it certainly does not support an opposite conclusion. [24] while subsection (5) describes circumstances in which a reasonable excuse will exist, within its term are qualifications such as “reasonable grounds”, “...necessary to protect the health...” and “...not longer than was necessary”, which if not met will exclude some “excuses”. i incline to the view that where the legislature has specifically installed qualifications on an excuse in a particular set of circumstances, it would not be open to make a finding of excuse where that limit had been exceeded, unless there were some additional circumstances that took the case out of the situation dealt with by the subsection. so, as to the second example given in the preceding paragraph, without such an additional circumstance, it would not be open to find reasonable excuse in respect of a contravention for a period that exceeded that which was necessary to protect a child’s health.
... in my view, the correct approach would have been to at least attempt to measure the mother’s excuse against the terms of s 70nae(5) and to explain why the subsection did not apply, if that was held to be the case....
... the learned magistrate may well have fallen into error by applying too loose a test of “reasonableness”. the question is not simply whether, viewed from some ill-defined concept of fairness or reasonableness, the mother’s actions were excusable. the position with regard to the terms “reasonable grounds” and “reasonable excuse” in s 70nae is, i think, similar to that of terms of like generality, for example, “any just cause” used elsewhere in the act....
here, the context in which “reasonable excuse” applied tellingly included the subsections of s 70nae. it also included that the father was entitled to spend time with the child pursuant to a court order. such an order places serious obligations on persons in the position of the mother in this case.
the relevant context also includes authoritive [sic] statements of the court about like cases, of which the following statements in the marriage of gaunt [1978] famca 97, (1978) flc 90-468 are a good example (at 77,398):
the essential question is this - can a party who does not agree with a court’s decision about access defy the order and then plead that in preventing access his actions were based on his genuinely held belief that to allow the order to operate would be contrary to the welfare of the child? the question of the child’s welfare is, of course, the paramount consideration for the court in determining the access question in the first place. to allow a party to arrogate to himself a supervening power to make an independent decision on that issue and to rely on that decision to escape from compliance with the court’s order or from the consequences of non-compliance would undermine the purpose and intentions of the act.
... a party’s subjective view of the rights and wrongs of a decision cannot be relied on as “just cause or excuse” or “reasonable cause”...
a person is taken for the purposes of this division to have contravened an order under this act affecting children if, and only if:   where the person is bound by the order—he or she has:  intentionally failed to comply with the order, or (ii) made no reasonable attempt to comply with the order, or  otherwise—he or she has:  intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   a court having jurisdiction under this act may make an order varying a primary order if:   proceedings in relation to the primary order are brought before a court having jurisdiction under this act, and (b) it is alleged in those proceedings that a person committed a contravention of the primary order and either:  the court does not find that the person committed a contravention of the primary order, or (ii) the court finds that the person committed a contravention of the primary order.  if subdivision f applies to the contravention, when making an order under subsection (1) varying a primary order, the court, in addition to regarding, under section 60ca, the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration, must, if any of the following considerations is relevant, take that consideration into account:   the person who contravened the primary order did so after having attended, after having refused or failed to attend, or after having been found to be unsuitable to take any further part in, a post‑separation parenting program or a part of such a program, (b) there was no post‑separation parenting program that the person who contravened the primary order could attend, (c) because of the behaviour of the person who contravened the primary order, it was not appropriate, in the court’s opinion, for the person to attend a post‑separation parenting program, or a part of such a program, (d) the primary order was a compensatory parenting order made under paragraph 70neb(1)(b) or 70nfb(2)(c) after the person had contravened a previous order under this act affecting children.   this section does not limit the circumstances in which a court having jurisdiction under this act may vary a primary order.
a. application in a proceeding filed 13th january 2022
mother’s orders sought
fathers’ orders sought
a. an initiating application, b. affidavit, c. notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, and d. parenting questionnaire. that within twenty-eight (28) days of compliance with order six, the father cause to be filed and served the following documents: a. response to initiating application, b. consolidated affidavit, c. notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, and d. parenting questionnaire.
9. that the mother pay the father’s costs of and incidental to this application. notation given the content of the father’s affidavit filed in these proceedings on 15 december 2022, he now contends there has been a change in circumstances significant enough to satisfy the threshold test set out in rice v asplund, and consents to enlivening the jurisdiction of part vii of the family law act 1975 (cth) in relation to [d].
the mother’s oral submissions in relation to rice v asplund
oral submissions on behalf of the fathers in relation to rice v asplund
consideration & disposition
b
d  the mother recently moved back to the city ab region, firstly to town ad, just outside its borders, and then to emergency (and thereby, non-permanent) accommodation in a suburb of city ab. that accommodation, according to the occupancy agreement, expires on 8th june 2023, (b) it has been approximately 2½ or so years since the final orders of june 2020, (c) there needs to be a further report, (d) the breakdown in the relationship between mr solberg and his partner, (e) the sibling relationship between b and d needs to be re-considered, and (f) the [unspecified] needs of the children are now not being met.   it has been approximately 2½ or so years since the final orders of june 2020, (c) there needs to be a further report, (d) the breakdown in the relationship between mr solberg and his partner, (e) the sibling relationship between b and d needs to be re-considered, and (f) the [unspecified] needs of the children are now not being met.   there needs to be a further report, (d) the breakdown in the relationship between mr solberg and his partner, (e) the sibling relationship between b and d needs to be re-considered, and (f) the [unspecified] needs of the children are now not being met.   the breakdown in the relationship between mr solberg and his partner, (e) the sibling relationship between b and d needs to be re-considered, and (f) the [unspecified] needs of the children are now not being met.   the sibling relationship between b and d needs to be re-considered, and (f) the [unspecified] needs of the children are now not being met.   the [unspecified] needs of the children are now not being met.   the needs of the children, having regard to their different ages, (b) the importance of the sibling relationship between the sisters, (c) the different living situations of the families of each father (one in city ab, the other in town e in country new south wales, town e being approximately 100 or so kilometres from city ab, a drive of approximately several hours), (d) the living situation of the mother at a significant distance from city ab, and what might (or would) happen in terms of the parenting arrangements in the event that she was to return to live in much closer proximity to the father(s).   the importance of the sibling relationship between the sisters, (c) the different living situations of the families of each father (one in city ab, the other in town e in country new south wales, town e being approximately 100 or so kilometres from city ab, a drive of approximately several hours), (d) the living situation of the mother at a significant distance from city ab, and what might (or would) happen in terms of the parenting arrangements in the event that she was to return to live in much closer proximity to the father(s).   the different living situations of the families of each father (one in city ab, the other in town e in country new south wales, town e being approximately 100 or so kilometres from city ab, a drive of approximately several hours), (d) the living situation of the mother at a significant distance from city ab, and what might (or would) happen in terms of the parenting arrangements in the event that she was to return to live in much closer proximity to the father(s).   the living situation of the mother at a significant distance from city ab, and what might (or would) happen in terms of the parenting arrangements in the event that she was to return to live in much closer proximity to the father(s).
b. contravention application filed 22nd july 2022
contravention 1 orders 2, 11, l 2(b)(iii), i 3, and i 9 of the final orders made on 30 june 2020. 30/05/2022 – time unknown – [ae school] the first respondent without reasonable excuse, with knowledge that the applicant did not consent, enrolled their daughter, [d] [ranwick], into school. contravention 2 order 2 of the final orders made on 30 june 2020. 24/05/2022 – time unknown – [af school city ab] the second respondent without reasonable excuse, with knowledge that the applicant did not consent enrolled their daughter, [b] [solberg], into school. contravention 3 order 12(b)(iii) of the final orders made on 30 june 2020 9 july 2022 - 10:00am – [town f] service centre on the [g highway] at [town f] the first respondent without reasonable excuse, failed to facilitate d spending time with the applicant. contravention 4 order 13 of the final orders made on 30 june 2020 9 july 2022 - 10:00am - [town f] service centre on the [g highway at town f] the first respondent without reasonable excuse, failed to make the child, [d] [ranwick], available at [town f] service centre on the [g highway at town f] for changeover. contravention 5 order 19 of the final orders made on 30 june 2020 9 july 2022 – 10:00am – [city ab] the first respondent without reasonable excuse, failed to take all reasonable steps to ensure that the child, [d] [ranwick], spends time with the mother and her sibling, [b] [solberg].
evidence and submissions in relation to prima facie case of the contraventions
mother’s evidence in relation to prima facie case
submissions on behalf of the father in relation to prima facie case
submissions by the mother in relation to prima facie case
the mother’s affidavit filed 23 november 2022
father’s evidence in relation to the contraventions proceedings on 24th november 2022
mother’s evidence in relation to the contraventions proceedings on 24th november 2022
oral submissions of the mother   bk] advised at this time she could not make a finding on whether it was safe to send [d], and that she would need to question [ms markwell] and [mr ag] first. this did not occur until 26 july. in consideration of the advice provided by both agencies and their serious natures, i withheld [d].
oral submissions of the father
she was scared to go to the mother’s house and scared of the mother’s partner, [mr ag]. she then subsequently disclosed that she had been inappropriately touched by [mr ag] while spending time with the mother.
a reasonable excuse in respect of concern as to the welfare of the child is limited to a belief on reasonable grounds that depriving a person of access pursuant to an order was necessary to protect the health and safety of the person. it is not a question as to whether in the view of the custodial parent, or in the view of the custodial parent on reasonable grounds that carrying out of access order might not be in the best interest of the child. the question is whether it is necessary to protect the health or safety of a person, including the child.
written submissions by the mother
issues in dispute i note there are three parties to this matter, [mr solberg] and [mr ranwick], applicant fathers, and [ms markwell], respondent mother. [b], [born] 2010 is the daughter of the respondent mother and [mr solberg], first applicant father. [d], [born] 2017 is the daughter of the respondent mother and [mr ranwick], the second applicant father. the applicant fathers dispute the threshold in the rule of rice & asplund has be met by the respondent mother. it is stated by the respondent mother the threshold can be met on the following grounds, a) there has been a material change in circumstances to the living arrangements of the respondent mother following forced vacation of the crisis house in [town r] in july 2021 and the ongoing inability to obtain a residence in the [city ab] region to comply with orders of 30 june 2020, b) the current orders of 30 june 2020 do not provide for the children to have a meaningful relationship with their mother and each other, c) the applicant fathers are acting in opposition with s.65dac(1)(b), (2), (3) family law act 1975 (cth), d) s.65n(2)(a)(b) provisions are not met through the current orders e) the current orders do not support the mandatory provisions of s60cc factors, f) the provisions pursuant to 65daa for substantial and significant time cannot be facilitated under the current orders, g) the first applicant father, [mr solberg], separated from [ms w] in or around may 2022 and materially changed [b]'s living arrangements, h) the department of communities & justice (dcj) have indicated in conversations that [d] is at risk of harm in the care of the second applicant father, [mr ranwick], and his partner, [ms an], following spurious allegations the child, [d], was sexually abused whilst in the mother's care, to which dcj have indicated to both parents they are not substantiating, both applicant fathers have shown an unwillingness to foster a meaningful relationship between [b] and [d], despite their claims in the substantive hearing that they would ensure the sibling bond is maintained if the children reside primarily with their respective fathers. the fathers have facilitated [b] and [d] seeing each other twice since january 2022 whilst in their respective fathers' care, the current orders are no longer reflective of the children's actual arrangements. 7. a substantial period of time has lapsed since the final orders. 8. this matter would benefit from being seen as two separate applications. the applicant fathers have disputed this is an ongoing matter and this is factually incorrect. in their case summary outline, filed and served 3 october 2022 (noting the mother was served with 2 case summary outlines, one at 5:11pm and another at 7:11pm), that pursuant to rule 5.02 this matter should be struck out. the fathers' representation file multiple documents which are very much the same in material nature. the mother was served with an affidavit on behalf of the first applicant father, [mr solberg] on 29/09/2022 at 9:18am, (12 pages) and a further affidavit at 4:08pm (14 pages) on the same date. the mother was served with an affidavit on behalf of the second applicant father, [mr ranwick] on 29 september 2022 at 10:56am (7 pages) and a further one at 4:09pm on the same date (9 pages). the affidavits filed by both applicant fathers do not comply with the orders of his honour judge neville of 14 september 2022 in that they were filed out of time and did not comply with his honours orders limited to 6 pages. it is therefore sought that the affidavits be struck out. the material deposed in the affidavit of [mr ranwick] of 29 september 2022 contains disputed facts, of which only probative and direct evidence from dcj can resolve. this evidence is not currently before the court. the material contained in his affidavit is mostly hearsay and therefore inadmissible pursuant to rule 15.13 of the family law rules 2004. the father, [mr ranwick], maintains the belief the mother is in a relationship. this is not the case, the mother is single and lives alone. the mother's solicitor withdrew on 14 september 2022, giving the mother one day notice she was withdrawing. there has been no handover of the matter. the fathers assert there is no material change which will meet the threshold in the rule of rice & asplund. outline of contentions threshold has been met by the following, material change in mother's living circumstances despite canvassing a myriad of options to relocate to the [city ab] district so the orders of 30 june 2020 can be effected, the mother has been unable to procure accommodation. in order to be housed through [city ab] housing, the mother has been advised by [mr ao], senior gateway practitioner of [city ab] housing that she would need to be in [city ab] and therefore homeless in order to be linked in with an emergency accommodation provider for temporary housing. it is not in the children's best interest for the mother to be homeless as this would place the children at risk by virtue of the mother's unstable living arrangements in the [city ab] district. the mother has a stable home and employment in [region ap]. the mother is employed as the [administrative officer] for a [primary industry] company and has long-term employment available to her in the area of her expertise. the mother is residing in [region ap], where she hails from, and has strong support networks, including her biological family. (mrr v gr) the mother has been placed on a waiting list with [city ab] housing however has been advised by the department the waiting list is many years long. the mother has had difficulty in obtaining private rentals due to the cost of rent in the [city ab] district, and is not able to secure employment in the [city ab] district without a place of residence. it is not available to the mother to continue her current employment from the [city ab]. it is not in [b] and [d]'s best interest for the mother to continue to sit on a long waiting list in the hope she may be accommodated with potentially many years lapsing in the intervening period. as it is, 2 years have already lapsed and this has impacted the relationship between the siblings and their mother, and their relationship with one another. the mother has been making frequent trips to [city ab], which is approximately [hundreds of kilometres], to attend open homes and meetings with service providers in attempts to procure accommodation. the mother has kept both fathers informed of her difficulty with obtaining accommodation in the [city ab] district, including surrounding suburbs. following being vacated from the crisis house in [town r], despite dcj writing a support letter in 2021 for the mother and the children to be placed in accommodation in the [town bbb] district, the mother is still on the waiting list. the fathers maintain the mother could live elsewhere in the [approx.] 200km range to [town e], however it is unreasonable the mother should live in a town outside of the [city ab] district as this will still force the separation of the siblings, [b] and [d]. under the current orders, [b] is only to live with her mother and sister if the mother is residing in the [city ab] district. the ongoing impact on the children due to their separation from each other and their mother, who has been their primary attachment figure since birth, is detrimental to their overall wellbeing and also would warrant a child impact report. the last family report was conducted more than 3 years ago. [d] is now 5 and [b] is now 12 and both girls are able to articulate their wants. material change in [mr solberg's] living circumstances the first applicant father, [mr solberg], separated from [ms w] in or around may 2020 and materially changed [b]'s living arrangements. the child, [b] is aged 12 and has been subjected to a sudden material change in her living arrangements where, [b] indicated the same day she vacated [ms w]'s house, where she had lived for approximately 2 years, moved to her father's house and met his new girlfriend. [b] has stated she's very confused at how her dad had a new girlfriend so suddenly. [b] has stated she is uncomfortable with the changes in her father's life. [b] has recently become pubescent and has stated to a teacher at school "i just want to be with my mum". the physical needs of [b] have changed and thus goes to the threshold. (see s 68 f family law act 1975. [mr solberg] states in his affidavit that [b] has lived with just him before. he refers to a period in early 2019 when [b] was ordered to live with [mr solberg] pending my return to the [town e] area. i returned to the area within approximately 2 weeks and the orders provided for [mr solberg] to return [b] to my care (18 january 2019). instead, he refused and withheld [b] from seeing her then 18 month old sister and mother for a period of 7 weeks, notwithstanding i was complying with orders and had returned. [mr solberg] has demonstrated his ongoing unilateral decision making in opposition to s65dac family law act 1975, outside of the orders and those of which are not in [b]'s best interest. [mr solberg] has repeatedly demonstrated he will unilaterally decide how the orders should read. it has been observed and experienced by the mother that [mr solberg] has: - withheld [b] in september 2021 from spending time with her sister and me, despite there being orders in place, and relying on covid, knowing the court's position with relation to covid and the need for orders to be complied with (no party had covid, [mr solberg] was relying on the [city ab] lockdowns). covid, as an excuse relied upon by [mr solberg] to circumvent [b] spending time with her mother and sister, did not prevent him from seeking orders in april 2020 that [b] spend time with him, notwithstanding covid, - unilaterally interpreting the orders with relation to [b]'s school enrolment being his decision, - unilaterally deciding not to engage [b] in the recommended counselling following her disclosing being sexually abused by a female student, which was investigated by her school, and saying to [b] "it's no big deal what happened, just get over it". the department of communities & justice (dcj) ([ms aq]) have indicated to me today that they are preparing a section 248 notice because of concerns about misinformation by [mr ranwick] and the level of harm that appears to be facilitated by him and his partner, [ms an], following spurious unsubstantiated allegations the child, [d], was sexually abused whilst in the mother's care. dcj have confirmed by telephone conversation that allegations made by [mr ranwick]’s partner, [ms an], of [d] being sexually abused in the mother’s care, have not and will not be substantiated. it has been stated to the mother that [mr ranwick] and [ms an] are not happy that sexual abuse hasn't been substantiated and it is argued that unsubstantiated child sex abuse "does not suit their narrative". it is understood that [mr ranwick] and [ms an] have made a complaint to dcj regarding the investigation of the allegations brought by [ms an] and the practise of the caseworkers, [ms aq] and [ms ar]. it is understood that after a review of the complaint, [ms aq] and [ms ar]'s investigation has been found to be thorough. it is envisaged this will be clarified in the s 248 paper being completed by dcj legal team. it was indicated to the mother by [ms aq] on 29 september and reiterated today that dcj would consult their internal legal team for further advice with relation to providing their evidence to the court at a later date. it would be prudent for this material to be before the court when it is fully reviewed. steps have been taken by the father [mr ranwick] that are in excess of professional recommendation, despite there being no substantiation of sexual abuse, [mr ranwick] has booked [d] in to see a sexual abuse counsellor on 19 october 2022. dcj has stated to me today in a telephone conversation that [d] does not have a referral for such sex assault counselling and it will not proceed. [mr ranwick] asserted to the mother in a message on 28 september 2022 at 10:32am that ‘as per recommendation from joint child protection team’ [d] has been on a wait list. a copy of this message is sought to be tendered. of the understanding that dcj weren’t substantiating sexual assault, the mother contacted dcj on 29 september 2022 to seek clarification. the mother was advised that information stated in [mr ranwick]’s correspondence was a “blatant lie” and dcj had suggested that there is benefit in [mr ranwick] and [ms an] engage with their own counselling. if [d] is presented by [mr ranwick] and [ms an] to a sexual abuse counsellor for something that dcj has not and will not recommend and the preception [sic] of such a fixed view is not in [d]’s best interests. it is submitted that children of [d]’s age are highly suggestable, and that repeated questioning can focus attention on the issue about which the child is questioned. in circumstances where dcj and police have not substantiated sexual abuse, [mr ranwick] and [ms an] engaging [d], and seemingly somewhat eagerly, with a sexual assault counsellor exposes d to risk of significant psychological harm. it is further submitted that given dcj and police didn’t substantiate sexual assault, it is entirely plausible for the court to consider [mr ranwick] is seeking to engage [d] in sexual assault counselling motivated solely by his desire to seek evidence of false allegations, particularly where he has engaged on what can be described as a tirade of complaints in an attempt to ensure sexual abuse is substantiated. [d] is currently in the care of her mother in accordance with the orders. she is settled and happy and her environment is familiar. she has a kindergarten she can attend which is situated approximately 100m from our home and she can commence grade prep at the local primary school in 2023, which is across the laneway from our backyard. the school available to the children is a prep - year 12 (p-12) inclusive school, which the sisters can attend together. it is strongly submitted that if [d] returns to [mr ranwick]’s primary care, there is a very real risk she will be exposed to further ongoing harm. the only way this can be ameliorated is by [d] remaining in the primary care of her mother. the child, [d], who is aged 5, spent 6 months without spending substantial or significant time with her mother and sister (she spent a total of 26 hours in 6 months) due to the applicant father, [mr ranwick], unilaterally withholding [d] without reasonable grounds, including police and dcj telling the father on 8 july (the day before he was due to hand [d] over) that they were not substantiating the alleged sexual abuse brought by [ms an], that [d] was not at risk in the mother's care and that they did not direct him to withhold [d]. discussions had with dcj have indicated to the mother that on 8 july, dcj and police did not instruct that [mr ranwick] not hand [d] over the following day. the advice provided to the father on 6 july 2022 was superseded with the advice on 8 july that [d] was safe in my care and could be brought over for contact the following day. it is submitted there is a very real risk the father, [mr ranwick], will continue to circumvent the relationship between [d], her mother and sister. it should also be noted that the mother is a self-represented lay-person who has just picked up the matter. the mother's legal representation withdrew on 14 september 2022, with the mother being informed the day prior. the mother has had limited time to prepare. this is impeded by being served multiple documents by the fathers' solicitor in the past week. further, the mother currently has [b] and [d] in her care in accordance with the orders and by virtue of being unrepresented, has been forced to spend time away from the children. this is not in their best interest that the little time they get with their mother and each other is impacted. further, i was not made aware by my former solicitor of the requirement in accordance with the orders of 5 may 2022 that i was to file written submissions. noting his honour's email of even date, i have put this together as best and as quickly as i can given the limitations. the fathers assert there is no material change which will meet the threshold in the rule of rice & asplund. i submit the rice & asplund threshold has been met on multiple grounds of significant change of circumstances. living situation b) seek to relocate due to circumstances c) orders are unworkable and do not reflect the actual arrangements of the children d) a substantial time has passed e) [mr solberg] has re-partnered and there is material change f) the children have issues of struggling, equal shared parental responsibility is poorly managed, and [b] is older wanting her wishes acknowledged.
a) there has been a material change in circumstances to the living arrangements of the respondent mother following forced vacation of the crisis house in [town r] in july 2021 and the ongoing inability to obtain a residence in the [city ab] region to comply with orders of 30 june 2020, b) the current orders of 30 june 2020 do not provide for the children to have a meaningful relationship with their mother and each other, c) the applicant fathers are acting in opposition with s.65dac(1)(b), (2), (3) family law act 1975 (cth), d) s.65n(2)(a)(b) provisions are not met through the current orders e) the current orders do not support the mandatory provisions of s60cc factors, f) the provisions pursuant to 65daa for substantial and significant time cannot be facilitated under the current orders, g) the first applicant father, [mr solberg], separated from [ms w] in or around may 2022 and materially changed [b]'s living arrangements, h) the department of communities & justice (dcj) have indicated in conversations that [d] is at risk of harm in the care of the second applicant father, [mr ranwick], and his partner, [ms an], following spurious allegations the child, [d], was sexually abused whilst in the mother's care, to which dcj have indicated to both parents they are not substantiating,
b) the current orders of 30 june 2020 do not provide for the children to have a meaningful relationship with their mother and each other, c) the applicant fathers are acting in opposition with s.65dac(1)(b), (2), (3) family law act 1975 (cth), d) s.65n(2)(a)(b) provisions are not met through the current orders e) the current orders do not support the mandatory provisions of s60cc factors, f) the provisions pursuant to 65daa for substantial and significant time cannot be facilitated under the current orders, g) the first applicant father, [mr solberg], separated from [ms w] in or around may 2022 and materially changed [b]'s living arrangements, h) the department of communities & justice (dcj) have indicated in conversations that [d] is at risk of harm in the care of the second applicant father, [mr ranwick], and his partner, [ms an], following spurious allegations the child, [d], was sexually abused whilst in the mother's care, to which dcj have indicated to both parents they are not substantiating,
c) the applicant fathers are acting in opposition with s.65dac(1)(b), (2), (3) family law act 1975 (cth), d) s.65n(2)(a)(b) provisions are not met through the current orders e) the current orders do not support the mandatory provisions of s60cc factors, f) the provisions pursuant to 65daa for substantial and significant time cannot be facilitated under the current orders, g) the first applicant father, [mr solberg], separated from [ms w] in or around may 2022 and materially changed [b]'s living arrangements, h) the department of communities & justice (dcj) have indicated in conversations that [d] is at risk of harm in the care of the second applicant father, [mr ranwick], and his partner, [ms an], following spurious allegations the child, [d], was sexually abused whilst in the mother's care, to which dcj have indicated to both parents they are not substantiating,
d) s.65n(2)(a)(b) provisions are not met through the current orders e) the current orders do not support the mandatory provisions of s60cc factors, f) the provisions pursuant to 65daa for substantial and significant time cannot be facilitated under the current orders, g) the first applicant father, [mr solberg], separated from [ms w] in or around may 2022 and materially changed [b]'s living arrangements, h) the department of communities & justice (dcj) have indicated in conversations that [d] is at risk of harm in the care of the second applicant father, [mr ranwick], and his partner, [ms an], following spurious allegations the child, [d], was sexually abused whilst in the mother's care, to which dcj have indicated to both parents they are not substantiating,
e) the current orders do not support the mandatory provisions of s60cc factors, f) the provisions pursuant to 65daa for substantial and significant time cannot be facilitated under the current orders, g) the first applicant father, [mr solberg], separated from [ms w] in or around may 2022 and materially changed [b]'s living arrangements, h) the department of communities & justice (dcj) have indicated in conversations that [d] is at risk of harm in the care of the second applicant father, [mr ranwick], and his partner, [ms an], following spurious allegations the child, [d], was sexually abused whilst in the mother's care, to which dcj have indicated to both parents they are not substantiating,
f) the provisions pursuant to 65daa for substantial and significant time cannot be facilitated under the current orders, g) the first applicant father, [mr solberg], separated from [ms w] in or around may 2022 and materially changed [b]'s living arrangements, h) the department of communities & justice (dcj) have indicated in conversations that [d] is at risk of harm in the care of the second applicant father, [mr ranwick], and his partner, [ms an], following spurious allegations the child, [d], was sexually abused whilst in the mother's care, to which dcj have indicated to both parents they are not substantiating,
g) the first applicant father, [mr solberg], separated from [ms w] in or around may 2022 and materially changed [b]'s living arrangements, h) the department of communities & justice (dcj) have indicated in conversations that [d] is at risk of harm in the care of the second applicant father, [mr ranwick], and his partner, [ms an], following spurious allegations the child, [d], was sexually abused whilst in the mother's care, to which dcj have indicated to both parents they are not substantiating,
h) the department of communities & justice (dcj) have indicated in conversations that [d] is at risk of harm in the care of the second applicant father, [mr ranwick], and his partner, [ms an], following spurious allegations the child, [d], was sexually abused whilst in the mother's care, to which dcj have indicated to both parents they are not substantiating,
per newling, j.w. and newling, b.e [1987] famca 21, at 20,
'at the same time, as against that, one must balance the other consideration, and that is, that the circumstances of children, generally speaking, are likely to change as those children grow up, and their psychological and physical needs change from time to time. in the circumstances of this particular case, the relevant date to look at as to when the court must determine whether or not it was appropriate to reconsider the issue of access, was the date when the proceedings came on for hearing before her honour on 23 june 1987, rather than the institution of proceedings on 9 november 1984. had the issue been raised then, in some way or another, a totally different situation might well have arisen.'
authorities relied upon, mrr v gr [2010] hca 4, 240 clr 461, 84 aljr 220, 263 alr 368, (2010) flc 93–424, 42 fam lr 531, adamson & adamson [2014] famcafc 93-66, 65, 66, 67, 68, ams v aif [1999] hca 26 u & u [2002] hca 36 at 37, 73 young, lisa --- "u and u: the high court reconsiders relocation in the family court" [2002] uwslawrw 11, [2002] uwslawrw 11, (2002) 6(1) university of western sydney law review 242 in the reasons for judgment of her honour judge hughes of 30 june 2020, i rely on the following paragraphs, 214, 220, 226, 371, s68f (1)(2)(c ) (i)(ii)(d)(g)(i) family law act 1975 (cth)
cover letter regarding filing of the submissions the father’s submission was filed at 4.03pm on 15 december 2022 and is therefore taken to be filed on the next business day (16 december 2022) on the same day as his honour’s chambers hearing to decide this matter. it is noted that at the time of preparing these submissions, the respondent father has not served me with same. i was alerted to such by logging onto the commonwealth courts portal at approximately 5:20pm. if his submission is accepted by the honourable court, i request the same procedural fairness be applied to my submission that it also be taken to be filed on 16 december 2022. it is noted the father has filed late previously with impunity (order 4 of his honour of 14 september 2022). i therefore submit my submission pursuant to the orders of his honour judge neville made 25 november 2022, and a reply submission to the father provided within the same document. cover letter regarding filing of [mr ranwick]’s new application 15 december 2022 today at 1:05pm, i sought the [city ab] registry file a recovery order and affidavit for [d] to be returned to my care forthwith, and this was stamped as received on 15 december 2022, and they stated it would be provided to chambers. i am very concerned that when i logged onto the portal to file this submission that [mr ranwick] filed an application and supporting affidavit at 5:55pm, which has not been served. i say he has done so because he is aware i am now permanently residing in the [city ab] and [d] is to live with me pursuant to the final orders. it is supported in the dcj report that [mr ranwick] seeks for me to have minimal contact with [d]. he has had over a year to bring a change of circumstance application, and this was indeed foreshadowed by her honour judge hughes in december 2020. on 24 november 2022, in the hearing before his honour neville j. in the opening of proceedings, his honour stated words to the effect of: “as a matter of procedural fairness it is not appropriate for anything to be filed so late, and especially in a matter that is part heard. it is procedurally unfair on the respondent, and it's equally unfair on the court.” his honour also canvassed the following scenario: “if i, or both of the respondents, i suggest [ms markwell] had filed an affidavit of any length, but especially of the length that was filed yesterday, you would rightly be very concerned about not having had proper opportunity in order to consider and deal with it. would you accept that as a proposition?”. as his honour rejected the filing of my affidavit of 23 november 2022 on these exact grounds, it is required his honour reject the 40-page affidavit of the father filed at 5:55pm 15 december 2022 on the night before this hearing. if his honour even so much as views the father’s affidavit, which has not been served on me, he must adopt my affidavit lodged at the registry at 1:05pm 15 december 2022 accompanying the recovery order application. i seek this recovery order application be heard post-haste. written submissions of [ms markwell] in respect of orders of his honour judge neville made 24 november 2022 this matter is a matter of contravention of [mr ranwick] in respect of failing to provide [d] to my care during the 2022 july holidays pursuant to final orders made by her honour judge hughes. the additional evidence in respect of the contravention, which is before the court, is contained in the report provided by the department of communities and justice (“dcj”) on 22 november 2022. that report is to form the basis of this submission. the report was provided in a highly redacted manner, and in what i strongly assert was at the request of the respondent father, without any hearing, and there may be further redacted evidence in the dcj report that should form part of this submission. i say, i am within my right to see all of that document so i may know of, respond to, and properly manage the risks associated with [d]’s wellbeing in the respondent’s care. cross examination of [mr ranwick] admissions made by [mr ranwick] during cross examination include: [mr ranwick] did not hand [d] into my care pursuant to orders on 9 july 2022 [mr ranwick] advised me on the morning of 9 july 2022 that [d] was unwell and did not provide me with details of the illness. [mr ranwick] admitted [d] was not unwell on 9 july 2022. mr ranwick admitted [ms as] (solicitor) told him to inform me [d] was unwell. [mr ranwick] made sexual abuse allegations against my former partner, [mr ag]. [mr ranwick] admitted to presenting [d] to the [town ee] child abuse unit on 8 july 2022. [mr ranwick] admitted that he held no probative evidence of sexual harm towards [d]. [mr ranwick] did not inform me of the allegations before the report was made to dcj. [mr ranwick] conceded he had not made any application for a variation of final orders to the court to request a change to final orders. denials made by [mr ranwick] during cross examination include: [mr ranwick] had been advised on 8 july 2022 by dcj and police that [d] was safe to return to my care, and any withholding of [d] would be a matter for him to decide. evidence that [mr ranwick] made a direct lie and committed perjury to the court is supported by the email of 15 august 2022 from dcj to the mother and provided to the court in accordance with his honour’s orders of 24 november 2022, and also found in the dcj report at [25] on page 23 of 25.
“[ms an] and [mr ranwick] chose to withhold [d] from attending her mother’s home for court ordered visitation on the 9th july 2022 despite being told on the 8th july by police and dcj that [d] could go to the arranged visitation. despite [ms markwell] making multiple attempts to facilitate contact with [d] since then [mr ranwick] and [ms an] have not agreed, justifying their decisions with minor reasons and not acting in line with [d]'s best interest. [mr ranwick] and [ms an] have expressed they will be seeking further orders through family law court asking for supervised contact between [ms markwell] and [d], further impacting on the relationship [d] has with her biological mother.” [mr ranwick] denies it is appropriate to advise me of details of illness related to [d] [mr ranwick] denies it is appropriate to advise me of sexual abuse allegations related to [d] where he makes such allegations against third parties whilst she is in my care.
reasonable risk of harm admissions made by [mr ranwick] during cross examination include an admission that he did not at any time advise his friend, and [b]’s father [mr solberg], that there were allegations of sexual abuse by [mr ag] against [d]. he failed to do so knowing [b] was at that time in my care. i submit this demonstrates [mr ranwick] to be fabricating his allegations, as, if he had genuine concerns, he would have prevented [b] from also being in my care by advising [mr solberg] of such. submissions on the cross examination evidence [mr ranwick] held the view that [d] was at risk in my care, despite being told by dcj and nsw police on 8 july 2022 that there was nothing to indicate [d] was not safe in my care, and therefore handover should occur. this is substantiated by the email provided to the court and respondent’s solicitor on 24 november 2022 in accordance with his honour’s orders and in the dcj report at [25] page 23 of 25, [mr ranwick], on 9 july 2022 consciously decided to contravene the orders of her honour judge hughes and refused to hand [d] into my care, it is therefore reasonable to conclude [mr ranwick] purposely and wilfully withheld [d] without reasonable ground and purely as a means to circumvent [d] having a meaningful relationship with me. (dcj report at [25] on page 23-24 of 25
“[d]’s future level of risk has been identified as moderate. continuing flc proceedings, and plans for the orders to be changed to allow for [d] to have supervised contact with [ms markwell] will have a detrimental impact on [d]. [d] continues to be subject to an unhealthy relationship between [ms markwell] and both [mr ranwick] and [ms an], with [mr ranwick] and [ms an] expressing that they are wanting [d] to have minimal contact with her mother. this is not considered in the best interest of [d].” [mr ranwick] did not seek to make application to the court for a variation to orders based on rice v asplund change of circumstance, given the severity of the allegations. this would have been the appropriate course of action, noting he is legally represented by highly competent counsel. i submit i have attempted to avoid further litigation by moving to [city ab] in line with the risks identified by dcj. i submit [mr ranwick] is seeking to agitate further proceedings contrary to the advice of dcj, who have identified this would be a risk to [d]’s wellbeing.
reply submission in respect of [mr ranwick]’s submission lodged 15 december 2022 at 4:03pm, taken to be filed 16 december 2022. the father claims the sole task of this court was to determine that the withholding of [d] by [mr ranwick] was reasonable in the circumstances. [mr ranwick] admitted in cross examination he held no probative evidence of sexual harm towards [d] therefore the excuse purported by [mr ranwick] cannot possibly be found to be reasonable, as no court could ever test the allegations without probative evidence. therefore, the court’s sole task in determining whether the excuse offered by [mr ranwick] was reasonable, respectfully, cannot possibly be found. the father submits at [14] the circumstances and factors find substantive corroboration in the material provided by dcj. he has not particularised this claim in any way. he states the material is relevant in that it goes directly to the truthfulness of the manner in which [mr ranwick] says he formed the view to withhold [d], however, this cannot be possibly found on the basis that on 8 july 2022, [mr ranwick] was informed by both police and dcj as reported at [25] on page 23-24 of the dcj report.
“[ms an] and [mr ranwick] chose to withhold [d] from attending her mother’s home for court ordered visitation on the 9th july 2022 despite being told on the 8th july by police and dcj that [d] could go to the arranged visitation. if the fathers conduct - which i submit is wilful and engineered to circumvent [d]’s relationship with me - is treated with impunity, there is a very real risk his conduct will continue and the court would be setting a dangerous precedent for all to follow. it is therefore submitted that when it comes to making penalty, this court must impose serious consequences to prevent any further misconduct. the orders i seek, therefore, should be granted and penalty determined by this honourable court commensurate with the deliberate nature of [mr ranwick]’s actions in causing harm to [d] and serious psychological and economic consequences on myself.
further relevant notes (due to in chambers hearing on 16 december 2022 to be held in absence of parties) further affected time with [d] it should be noted by this honourable court, [mr ranwick] only provided time for me in september 2022, i say, to attempt to make my contravention filed 22 july 2022 futile. had this contravention not been filed, [d] would not have been provided to me in the september school holidays, and [mr ranwick] would have continued to contravene orders with impunity. this is supported by the evidence in the dcj report at [25] where he admitted to dcj he seeks to minimise [d]’s time with me. this is direct evidence of [mr ranwick]’s true intention, to remove the relationship between myself and [d] (which also directly affects [b]), based on his own vexatious intentions towards me, in the worst interests of [d] and [b]. it is noted the dcj report supports that both [mr ranwick] and his partner, [ms an], do not have [d]’s best interest in mind. relocation due to risk of harm to [d] by [mr ranwick], and financial consequences it should also be noted by this honourable court, purely due to the spurious and unsubstantiated sexual abuse allegations against my previous partner [mr ag] , evidenced in the dcj report, and a finding by dcj that [d] is at risk of harm by [mr ranwick] and [ms an] in respect of my relationship with [d] also evidenced in the dcj report, on 9 october 2022 i relocated to [city ab], initially in temporary accommodation (primarily in [town ad], in which details were provided to the father via talking parents app, which he acknowledged was the “[location at]” on 29/10/2022). my costs involved in the relocation have so far been in the vicinity of $7,000 for transitional accommodation and lease establishment costs on the house in [suburb ak]. i now reside in a leased 3-bedroom property facilitated by [organisation au] with a lease signed on 9 december 2022. the only way i could protect [d] from the risk of harm substantiated by dcj was if i was residing in the [city ab], hence my swift relocation to the [city ab] only four days after the hearing in october 2022. despite this relocation and the final orders now being active for [d] to remain in my primary care, [mr ranwick] still, despite the evidence in the dcj report demonstrating me to be of no risk of harm to [d] (including to his relationship with her), has failed to provided [d] back into my care. hence today i sought a recovery order. recovery order provided to the court registry on 15 december 2022 at 1:05pm this evidence is in the affidavit sworn 15 december 2022 received by the [city ab] registry on 15 december 2022, which further references evidence filed in affidavit on 23 november 2022. i was advised by the registry the material would be sent to chambers for review and i would be notified by email. i am concerned the evidence is being concealed from coming before the court –evidence which i say further substantiates the risk posed to [d] by [mr ranwick] and [ms an] and must come before the judge immediately and be reviewed in light of the orders sought in this application and the rice v asplund application, for the protection of [d] and her sister [b]. the affidavit of 23 november 2022 was served on [mr ranwick] on 23 november 2022 and he has had ample time to review that affidavit and file a response with this court. i am very concerned that when i logged onto the portal to file this submission that [mr ranwick] filed an application and supporting affidavit at 5:55pm, which has not been served. i say he has done so because he is aware i am now permanently residing in the [city ab] and [d] is to live with me pursuant to the final orders. it is supported in the dcj report that [mr ranwick] seeks for me to have minimal contact with [d]. he has had over a year to bring a change of circumstance application, and this was indeed foreshadowed by her honour judge hughes in december 2020.
further written submission of [ms markwell] in respect of orders of his honour judge neville made 15th december 2022. analysis of dcj report there is no evidence in the dcj report that the mother is a risk of any harm, including sexual harm, to either of her children. the mother is deemed not to be a risk to her daughter [d] in this assessment period. there is substantiated evidence [mr ranwick] and his partner [ms an] present a risk of emotional and psychological harm in this assessment period towards [d]. dcj have substantiated [mr ranwick] and his partner continue to seek to sever the relationship between [d] and her mother, and this would cause significant harm to [d]. furthermore, the report identifies [mr ranwick] and [ms an] simply refuse to take advice of police and dcj in relation to facilitating a relationship between [d] and her mother, and continue to perceive the mother as a risk of harm to [d], where such harm is unsubstantiated after extensive investigation by dcj. they have demonstrated they will continue to withhold [d] from the care of her mother and are willing to breach family court orders in order to achieve a severing of the mother-daughter relationship. most importantly, this is the third claim [mr ranwick] has made of sexual risk of harm towards [d] by the mother and her family and friends: allegations the maternal grandmother is a sexual abuser made by [ms an] in 2021 at [town r] service station, in the presence of d – recorded in audio, available to the court. allegations the mother’s former partner, [mr ag], is a sexual abuser where the dcj report demonstrates him to be safe with all checks on all systems and to be in possession of a current working with children card. in a message from [mr ranwick] on the talking parents app, contained in the mother’s affidavit, accusing the mother of taking photos for her own sexual gratification – thereby directly accusing the mother of being a sexual abuser. it is clear [mr ranwick] and his partner will continue to make false allegations against any person, provided it gives them a reason to withhold [d] from her mother’s care. non workability of current orders orders of 30 june 2020 (the final orders) sole parental responsibility for the mother in respect of [d] is required due to high conflict with [mr ranwick]. there is no prospect for a positive co-parenting relationship. it is not in [d]’s best interest to be subjected to the high conflict. it is not in [d]’s best interest to be subjected to the ongoing conflict and [mr ranwick] has demonstrated since the final orders he is an antagonist. he was counselled by then icl during cross examination over his behaviour, to which he stated he ‘wouldn’t do that anymore’ (p146, l10 – 35 of transcript of 11.10.2019) yet, in the entire time since the final orders his behaviour has continued and escalated, as has been identified by dcj and outlined in their report. it is inconceivable that [d] attend visits with [mr ranwick] from 10am wednesday – 4pm sunday each alternate week when she is attending school. the trial judge did not make any allowances for this. therefore, there must be a change otherwise the mother faces risk of contraventions by the father if she doesn’t comply with orders. the mother will not jeopardise [d]’s education. it is unlikely [mr ranwick] would want to relocate to the [city ab] and give up his employment, support systems, home, and this is the only way the current orders in relation to [d] spending time from 10am wednesday – 4pm sunday each alternate week could occur. therefore, it is submitted this needs to materially change. the father, [mr ranwick], cannot agree on anything proposed by the mother yet, expects her to agree on everything put by him. if the matter is re-opened, evidence will be adduced to demonstrate precisely how uncooperative the father is towards the mother. orders made on 7 august 2020, made only some 5 weeks after the final orders, were referred to by her honour herself as ‘interim orders’. with relation to the orders requiring permission of the other parties to travel interstate, it is more than reasonable to conclude this was punitive to the mother as she is the only one with meaningful connections in victoria. in any case, with this requirement in place with a high conflict parent, it is certain this will always end up in court as there is a real risk [mr ranwick] will not permit the mother to travel with the children (in this case, [d]). the iccpr requires freedom of movement as a human right, and is enshrined in the constitution. [b]'s voice has not been heard in relation to her wish to live with her mother and see her father. it has been over 3 years since the last family report and both girls’ needs have changed. [b] is now entering the teen years and requires her mother to guide her through the female changes she will face with her body and emotions into adulthood. further, the sisters would benefit greatly from living together, particularly in circumstances where they are attending schools close by (approximately 300m apart). their bond, which is the primary sibling bond, was greatly affected by virtue of the final orders. there is a required discharge of publication orders of reasons for judgment of hughes j. the reasons for judgment of hughes j in markwell & solberg & anor (no.3) [2021] fcca 812 at [10] states:
more controversially, on 7 august 2020 i made an order that, in the event any of the parents made a notification to the police or a child protection agency in relation to either of the children, they were required to also provide to the police or child protection authority a copy of the orders and reasons for decision dated 30 june 2020 and a copy of the orders of 7 august 2020. this was because, in the period of a little over five weeks between the judgment on 30 june 2020 and when the matter came before me on 7 august 2020, there had been another notification made by the mother to a doctor who, in turn, made a report to a child protection agency. the orders i made did not prevent any child protection agency from investigating any future notifications but gave them the benefit of a broader perspective given the reasons for decision dealt in detail with numerous previous notifications made directly or indirectly by the mother to child protection agencies, none of which were substantiated. the trial judge describes this as ‘controversial’. the trial judge placed no weight on the many vexatious and frivolous complaints made by the father and made no judgment in relation to his conduct, as outlined in the mother’s affidavit and canvassed in recent appearances before his honour. it is my respectful submission the order was made with intent to be punitive to the mother and to make her seem non-credible to the respective agencies, colouring their view when making assessments of any real or perceived risk of harm of the children. in contravention of s121 family law act 1975 (cth), both fathers have demonstrated improper use of the rfj for final orders of hughes j to paint the mother in a bad light to external parties, including a doctor’s surgery, the preschool [d] attended, and the primary school [mr ranwick] seeks [d] to attend in [town e]. further, [mr ranwick], in contravention of s121 provided the reasons for judgment to [ms an], who then used a part of the rfj to attempt to fracture my relationship with my mother. this was detailed in my affidavit filed march 2021, and the affidavit of [ms av]. this would place an unnecessary strain on the mother’s ability to communicate with the school and properly attend to [d]’s educational needs if she were to attend primary school in [town e], as reputational damage has already proven to have been caused by the publication of the rfj by [mr ranwick]. as it is, [ae school] will not communicate with the mother and the mother has not been made aware, by the school or [mr ranwick], any details of [d]’s schooling in [town e] save for she had attended a transitional day. [d]’s attendance at [aw school] in the [city ab], nearest to [b]'s school ([af school]), is required to establish a fresh view of the mother at her school without any defamatory material being presented to them to jeopardise her relationship with the school.
costs of relocation and ongoing cost of living in the [city ab] due to all of these factors, and despite the mother’s place of work being in [town ax], victoria, and the loss of 50% of her work hours (causing a 50% pay reduction) as well as a promotion, she has relocated to the [city ab] in compliance with orders of hughes j to ensure the safety and wellbeing of both daughters, such that [d] can be in her primary care throughout all of her schooling, and [b] is well supported throughout all of her schooling and has the restoration of the mother/daughter bond, which was her primary bond since birth and the bond with her only sibling. it is therefore likely an application for spousal maintenance will be required to maintain her living in the [city ab] to compensate for her income losses caused by the orders sought by both fathers for her to reside in the [city ab] district. no application for variation of orders made by [mr ranwick] for 11 months [mr ranwick] did not seek to make application to the court for a variation to orders based on rice v asplund change of circumstance, given the severity of the allegations he made about the alleged sexual abuse of [d] by the mothers previous partner. this would have been the appropriate course of action, noting he is legally represented by highly competent counsel. instead, despite being advised by dcj and police on 8 july 2022 (the day before handover) that there was no reason from their view to withhold [d], he chose to withhold her from the mother for a period of almost 6 months. this afforded [mr ranwick] adequate time to file the necessary application with the court, however instead, he launched a litany of complaints which were subjected to internal reviews of dcj. [mr ranwick] was put on notice by hughes j on 17 december 2020 that he would need to file an application if he sought a change to the orders in circumstances where the mother resided in a place other than what is required of her in the orders. therefore, he has been afforded due process and is aware of the correct process. his honour cannot be satisfied his conduct in responding to my applicaiton 11 months later is plausible in these circumstances. weight must be applied to the likeliness of [mr ranwick]’s response at a time that the mother secured accommodation in the [city ab], and thus, he is satisfied the mother is permanently residing in the [city ab]. [mr ranwick] has only recently provided such response after the mother moved to the [city ab] to be in compliance with orders of hughes j, such that the final orders return [d] to her primary care, and it is submitted this is not in line with his agenda, and it is supported by dcj that he seeks that [d] have minimal contact with her mother, which dcj have stated is not in [d]’s best interest and would be harmful to her. avoidance of further litigation all parties admit there has been no change of circumstance on those facts at the original trial which would allow the father to reopen litigation in the matter. the mother is living in [city ab] in compliance with the orders. during the hearing on 20 december 2022, his honour foreshadowed to the effect of the father could not argue a change of circumstances where the orders contemplate the mother living in the [city ab]. equally, there is no ability for [mr ranwick] to attempt to coerce the mother to be the “applicant” in any reopening of proceedings by the father, as such would be his application and would subject him to all costs pursuant to s117(2) of the family law act. if proceedings were reopened, a barro or hogan order would be sought that [mr ranwick] pay upfront for the cost of the mother’s representation and senior counsel for the entirety of proceedings, ancillary expenses, and the full cost of loss of her work hours. the mother submits she has attempted to avoid further litigation by moving to [city ab] in line with the risks identified by dcj and in compliance with hughes j orders. notwithstanding the mother’s right to freedom of movement, as supported by the constitution and other authorities already submitted to this honourable court, recently franklyn & franklyn [2019] famcafc 256 (23 december 2019), the mother has settled into the [city ab] and the children are the direct beneficiaries of the relationship between the children, [b] and [d], and their mother being restored. the mother submits [mr ranwick] is seeking to agitate further proceedings contrary to the advice of dcj, who have identified this would be a risk to [d]’s wellbeing. this demonstrates [mr ranwick] lacks insight into [d]’s best interest, whereas the mother relocated to the [city ab] as she accepted that ongoing litigation is not in [d]’s best interest. relocation due to risk of harm to [d] by [mr ranwick], and financial consequences it should also be noted by this honourable court, purely due to the spurious and unsubstantiated sexual abuse allegations against the mother’s former partner, [mr ag], evidenced in the dcj report, and a finding by dcj that [d] is at risk of harm by [mr ranwick] and [ms an] in respect of the mother’s relationship with [d] also evidenced in the dcj report, on 9 october 2022 she relocated to [city ab], initially in temporary accommodation (primarily a motel room in [town ad], in which details were provided to the father via talking parents app, which he acknowledged was the “[location at]” on 29/10/2022). the mother’s costs involved in the relocation have so far been in the vicinity of $12,000 for transitional accommodation and lease establishment costs on the house in [suburb ak]. she now resides in a leased 3-bedroom property facilitated by [organisation u] with a lease signed on 9 december 2022. although this is transitional housing, it was the only way for the mother to be able to relocate to the [city ab]. [organisation u] have stated that the property is available to the mother and her children until such a time that we are able to find a property on the [region ay] of [city ab]. if these proceedings are reopened, sworn evidence from [organisation u] will support that the mother and children are at no risk of being rendered homeless. the mother advised the court the property in [town al] is on the market. she has fully vacated and has no option of returning to live in the area. the court can therefore be satisfied the mother is a permanent resident of the [city ab]. as evidenced in the letter provided to the court in affidavit of the mother from [mr ao] of housing [city ab], the mother had been canvassing accommodation since early july 2020 following the making of the final orders. it must be noted that the mother never ‘chose’ to be separated from her children and it is unfortunate that by virtue of the orders, the mother has had significant financial burden by the requirement to relocate for her children to remain in her care. the only way she could protect [d] from the risk of harm substantiated by dcj was if she was residing in the [city ab], hence her swift relocation to the [city ab] only four days after the hearing in october 2022. the evidence before the court is that the mother had to be physically in the [city ab] to be assisted by services. despite this relocation and the final orders now being active for [d] to remain in the mother’s primary care, [mr ranwick] still, despite the evidence in the dcj report demonstrating her to be of no risk of harm to [d] (including to his relationship with her), continues to prosecute a return to his care, and continues to claim a risk of harm by the mother towards [d] despite no substantiation by dcj of any such harm. despite the mother relocating to the [city ab] on 9 october 2022, both fathers retained 100% commonwealth benefits for the children, along with being recipients of child support, which is still being deducted from the mother’s salary, despite [b] being in a week about with the mother and [mr solberg]. on or around 12 january, [mr solberg] agreed to both centrelink and child support agency that from 9 december, when the mother signed the lease on the current property in [suburb ak], that the care arrangement for [b] is 50/50 and thus, benefits have been allocated accordingly between [mr solberg] and the mother. it is therefore submitted that by virtue of this, [mr solberg] is satisfied the mother is permanently a resident of the [city ab]. it remains, however, that [mr ranwick] is disputing [d] is living with the mother in [city ab], and has been claiming ongoing ftb and child support, knowing the arrangements for [d] as acknowledged in a letter sent to the mother from his solicitor on 25 january 2022. despite [d] being returned to the mother’s care in accordance with the orders on 23 december 2022, she has not received any allowable entitlement for [d] since 21 september 2021. [mr ranwick] has a current dispute being investigated by centrelink. it is therefore plausible for this court to consider and place strong weight on [mr ranwick]’s financial motivation, particularly considering the evidence that was tested in 2019 where [mr ranwick], under cross examination on 11 october 2019, admitted to not financially supporting the family other than a few groceries here and there. [mr ranwick]’s affidavit of 15 december 2022 evidence can be tendered that disputes what [mr ranwick] has claimed in his affidavit and is consciously misleading this honourable court. the mother has a right to respond in affidavit if the court entertains this evidence of the father. in any case, the mother was living in the [city ab] and [d] was to be living with the mother in accordance with the orders. there was no order prohibiting the mother from collecting [d], which the preschool had noted at the time of [d]’s enrolment in 2021 when [mr ranwick] demanded the preschool prohibit the mother from collecting [d] at any time. an email from the day care can be provided to the court. there is very real risk that if the matter is re-opened to consider [d] living with the father, she will be subjected to ongoing psychological harm of the father and his partner. without the mother being granted sole parental responsibility, there is a very real risk she will continue to be exposed to ongoing harassment by [mr ranwick], which will have an effect on [d] - and [b] by proxy. by virtue of the mother relocating to, and settling in the [city ab], she accepts dcj’s position relating to ongoing litigation not being in [d]’s best interest and does not press to relocate to victoria. costs there is no justifiable reason that the court should make orders for costs in favour of the fathers. by virtue of the orders, the mother has been required to give up employment, relocate numerous times, pay child support to both fathers and both fathers be in receipt of 100% ftb as the mother was only deemed as having 11% care of her children, through no fault of her own, due to the accommodation difficulties she faced for 2 and a half years. it was not in the mother’s control as to when she was accommodated in the [city ab], and the evidence before the court clearly demonstrates the mother did not stop canvassing all options available to her in this time. annexure a: [mr ranwick]’s history of vexatious complaints against the mother to withhold [d] on 7 august 2020, i made submissions to the following effect to then hughes j, with relation to [mr ranwick], supported by transcript, handed her over to the father, he is not doing anything to give her back and he is likely to continue doing this kind of thing at his discretion. there is no reason preventing him from handing [d] back. his demands of a copy of a lease prior to handing [d] back to me and causing his solicitor to request the same is not in the orders. i tried to arrange [d]’s return to me and [mr ranwick] rang the police and made a vexatious complaint that i was harassing and bullying him, resulting in the police contacting me. there were no charges laid. he sought for someone at nsw health to write him a letter, which he provided to police, stating that [d] must remain isolated with him for a further 14 days. i have not seen this letter naming [d] and it was sought by [mr ranwick] in spite of espr. no such letter or any evidence has been adduced despite the father seeking an adjournment on monday. [mr ranwick] caused the police to investigate me on the 1 august 2020 following complaints that i was harassing and bullying him. in the context of the situation, that being me trying to facilitate the return of [d] to me, the police ceased their investigations into me however acknowledged that [mr ranwick]’s conduct was in breach of family court orders and the family violence intervention order. here we are now, more than 2 years down the track, and [mr ranwick] is continuing with this behaviour. his numerous complaints about the investigation which found he and [ms an] were identified as persons of interest for causing psychological harm to [d] in this assessment period is an example of how far he will go to secure his intended outcome. instead of accepting the outcome, which was subjected to numerous internal reviews by senior members of dcj, he sought to have the findings against he and his partner withdrawn. this poses a significant risk to [d] that he lacks insight into how his and his partners behaviour affects [d], and it is respectfully submitted this demonstrates a man who is more self-focused (as supported by his treating psychiatrist and contained in the subpoenaed material) than it shows a father vested in his daughter’s best interest. this honourable court can accept with ease that [mr ranwick]’s intention is to withhold [d] for no other reason than to alienate me from her. [mr ranwick]’s history of spurious and vexatious complaints against the mother since separation supports that he will go to any length to alienate the mother from their daughter.
written submissions on behalf of the fathers
current proceedings 1. application in a proceeding filed by applicant mother on 11 january 2022. *it is noted that the application for final orders filed by the first respondent father remains listed as an open file on comcourts. this application was in fact withdrawn and dismissed pursuant to orders made by consent on 18 march 2022 and there is no substantive initiating application or response for final parenting orders filed by either party before the court. documents relied upon by the first and second respondents 1. case outline 2. affidavit of [mr ranwick] filed 29 september 2022 3. affidavit of [mr solberg] filed 29 september 2022 orders sought by the first and second respondents 1. that the application in a proceeding files 11 january 2022 be dismissed. the applicant pay the first and second respondent’s costs of and incidental to the application in a proceeding and application for contravention. relevant case law and legislation doughty & fairhall [2022] fedcfamc1a 15 kelly & otto [2022] fedcfamc1a 144 (13 september 2022 rice and asplund [1978] famcafc 128, (1979) flc 90-725 sps & pls [2008] famcafc 16, (2008) flc 93-363 searson & searson [2017] famcafc 119, (2017) flc 93-788 family law act 1975 (cth) (the act) federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) (the rules) submissions – application in a proceeding filed 11 january 2022 subject to limited exceptions, not relevant here, no interim application can be entertained if not covered by an extant application for final relief (r 5.02 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)). doughty & fairhall [2022] fedcfamc1a 15. rule 5.02 limits the extant application for final relief to “a person may apply for an interlocutory order only if the order sought relates to a current proceeding” (subsection 2) with some exceptions. the exceptions referred to in the subsection do not apply. the application in a proceeding relates to matters solely confined to part iii and part vii (division 6) of the act (orders 3 – 10) and procedural orders (orders 1, 11). the only other current proceeding before the court is an application for contravention under part vii (division 13a) of the act. the proceedings before the court finalised by consent on 18 march 2022 were proceedings under part xib of the act. in the event that there are matters which require the orders to be varied (arising from those proceedings), this can be achieved by an exercise of the power reposing within s 70nba of the act. it is submitted that there is no jurisdiction to entertain the application in a proceeding filed 11 january 2022 as it does not relate to any current proceeding before the court. in the event that the court is otherwise satisfied that the court has jurisdiction, the application in a proceeding must otherwise survive the threshold test for materially changed circumstances to justify being entertained (rice and asplund [1978] famcafc 128, (1979) flc 90-725). the applicant has the burden of proving the materially changed circumstances justifying further litigation over the orders and in dealing with the dispute as a threshold issue, without the evidence being tested in cross-examination, the mother’s evidence has to be accepted at its highest (sps & pls [2008] famcafc 16, (2008) flc 93-363 at [81], searson & searson [2017] famcafc 119, (2017) flc 93-788 at [11]). kelly & otto [2022] fedcfamc1a 144 (13 september 2022). in her affidavit of 20 september 2022, the applicant relies on her lack of accommodation in the [city ab], the breakdown of the relationship between the father and his former partner and generalised concerns. it is submitted these are matters either contemplated by the current final orders or lacking any substance in support of materially changed circumstances. the second respondents are not legally aided and are currently the primary carers of the subject children. in the event that the application in a proceeding is unsuccessful, they seek their costs of these proceedings on an indemnity basis.
background [ac] law firm act for [mr solberg] (“[mr solberg]”) & [mr ranwick] (“[mr ranwick]”), who are the first and second applicants in the substantive proceedings, but the respondents for the purpose of the extant application. the mother, [ms markwell] (“the mother”), is the respondent in the substantive proceedings and the applicant in the extant application. she is self-represented. the extant application is the application for contravention filed by the mother on 22 july 2022. the application for contravention was partially determined on 5 october 2022 but was subsequently adjourned part heard. the matter was heard again on 24 november 2022, judgement reserved. on 24 november 2022, his honour judge neville ordered each party to file written submissions as to the relevance of material produced by the department of communities and justice (“dcj”) with respect to the child [d] in relation to the application for contravention, only. dcj material the material produced by dcj goes some way to corroborating the version of events provided by [mr ranwick] in his affidavit filed 29 september 2022. page [3] of the “alternate assessment” document reveals that the joint child protection response program (“jcprp”) received three (3) reports between 6 and 7 july 2022 [1 rosh and 2 duplicate] in relation to the child, [d]. the reports contained, inter alia, information that [d]: displayed abnormal behaviour on 6 july 2022 by wetting herself, spoke of there being “scary” things at her mother’s house, was scared of [mr ag], the mother’s then-boyfriend (“[mr ag]”), and answered “yes” when asked if [mr ag] toucher her on her “private parts”. the proceeding paragraphs, which are too lengthy to summarise in detail in these brief submissions, reveal that [d] was unable to be engaged by jcprp and did not participate in an electronically recorded interview. the material then goes on to detail the various investigations conducted by dcj and jcprp, ultimately resulting in a finding that the allegations concerning [mr ag] were unable to be substantiated. the mother’s prosecution of her application for contravention at the hearing on 24 november 2022 appeared to be founded on two primary limbs: firstly, that the allegations against [mr ag] were ultimately not substantiated by either jcprp or dcj, and therefore the excuse provided by [mr ranwick] for withholding [d] could not possibly be countenanced as “reasonable”. with the greatest of respect to the mother, who is notably self-represented, these limbs are founded in legal error. in this forum, the court is not tasked with making a finding regarding the veracity of [d]’s disclosures, including whether or not [mr ag] assaulted [d]. with [mr ranwick] having conceded withholding [d] in contravention of the orders of 30 june 2020, the court’s sole task is to determine whether the excuse offered by [mr ranwick] is “reasonable”. in in the marriage of o’brien [1992] famca 52, (1992) 16 fam lr 723, justice smithers said at 727:
“...a reasonable excuse in respect of concern as to the welfare of the child, is limited to a belief, on reasonable grounds, that depriving a person of access pursuant to an order was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person. it is not a question as to whether the view of the custodial parent, or in the view of the custodial parent on reasonable grounds, that the carrying out of the access order might not be in the best interests of the child”.  phasis added) the circumstances and factors upon which [mr ranwick] based his decision to withhold [d] from the mother, which he gives in evidence at paragraphs 8 – 10 (inclusive) of his 29 september 2022 affidavit, were not the subject of cross-examination at the hearing of 24 november 2022 and were not otherwise materially challenged. these circumstances and factors find substantive corroboration in the material provided by dcj. the material is relevant in that it goes directly to the truthfulness of the manner in which [mr ranwick] says he formed the view to withhold [d]. [mr ranwick] formed the view, on what is submitted can only be considered “reasonable grounds”, that depriving the mother of time with [d] until the substance of [d]’s disclosures could be properly investigated was necessary to protect [d]’s ongoing health and safety. the material provided by dcj speaks to the reasonableness of these grounds, notwithstanding their ultimate finding that the allegations could not be substantiated.
background [ac] law firm act for [mr solberg] (“[mr solberg]”) & [mr ranwick] (“[mr ranwick]”), who are the first and second applicants in the substantive proceedings, but the respondents for the purpose of the extant application. the mother, [ms markwell] (“the mother”), is the respondent in the substantive proceedings and the applicant in the extant application. she is self-represented. on 4 and 5 october 2022, his honour judge neville dealt with two applications brought by the mother, those being:
a. the application in a proceeding filed 11 january 2022, and b. the application for contravention filed 22 july 2022. the application in a proceeding was heard on 4 october 2022, judgement reserved. judgement has not yet been delivered. the application for contravention was partially determined on 5 october 2022 but was subsequently adjourned part heard. the matter was heard again on 24 november 2022, judgement reserved. on 24 november 2022, his honour judge neville ordered each party file written submissions as to the relevance of material produced by the department of communities and justice (“dcj”) with respect to the child [d] in relation to the application for contravention, only. those submissions were filed on 15 december 2022. concurrent with those written submissions, [mr ranwick] caused to be filed on his behalf a response and accompanying affidavit to the mother’s application in a proceeding filed 11 january 2022. [mr ranwick] sought, inter alia, to re-open the evidence of the application in a proceeding prior to judgement delivery, citing various evidentiary issues not dealt with when the matter was heard on 4 october 2022. the matter came before his honour judge neville on 20 december 2022. his honour ordered that each party “file supplementary submissions of no more than 5 pages in length addressing the new material from the department of communities and justice and if any changes should be made to the final orders dated 30 june 2020”.
dcj letter – 14 december 2022 on 23 november 2022, the mother caused to be filed an additional affidavit in support of the application for contravention filed 22 july 2022 (“the november affidavit”). subsequent to objection on behalf of [mr ranwick], his honour judge neville ruled the mother could not rely on the affidavit, “except in relation to the determination by the department of communities and justice that there is no relevant risk as determined in relation to the mother’s former partner”. on 14 december 2022, the court received a letter from dcj, specifically [town ee] joint child protection response team (“jcprp”), which sets out their response to a number of factual assertions contained in the november affidavit (“the dcj letter”). it will not be necessary to detail each and every response provided by dcj in relation to the november affidavit. some of the responses are not materially relevant to the issues presently before the court. to the extent the responses are relevant, they will be addressed intra. at paragraph 16 of the november affidavit, the mother gives evidence that she text messaged [mr ranwick] saying, inter alia, “can you please advise why you think [d] needs to attend counselling, noting this was not a recommendation of dcj”. the dcj letter responds to this paragraph saying “dcj’s joint child protection response program (jcprp) made a referral for [d]’s father, [mr ranwick] and her stepmother [ms an] to attend generalised counselling for protective behaviours. this counselling is a generalised counselling to assist in teaching parents and children body safety. [ms markwell] also requested she be able to attend this counselling service.” (emphasis added) if the version of events provided by dcj is accepted as true, not only did the mother know dcj recommended generalised counselling for [d], she requested she be able to attend. [mr ranwick] acknowledged that generalised counselling, and not sexual assault counselling, was recommended by dcj in his reply text message to the mother set out at paragraph 17 of the november affidavit, saying “the sexual assault counsellor is booked for tomorrow in [town ee]. on the basis that generalised counselling is being recommended, i will cancel the appointment in the morning and [d] will be present at [event az]”. at paragraph 24 of the november affidavit, the mother says “there have been previous mandatory reports made with relation to [d] being a victim of physical abuse in the father’s care, where even the police subpoena issued in april 2022 validated ‘police do not disagree the child has what appear to be smack marks’. i cannot comment on why judge hughes did not turn her mind to this.” the dcj letter responds to this paragraph saying: “in response to paragraph 24, the previous assessment completed in 2021 did not substantiate physical abuse of [d]”. paragraph 33 of the november affidavit is too long to repeat verbatim in these submissions, but it recounts, in detail, a conversation between the mother and [ms aq] on 28 october 2022. relevantly, the mother says, inter alia “in terms of their assessment, it had been finalised. [mr ranwick] and [ms an] are persons of interest in the risk of psychological harm to [d]”. the letter from dcj says “in response to paragraph 33...[ms markwell] was told all three parental figures had now been listed as poi’s for the substantiation issue due to the ongoing negative relationships and its impact on [d]”. the acknowledgement that the mother has also been identified as a person of interest is not conceded anywhere in her evidence. it is submitted the version(s) of events given in the dcj letter by [ms ba] ought to be accepted by the court. dcj do not have a vested interest in the outcome of this case and volunteered the letter to correct what they allege are factual inaccuracies in the november affidavit. when the november affidavit and the dcj letter are read together, the court will find the mother’s evidence contains a number of factual inaccuracies, some of which are outlined above, which have the fundamental effect of misleading the court. the court will find that the inaccuracies in the november affidavit were by design, intentional, and were undertaken for the express purpose of exaggerating the risk posed by [mr ranwick], and minimising the risk posed by the mother. the court will find that the mother continually referred to the labelling of [mr ranwick] and his partner as “persons of interest in the risk of psychological harm to [d]”, without once conceding dcj applied the same label to her. the court will find this omission to be a wilful attempt to mislead the court in relation to the dcj findings. the mother gave evidence about the mandatory reports concerning alleged physical abuse by [mr ranwick] but failed to mention that dcj did not substantiate physical abuse. the court will again find the omission of dcj’s ultimate finding to be a wilful attempt to mislead the court in relation to the risk posed to [d] by [mr ranwick]. the misleading tenor of these crucial aspects of the mother’s evidence necessitates the court approach any other evidence given by her with healthy scepticism. the court could not be satisfied the mother has been truthful in any of her evidence, save for that which is capable of being independently corroborated by other evidence available to the court. changes to final orders dated 30 june 2022 this case has a regrettably long and protracted history before this honourable court. the court would be well aware of the history of this matter, including the previously problematic conduct of the mother. the court would be aware the mother was the subject of a vexatious litigant application, which was settled by consent in march 2022 on terms preventing her from bringing any application, except that of contravention, without leave of the court. noting the lengthy history of the matter and the concision presently required, these submissions will concern themselves largely with conduct peripheral to the extant applications before the court, and not otherwise detailed in previous applications. paragraphs 7 through 22 inclusive of [mr ranwick]’s affidavit filed 15 december 2022 (“the december affidavit”) give a historical account of the difficulties with the mother’s residential address in the [city ab]. in summary, the mother has previously alleged her residential address in the [city ab] was variously a caravan park, a tourist park, and a hotel. all three of these ultimately proved transient residences for a finite period, notwithstanding the mother’s assertions to the contrary. [mr ranwick] alleges the mother’s [city ab] -based transience has also extended to sleeping in her car, a disclosure he alleges was made by [d] on 12 october 2022. on 7 december 2022, there began an exchange between the mother and solicitors for [mr ranwick] in relation to the mother’s living arrangements. the mother disclosed her new residential address was [bc street, suburb ak] [city ab], and that her accommodation was arranged through the [organisation u]. notwithstanding repeated requests, the mother refused to provide a copy of her lease. on 20 december 2022, his honour judge neville ordered the mother to disclose a copy of her lease. a review of the lease, or “occupancy agreement”, reveals that it is an “occupancy agreement for emergency accommodation for people in crisis” and that the term of the occupancy agreement concludes on 8 june 2023. until the disclosure of the lease, the mother had not made the court or [mr ranwick] aware that the accommodation was temporary crisis accommodation. it is submitted that the mother took active steps to obfuscate the finite nature of her accommodation, and the limited-term lease represents a continuation of the previous residential transience she has been party to in trying to secure [d] in her full time care. there is a lacuna in the mother’s evidence before the court about what is likely to happen if she is unable to secure accommodation past 8 june 2023. the mother has spoken repeatedly, both in court and in her evidence, of the extreme difficulty she has previously encountered in securing accommodation in the [city ab]. there is no evidentiary basis to suggest she will not be subjected to the same adversity at the conclusion of her current occupancy agreement. on the operation of the current orders and presupposing the mother does as she has done previously and returns to [town al] if she is unable to find additional accommodation in the [city ab], [d] will return to the care of [mr ranwick] in [town e], nsw. the court will find that, given the mother is residing in crisis accommodation, there is real possibility this will occur if the orders are not changed. noting that [d] is now of school age, such instability and unpredictability in her living arrangements have real consequences to both her development and her schooling. such consequences are not in [d]’s best interests. [mr ranwick] has been [d]’s resident parent and primary carer since september 2021. [mr ranwick] has a stable and loving relationship with his partner, [ms an]. in 2021, [mr ranwick] and [ms an] had a son, [bd], [d]’s half-brother. [d] is enrolled at [ae school] which is due to commence term 1 on 3 february 2023. [d] has previously completed the transition program and is familiar with the school, her peers, and her teacher [ms be]. it is submitted [mr ranwick] has demonstrated himself to be a competent and diligent parent, with stable accommodation, work, and relationship. conversely, it is submitted the mother has demonstrated herself as dishonest, capricious, and prone to continuing conflict. the mother also continues to exhibit a high-handed attitude towards compliance with orders of this court, perhaps best exemplified by her unilateral attempt to remove [d] from day care at about 1:30pm on 6 december 2022, without any notice to [mr ranwick]. during this time, the mother also disseminated a copy of the letter addressed to the registrar of the federal circuit and family court of australia, [city ab] registry, [city ab], which comprised part of the dcj material released by the court after the contravention hearing on 24 november 2022, being the pdf entitled “ [d]s248 22.11.22.”. it is [mr ranwick]’s contention that the court, pursuant to s 70nba(1) of the family law act 1975 (cth) should vary the orders of her honour judge hughes dated 30 june 2020 such that: [d] live with [mr ranwick], [mr ranwick] has sole parental responsibility for [d], and whilst ever the mother resides within [several hundred kilometres] of [town e], [d] spend time with her each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school until 5:00pm sunday.
count 1: contravention 1 set out in the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 was not admitted and in the alternative was admitted but with reasonable excuse. the court finds that there is no prima facie case established. count 2: contravention 2 set out in the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 was not admitted and in the alternative was admitted but with reasonable excuse. the court finds that there is no prima facie case established. count 5: contravention 5 set out in the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 was not admitted and in the alternative was admitted but with reasonable excuse. the court finds that a prima facie case is established.
contravention 3 order 12(b)(iii) of the final orders made on 30 june 2020 9 july 2022 - 10:00am – [town f] service centre on the [g] highway, [town f] the first respondent without reasonable excuse, failed to facilitate [d] spending time with the applicant. contravention 4 order 13 of the final orders made on 30 june 2020 9 july 2022 - 10:00am - [town f] service centre on the [g] highway, [town f] the first respondent without reasonable excuse, failed to make the child, [d], available at [town f] service centre on the [g] highway, [town f] for changeover. contravention 5 order 19 of the final orders made on 30 june 2020 9 july 2022 – 10:00am - [city ab] the first respondent without reasonable excuse, failed to take all reasonable steps to ensure that the child, [d], spends time with the mother and her sibling, [b] .
c. contravention application filed 7th march 2023
contravention 1 order 11 of orders dated 30th june 2020. 44/01/2022 – 4:34am – [suburb ak], [city ab] the respondent, without reasonable excuse, caused the child [d] to be enrolled in a particular school without consulting the applicant, in circumstances where there is an order or equal shared parental responsibility. the respondent, without reasonable excuse, did not name the applicant as a parent on the enrolment form. contravention 2 order 12.b.i. of orders dated 30 june 2020. 10/02/2022 – 6pm – [town f] service centre the respondent, without reasonable excuse, failed to facilitate the child [d]’s time with the applicant. contravention 3 order 12.b.i. of orders dated 30 june 2020. 17/02/2022 – 6pm – [town f] service centre the respondent, without reasonable excuse, failed to facilitate the child [d]’s time with the applicant. contravention 4 order 12.b.i. of orders dated 30 june 2020. 23/02/2022 – 6pm – [town f] service centre the respondent, without reasonable excuse, failed to facilitate the child [d]’s time with the applicant.
evidence in relation to prima facie case of the contraventions
now, i’m going to talk to you now about the school enrolment contravention. okay? on 24 january at 1.59 pm, you caused a message to be sent to my client through the talking parents app, didn’t you?‑‑‑can i please have a copy of the message that you’re referring to? well, just bear with me. do you remember sending a message on that date?‑‑‑i don’t remember the dates off the top of my head, but i remember sending him correspondence. all right. if i read you this perhaps it will jog your memory:   ranwick], i write with relation to [d]’s schooling. as [b] attends school at [af school], i’m proposing to send [d] to [aw school] or [bg school]. both are in [suburb bg], which is essential given [b] is attending school in [suburb bg]. for practicality, it is in [d]’s best interests to attend a school near [b]. [aw school] is approximately 300 metres from [b]’s school. could you please kindly advise if you have any preference by 5 pm tomorrow. should i fail to hear from you, given [d] needs to be enrolled in school, i will select one for her.
does that jog your memory?‑‑‑yes, i remember sending the message. you remember sending that?‑‑‑but i can’t tell you exactly what date, i’m sorry, without seeing the message. ... his honour: it actually bears the date of 24.1.2023?‑‑‑thanks, your honour. mr [bh]: now, on 25 january 2023, you received a letter by email from my office, didn’t you?‑‑‑yes. and in that letter it said, among other things:
in circumstances where you have secured accommodation in the [city ab] and the orders of 30 june 2020 provide for [d] to live with you in such circumstances, our client nominates that [d] attends [bg] school.
do you remember it saying that?‑‑‑yes. do you also remember it saying:
please ensure that our client is provided with copies of all documentation and enrolment to be reviewed and co-signed by him as part of the enrolment process.
?‑‑‑i would have read it, but i don’t remember off the top of my head. well, i can show you a copy?‑‑‑is this – sorry. is this on the first page? it may be on the second?‑‑‑it’s just one page by the looks of it. his honour: no, the education matters are all on the first page?‑‑‑this is what – what am i looking at exactly, [mr bh]? mr [bh]: it’s the last paragraph just before it says “[d]’s time with her father”. it says:
please ensure that our client is provided with copied of all documentation and enrolment forms to be reviewed and co-signed by him as part of the enrolment process.
do you see that there?‑‑‑yes, yes. thank you. i will have that back. now, you did receive that, didn’t you?‑‑‑yes. yes. and you didn’t respond, did you?‑‑‑no. ... his honour: why?‑‑‑i sought ad hoc legal advice. sorry?‑‑‑i sought ad hoc legal advice at the time, your honour, and i was told that i was under no obligation to respond. so you’re saying to the court that you got advice to say that there was no obligation on you, is that it?‑‑‑no obligation to respond to the letter. i’m sorry. [mr bh] asked did i respond to the letter? mr [bh]: yes, that’s what i asked. i said, “you didn’t respond, did you”?‑‑‑no. no. and you submitted an application, didn’t you, in relation to [aw school]?‑‑‑i submitted an application to both of those schools. yes. and you submitted that application before you actually sent the message to my client, didn’t you?‑‑‑i think i submitted one to [bg school] on 17 january and the one to [aw school] perhaps ‑ ‑ ‑ well, i ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ on the 23rd or 24th. i’m not asking about [bg school] . i’m asking about [aw school]. when did you submit the one to [aw school]?‑‑‑i think it was either the 23rd or the 24th. i can’t ‑ ‑ ‑ right?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ remember off the top of my head. well, fortunately, the application is time-stamped, so i’m just going to show it to you. and you can see there it’s 4.34 am that you submitted it?‑‑‑yes. you see that? and that was before you sent the message to my client, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes. yes. now, you say you enrolled [d] in [bg school] as well?‑‑‑yes, i did, on the 17th. a copy of that enrolment wasn’t provided to the father, was it?‑‑‑no. and a copy of that enrolment wasn’t provided to my office, was it?‑‑‑no. and a copy of that enrolment is not in evidence, is it?‑‑‑no, it’s not. and [mr ranwick] wasn’t on the [bg school] enrolment, was he?‑‑‑on the [aw school] enrolment? no, on [bg school]?‑‑‑no, he wasn’t. thank you. i will have that back. so just so i understand your evidence you didn’t include him on the [bg school] one either, did you?‑‑‑no, i didn’t. ... his honour: so what does that mean to you that it says “equal” but you can do, really, whatever you think is appropriate at the time?‑‑‑no, that’s not – not accurate, your honour. well, that’s what i’m asking?‑‑‑well, given the concerns that had transpired with [d]’s preschool and the interference by [mr ranwick] and his partner, as set out in my affidavit that i filed yesterday, it explicitly states that i held concerns over that, and those concerns were very warranted in the phone call that [d]’s school received on 2 march this year from both [mr ranwick] and [ms an]. but we’re talking january and you unilaterally took steps in relation to enrolling [d], firstly, in [bg school] and then, secondly, at [aw school], yes?‑‑‑yes, just as [mr ranwick] had unilaterally enrolled [d] ‑ ‑ ‑ no. sorry. do you understand that it’s not a tit-for-tat exercise and we have to be very focussed upon this application, because i’m reserved on the other applications that you have brought. we just need to be as confined as we possibly can. understand?‑‑‑i think so. ... mr [bh]: you’ve just told the court that the reason you didn’t include the father on the [bg school] application is because you had fears about how he might interfere with [d]’s schooling. do i understand your evidence correctly?‑‑‑not how he would interfere with her schooling, how he would interfere in a way that it – he would paint me in a bad light to the school, which is exactly what has happened. i see. but that’s not the reason you say you didn’t include him on the enrolment to [aw school]?‑‑‑no. so you had one reason to not include him on the enrolment in relation to [bg school] and one reason in relation to [aw school] ?‑‑‑well, i mean ‑ ‑ ‑ is that right?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ it’s across the board for both of the schools. no, no. would you like to answer ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑the concern ‑ ‑ ‑ would you like to answer my question?‑‑‑the concern isn’t discrete to one school. the concern is whether [d] is going to school here or in [town e] or in western australia, the concern remains the same. the reason i didn’t include him on the application to [aw school] is because that would have automatically made him 50 per cent liable for the school fees, which are in excess of $8000 per year, and i was concerned, given the time-critical nature of [d] needing to be enrolled and commenced at a school by 30 january, that he would have held up or delayed the process of her enrolment. by refusing to pay the school fees, that’s what you’re saying?‑‑‑yes.
well, he indicated to you, didn’t you, that he didn’t agree with [d] attending [aw school] ?‑‑‑yes. and he sent you this message:
if you cannot enrol [d] in a public school in [city ab], please arrange for [d] to be returned to my care at 10 am on wednesday at [town f] service station. [d] can then commence at [ae school] on friday, 3 february.
?‑‑‑yes. and you say that that forms the basis, or a considerable part of the basis, for you contravening the orders?‑‑‑well, it shows he doesn’t have a regard for the orders. no, no. would you like to answer my question?‑‑‑yes. yes. his honour: sorry, that’s really the basis, or something similar, for your plea mitigation of reasonable excuse, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes, your honour, it is.
mr [bh]: yes. and it says:   markwell] was told all three parental figures had now been listed as persons of interest for this substantiation issue, due to the ongoing negative relationships and its impact on [d].
do you see that?‑‑‑yes. so what you in fact told the learned deputy registrar wasn’t accurate, was it?‑‑‑in relation to ‑ ‑ ‑ in relation to your interim family violence order against [ms an]?‑‑‑in relation to her conduct, yes, it was. i can’t ‑ ‑ ‑ no. in relation to her being a substantiated risk of harm to [d]?‑‑‑well, yes, it was accurate because she has been identified as a risk of harm – psychological harm to [d]. well, i put it to you that she hasn’t and i put it to you that this letter demonstrates that she hasn’t. and i also put it to you that the last sentence on the bullet point that i’ve just drawn your attention to suggests that all three parental figures have been listed as persons of interest. now, you didn’t tell the learned deputy registrar that you had been listed as a person of interest, did you?‑‑‑because it wasn’t in relation to the parental conflict. no, no. excuse me?‑‑‑it was in relation discretely to [ms an]’s conduct. would you like to answer my question, which is you didn’t tell them that you were listed as a person of interest, did you?‑‑‑no, because it wasn’t relevant ‑ ‑ ‑ no?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ to the application. the application was brought about following the interactions with [aw school] and what [ms an] had ‑ ‑ ‑ i’m aware, [ms markwell]?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ told them. but i put it to you that you actually misled deputy registrar [bj] in relation to material facts that she took into consideration in making that interim family violence order?‑‑‑i don’t agree with that.
the mother’s written submissions
changes to orders both parents seek sole parental responsibility of [d]. this is necessary to protect [d] from ongoing conflict. the father and his partner have both simultaneously made life very difficult for [d] having a relationship with her mother and sister, and there is very real risk this will continue. such is supported by the voice recordings where [ms an] and [mr ranwick] state to [d] they will not give up until she is home. they simply refuse to accept the harm they’re causing to [d] by removing her from her mother and sister’s lives and are clearly intent on exposing her to ongoing litigation (“we will not give up”). [d] deserves a life away from litigation. this is only achievable if the mother has spr. the mother is not a vexatious litigant. she has always filed where it has been in the children’s best interest. the order of 25 march 2022 must be discharged. the order requiring permission to travel outside of the [city ab]/nsw must be discharged. both fathers previously consented to this, and it must be accepted if this order remains, the mother will regrettably be forced to bring future applications. the mother now permanently resides in the [city ab] and has no intention of relocating. it is unreasonable that she and her daughters be further isolated by not being permitted to visit their friends and family in victoria. just recently, the father denied [d] being permitted to visit her family in sale for the easter holidays. this order gives control to the father and is not supported by a person’s right to freedom of movement, as enshrined in the constitution. further, this order was made around covid, which now has no restrictions or isolation periods imposed.
the father’s (mr ranwick’s) submissions
the time-based contraventions 1. in relation to what might be described as the “time-based contraventions” the court will make the following factual findings: on 20 january 2023, [mr ranwick] returned [d] to the mother’s care. noting the intended operation of order 12(b)(i) of orders dated 30 june 2020, that [d] is now of school age, and that the parties reside approximately 100km away from one another, [mr ranwick] caused correspondence to be sent to the mother from his solicitors on 24 january 2023, 6 february 2023, and 10 february 2023, first inviting the mother to propose an alternative arrangement for [d]’s time with [mr ranwick], and thereafter proposing an alternative arrangement in which [d] would spend time with him from friday to sunday, each weekend. no response was received from the mother to all three letters. [mr ranwick] sent multiple messages to the mother by the talkingparents app, requesting she comply with the orders and facilitate [d]’s time with the father, going so far as to say in a message on 23 february 2023 “if there is anything i can do to assist you in facilitating changeover, please advise”. no response was received from the mother to any of the messages. [mr ranwick] attended [town f] service centre on 10, 17, and 24 february 2023. the mother did not attend, and he did not spend time with [d]. the court will find the mother conceded at the directions hearing of 14 march 2023 that time had not occurred with [mr ranwick]. when asked directly by his honour judge neville as to the basis for time not occurring, the mother answered by saying: “as i said before, your honour, [mr ranwick] has sent messages which indicate that he intends for [d] to commence at [town e]. her enrolment remains open at [town e] and i have concerns that he would again withhold [d] and place her in the school in [town e] given a message that i received on the talkingparents app on or around 25 january this year.” the court will find the mother had no basis for believing as she alleges she did, and that such a justification could not possibly constitute a reasonable excuse in all of the circumstances. the court will find the time-based contraventions proved, and that the mother had no reasonable excuse for doing so. the school-based contravention in relation to what might be described as the “school-based contravention” the court will make the following factual findings: the mother made an application for [d] to be enrolled in [aw school] at 4:34am on 24 january 2023, the mother sent a talkingparents message asking [mr ranwick] to nominate one of two schools for [d] to attend (one of which was [aw school]) at 1:59pm on 24 january 2023, on 25 january 2023, [mr ranwick] caused his solicitors to write to the mother consenting to enrolment in [bg school]. on 28 january 2023, the mother sent a talkingparents message saying “[bg school] cannot enrol [d] as it isn’t in her zone. she has been offered a place at [aw school]” and “i will forward you a copy of the forms by email. you’re listed on the enrolment as the other parent, along with your contact name and number, and your address”. the mother did not send the enrolment form to [mr ranwick], nor does the enrolment form list him as [d]’s other parent. the court will find that the mother unilaterally applied for [d] to be enrolled in [aw school] without first consulting [mr ranwick]. the court will find that the messages by the mother to [mr ranwick] about this issue were purely performative, and disingenuous in circumstances where she had already taken active steps to enrol [d] in [aw school] without his knowledge. the court will find the school-based contravention proved, and that the mother had no reasonable excuse for doing so. it is submitted the court will find [mr ranwick] had no choice but to bring the current application for contravention to reinstate his time with [d], and the application constitutes yet another example in this long and protracted case of the mother demonstrating a high-handed disregard of the orders of this court, and a propensity toward ongoing conflict. if the contraventions are found proved without reasonable excuse, then pursuant to s 70nba(1) of the family law act 1975 (cth), [mr ranwick] contends the orders of 30 june 2020 ought to be varied such that [d] live with him, that he have sole parental responsibility for [d], and that [d] spend no time with the mother.
change of orders the court is empowered to vary existing parenting orders within contravention proceedings, and that power is not subject to whether the contravention is ultimately proven, or whether a reasonable excuse is ultimately accepted. in these proceedings, the non-workability of the current orders is not in dispute between the parties. in or around december 2022, the mother relocated to [bc street], [suburb ak] [city ab]. on 20 december 2022, his honour judge neville ordered the mother to disclose a copy of her lease. a review of the lease, or “occupancy agreement”, reveals that it is an “occupancy agreement for emergency accommodation for people in crisis” and that the term of the occupancy agreement concludes on 8 june 2023. there is a lacuna in the mother’s evidence before the court about what is likely to happen if she is unable to secure accommodation past 8 june 2023. the mother has spoken repeatedly, both in court and in her evidence, of the extreme difficulty she has previously encountered in securing accommodation in the [city ab]. there is no evidentiary basis to suggest she will not be subjected to the same adversity at the conclusion of her current occupancy agreement. the court will find that, given the mother is residing in crisis accommodation, there is real possibility she will once again be without residence in the [city ab], and [d] will return to the father’s care in [town e], nsw. the father was previously [d]’s resident parent and primary carer from september 2021 to january 2023. the father has a stable and loving relationship with his fiancé, [ms an]. in november 2021, the father and [ms an] had a son, [bd], [d]’s half-brother. [d] was previously enrolled at [ae school] and was due to commence term 1 on 3 february 2023. [d] had previously completed the transition program and is familiar with the school, her peers, and her teacher [ms be]. [d]’s enrolment remains open. it is submitted the father has demonstrated himself to be a competent and diligent parent, with stable accommodation, work, and relationship. conversely, it is submitted the mother has demonstrated herself as dishonest, capricious, prone to continuing conflict, and having unstable living arrangements. the mother also continues to exhibit a high-handed, recalcitrant attitude towards compliance with orders of this court. she has not exhibited acceptance of any wrongdoing, or contrition with respect to her conduct. the court would have very serious concerns that if it did not vary the orders in the manner proposed by the father, the mother will continue to contravene the orders into the future. it is the father’s contention that the court, pursuant to s 70nba(1) of the family law act 1975 (cth) should vary the orders of her honour judge hughes dated 30 june 2020 such that: [d] live with the father, the father have sole parental responsibility for [d], and that the mother spend no time with [d]. penalty the father was forced to bring the application for contravention dated 7 march 2023 in circumstances where his time with [d] had ceased entirely from 20 january 2023, notwithstanding there being final orders for [d] to spend four (4) nights per fortnight with the father, numerous attempts by the father to ensure (at least partial) compliance with those orders, and his honour judge neville being reserved on two separate applications in this matter. it is contended by the father that the mother has exhibited a “serious disregard of...her obligations under the primary order”, and consequently, it is submitted the contravention ought to be dealt with under subdivision f, division 13a, part vii of the family law act 1975 (cth). the mother’s serious disregard for her obligations is exemplified in the following concessions made during cross-examination at hearing on 24 march 2023: that despite being aware of the order for equal share parental responsibility, and understanding the obligations created by that order, she enrolled [d] in [aw school] before she invited the father to have input into same, and did not include the father on the enrolment form for [aw school], or the enrolment form to [bg school] [despite the latter not being in evidence]. that she received all letters from the father’s legal representatives and all messages from the father about compliance with orders, but responded to none of them. that she made no effort whatsoever to comply with the orders in any way. that she notified child support she intended to contravene the orders before [d] was returned to her care. where a contravention is established as having occurred without reasonable excuse, and where the person having contravened the orders has demonstrated a serious disregard of his or her obligations under the primary order, the court must make an order requiring the person who committed the contravention(s) to pay all of the costs of another party to proceedings under the division, unless the court could be satisfied that the making of such an order is not in the best interests of the child. the father has been legally represented, without the assistance of a grant of legal aid, for the duration of these proceedings. he has incurred considerable legal fees as a consequence of the prolonged litigation, including in relation to the most recent application for contravention. there is no evidence currently before the court which would cause the court concern an order for costs on the indemnity basis against the mother is not in [d]’s best interests. indeed, such an order may actually be in [d]’s best interests if the court ultimately makes orders consistent with the father’s submissions. the father contends the mother ought to be subject to imposition of the following penalties: a costs order on the indemnity basis, fixed in the sum of $15,000, and a bond, without surety, to be of good behaviour for a period of not-less-than twelve (12) months.
consideration and disposition
pleas and findings
penalties ] section 117(1) of the act provides: “[s]ubject to subsection (2), subsection 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa, 117ab, 117ac and 118, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs.” [63] section 117(2) of the act provides that if, in proceedings under the act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, it may, subject to sub-ss (2a), (4) and (5), and the applicable rules, make such order as to costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as it considers just. [64] section 117(2a) of the act provides that in considering what order (if any) should be made under s 117(2), the court shall have regard to the matters set out in paragraphs (a) to (g). in fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 the full court (kay, warnick and boland jj), referring to s 117(2a), said at 130 [41] :
a number of factors are then listed in the subparagraphs. the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings is the first mentioned factor. nowhere in subs (2a) or elsewhere in s 117, is there any prescription that more than one factor must be present before an order for costs is made nor of comparative weight of the factors set out in subs (2a). as a consequence, there is nothing to prevent any factor being the sole foundation for an order for costs.  ] as to the relationship between s 117(1) and s 117(2) of the act in penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311, in joint reasons, stephen, mason, aickin and wilson jj said at 315:
it is an accurate description of s. 117 (1) to say that it expresses a general rule, provided that it is firmly understood that the sub-section is not paramount to s. 117 (2). as sub-s. (1) is expressed to be subject to sub-s. (2) the former must yield whenever a judge finds in a particular case that there are circumstances justifying the making of an order for costs. sub-section (2) requires a finding of justifying circumstances as an essential preliminary to the making of an order. beyond this there is nothing in the subject matter or in the interrelationship of the two provisions which imposes any additional or special onus on an applicant for an order for costs. consequently, with respect to their honours in the family court, we do not agree with the suggestion made in the judgment under appeal that an order can only be made under s. 117 (2) in “a clear case”. (emphasis added)  ] as to the nature of the hearing of an application pursuant to s 117 of the act in penfold their honours said at 315-16:
sub-section (2) does not in our view as a matter of law require the judge to specify the circumstances which justify the making of an order. it does not expressly say so, and in the context of the making of an order for costs there is no sufficient basis for making an implication. judges very frequently make orders for costs without giving reasons or making findings, even when costs are in issue. the absence of reasons or findings does not in itself indicate that a judge has erroneously exercised his discretion to award costs, though it will place an appellate court in the position of examining the circumstances and of determining for itself whether the circumstances show that the discretion was erroneously exercised (kent v. kent [(1970) 92 w.n. (nsw) 503, at p. 505]). accordingly, in the absence of some positive legislative indication we should not attribute to parliament the requirement that a judge must make particular findings in relation to an order for costs.  ] we also observe that in re jjt, ex parte victoria legal aid (1998) 195 clr 184 the majority of the high court (gaudron, gummow, hayne and callinan jj, kirby j dissenting) held that s 117(2) of the act referred to costs in the conventional sense and thus to the payment by one party to litigation of money by way of a partial indemnity for professional legal fees and expenses actually incurred by another party in the course of the litigation: see hayne j at 219. an order for costs is made to compensate a party against expense incurred in litigation and is not punitive in nature. costs are not a penalty or damages: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534 per mason cj at 543 and mchugh j at 567, ruddock and ors v vadarlis and ors (2001) 188 alr 143 per full court of the federal court at [12] and brott and joachim [2006] famca 256, (2006) flc 93-259 per full court (holden, warnick and boland jj) at 80,403-404.
an order for costs may be made on an indemnity basis, subject to a judicial determination capable of being made that there ought to be a departure from the usual basis that costs be payable on the party and party basis. for a discussion of the jurisdiction to order indemnity costs and its exercise see colgate palmolive co and another v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536, (1993) 118 alr 248 per sheppard j at 256-257 and nmfm property pty ltd and others v citibank ltd (no 2) (court’s “nmfm” judgment no 11) [2011] fca 480, (2001) 109 fcr 77 per lindgren j at [53] to [90].
it seems to me that the following principles or guidelines can be distilled out of the authorities to which i have referred:-
1. the problem arises in adversary litigation, i.e. litigation as between parties at arm's length. different considerations apply where parties may be found to be entitled to the payment of their costs out of a fund or assets being administered by or under the control of a trustee, liquidator, receiver or person in a like position, eg. a government agency or statutory authority. 2. the ordinary rule is that, where the court orders the costs of one party to litigation to be paid by another party, the order is for payment of those costs on the party and party basis. in this court the provisions of order 62, rules 12 and 19, and the second schedule to the rules will apply to the taxation. in many cases the result will be that the amount recovered by the successful party under the order will fall short of (in many cases well short of) a complete indemnity. 3. this has been the settled practice for centuries in england. it is a practice which is entrenched in australia. either legislation (perhaps in the form of an amendment to rules of court) or a decision of an intermediate court of appeal or of the high court would be required to alter it. no doubt any consideration of whether there should be any change in the practice would require the resolution of the competing considerations mentioned by devlin lj in berry v. british transport commission and handley ja in cachia v. hanes on the one hand and by rogers j in qantas on the other. the relevant passages from the respective judgments have been earlier referred to. 4. in consequence of the settled practice which exists, the court ought not usually make an order for the payment of costs on some basis other than the party and party basis. the circumstances of the case must be such as to warrant the court in departing from the usual course. that has been the view of all judges dealing with applications for payment of costs on the indemnity or some other basis whether here or in england. the tests have been variously put. the court of appeal in andrews v. barnes (39 ch d at 141) said the court had a general and discretionary power to award costs as between solicitor and client "as and when the justice of the case might so require." woodward j in fountain selected meats appears to have adopted what was said by brandon lj (as he was) in preston v. preston ((1982) 1 all er at 58) namely, there should be some special or unusual feature in the case to justify the court in departing from the ordinary practice. most judges dealing with the problem have resolved the particular case before them by dealing with the circumstances of that case and finding in it the presence or absence of factors which would be capable, if they existed, of warranting a departure from the usual rule. but as french j said (at 8) in tetijo, "the categories in which the discretion may be exercised are not closed". davies j expressed (at 6) similar views in ragata. 5. notwithstanding the fact that that is so, it is useful to note some of the circumstances which have been thought to warrant the exercise of the discretion. i instance the making of allegations of fraud knowing them to be false and the making of irrelevant allegations of fraud (both referred to by woodward j in fountain and also by gummow j in thors v. weekes (1989) 92 alr 131 at 152, evidence of particular misconduct that causes loss of time to the court and to other parties (french j in tetijo), the fact that the proceedings were commenced or continued for some ulterior motive (davies j in ragata) or in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established law (woodward j in fountain and french j in j-corp), the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (davies j in ragata), an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise (eg messiter v. hutchinson (1987) 10 nswlr 525, maitland hospital v. fisher (no. 2) (1992) 27 nswlr 721at 724 (court of appeal), crisp v. keng (supreme court of new south wales, 27 september 1993, unreported, court of appeal)and an award of costs on an indemnity basis against a contemnor (eg megarry v-c in emi records). other categories of cases are to be found in the reports. yet others to arise in the future will have different features about them which may justify an order for costs on the indemnity basis. the question must always be whether the particular facts and circumstances of the case in question warrant the making of an order for payment of costs other than on a party and party basis. 6. it remains to say that the existence of particular facts and circumstances capable of warranting the making of an order for payment of costs, for instance, on the indemnity basis, does not mean that judges are necessarily obliged to exercise their discretion to make such an order. the costs are always in the discretion of the trial judge. provided that discretion is exercised having regard to the applicable principles and the particular circumstances of the instant case its exercise will not be found to have miscarried unless it appears that the order which has been made involves a manifest error or injustice.
s.70nba & variation of final orders  for the purposes of s.60cc(3)(b) and (d), d has two siblings: bd who obviously (as a quite young child of perhaps 18 months of age) lives exclusively with the father and his partner, and her older sister, b, who now lives in a week-about arrangement between the mother and mr solberg. thus, for example, in living with the father, d would be with bd all of the time except for the limited time she is with the mother, whereas if d lived primarily with the mother, she would only spend time with b when there was a coincidence and overlap between the two sisters with their mother, (ii) the father and his partner live in permanent accommodation in town e, whereas the mother lives in emergency accommodation in city ab, with a lease that expires in early june 2023. the mother contends, but with no evidence at all (other than her own contentions), that the organisation u will assist her with more permanent accommodation when the current lease expires, (iii) the father works full-time, while the mother, on her own evidence, (a) works casually with her current job (done remotely, its “end-date” was not disclosed nor was her weekly income), and (b) hopes/intends to work full-time once she finds more permanent accommodation. what the mother’s full-time employment might look like, and in what area and with what income, was never outlined. these two areas of employment and accommodation are certainly and clearly issues of speculation and concern for the mother. this is not a criticism, rather it simply records the facts as currently known. d needs stability and certainty on every front in her life. i do not doubt the mother’s intention to secure permanent, full-time employment, and likewise permanent accommodation. the reality is, however, that since the june 2020 orders were made, the mother consistently protested her plan to return to the city ab region and to secure permanent accommodation. regrettably for all concerned but most especially both of her daughters, the mother lived in a number of different localities, and ultimately lived in country victoria for a significant period of time. she only returned to the city ab region in late 2022: first to town ad, outside city ab, then to emergency accommodation in city ab. put another way: the mother’s long-professed intention to return to the city ab region took a very significant time to be realised, (iv) under s.60cc(3)(e), the matter of “geography” between the parties remains a consideration. while not as far as country victoria as has been the case for some time until recently, nonetheless the distance between town e and city ab, with the attendant travel times and cost of fuel, remains another not insignificant factor, (v) the unusual circumstances that are outlined above that led to the mother obtaining, on very selective and in part misleading evidence, an interim family violence order against the father’s partner (and naming d on that order) is obviously a matter of note and proper consideration. this is to say that the order is of note, as is the quite selective evidence used by the mother to obtain it, (vi) finally, the mother’s actions in unilaterally enrolling d in school, not placing the father’s name on the enrolment form(s), and not only preventing d spending any time with the father for a number of months together with not responding at all to correspondence from the father’s lawyers (and from the father himself), all speak very poorly of her exercise of parenting responsibilities under s.60cc(3)(c), (ca), (f), and (i).  ) the father and his partner live in permanent accommodation in town e, whereas the mother lives in emergency accommodation in city ab, with a lease that expires in early june 2023. the mother contends, but with no evidence at all (other than her own contentions), that the organisation u will assist her with more permanent accommodation when the current lease expires, (iii) the father works full-time, while the mother, on her own evidence, (a) works casually with her current job (done remotely, its “end-date” was not disclosed nor was her weekly income), and (b) hopes/intends to work full-time once she finds more permanent accommodation. what the mother’s full-time employment might look like, and in what area and with what income, was never outlined. these two areas of employment and accommodation are certainly and clearly issues of speculation and concern for the mother. this is not a criticism, rather it simply records the facts as currently known. d needs stability and certainty on every front in her life. i do not doubt the mother’s intention to secure permanent, full-time employment, and likewise permanent accommodation. the reality is, however, that since the june 2020 orders were made, the mother consistently protested her plan to return to the city ab region and to secure permanent accommodation. regrettably for all concerned but most especially both of her daughters, the mother lived in a number of different localities, and ultimately lived in country victoria for a significant period of time. she only returned to the city ab region in late 2022: first to town ad, outside city ab, then to emergency accommodation in city ab. put another way: the mother’s long-professed intention to return to the city ab region took a very significant time to be realised, (iv) under s.60cc(3)(e), the matter of “geography” between the parties remains a consideration. while not as far as country victoria as has been the case for some time until recently, nonetheless the distance between town e and city ab, with the attendant travel times and cost of fuel, remains another not insignificant factor, (v) the unusual circumstances that are outlined above that led to the mother obtaining, on very selective and in part misleading evidence, an interim family violence order against the father’s partner (and naming d on that order) is obviously a matter of note and proper consideration. this is to say that the order is of note, as is the quite selective evidence used by the mother to obtain it, (vi) finally, the mother’s actions in unilaterally enrolling d in school, not placing the father’s name on the enrolment form(s), and not only preventing d spending any time with the father for a number of months together with not responding at all to correspondence from the father’s lawyers (and from the father himself), all speak very poorly of her exercise of parenting responsibilities under s.60cc(3)(c), (ca), (f), and (i).  i) the father works full-time, while the mother, on her own evidence, (a) works casually with her current job (done remotely, its “end-date” was not disclosed nor was her weekly income), and (b) hopes/intends to work full-time once she finds more permanent accommodation. what the mother’s full-time employment might look like, and in what area and with what income, was never outlined. these two areas of employment and accommodation are certainly and clearly issues of speculation and concern for the mother. this is not a criticism, rather it simply records the facts as currently known. d needs stability and certainty on every front in her life. i do not doubt the mother’s intention to secure permanent, full-time employment, and likewise permanent accommodation. the reality is, however, that since the june 2020 orders were made, the mother consistently protested her plan to return to the city ab region and to secure permanent accommodation. regrettably for all concerned but most especially both of her daughters, the mother lived in a number of different localities, and ultimately lived in country victoria for a significant period of time. she only returned to the city ab region in late 2022: first to town ad, outside city ab, then to emergency accommodation in city ab. put another way: the mother’s long-professed intention to return to the city ab region took a very significant time to be realised, (iv) under s.60cc(3)(e), the matter of “geography” between the parties remains a consideration. while not as far as country victoria as has been the case for some time until recently, nonetheless the distance between town e and city ab, with the attendant travel times and cost of fuel, remains another not insignificant factor, (v) the unusual circumstances that are outlined above that led to the mother obtaining, on very selective and in part misleading evidence, an interim family violence order against the father’s partner (and naming d on that order) is obviously a matter of note and proper consideration. this is to say that the order is of note, as is the quite selective evidence used by the mother to obtain it, (vi) finally, the mother’s actions in unilaterally enrolling d in school, not placing the father’s name on the enrolment form(s), and not only preventing d spending any time with the father for a number of months together with not responding at all to correspondence from the father’s lawyers (and from the father himself), all speak very poorly of her exercise of parenting responsibilities under s.60cc(3)(c), (ca), (f), and (i).  ) under s.60cc(3)(e), the matter of “geography” between the parties remains a consideration. while not as far as country victoria as has been the case for some time until recently, nonetheless the distance between town e and city ab, with the attendant travel times and cost of fuel, remains another not insignificant factor, (v) the unusual circumstances that are outlined above that led to the mother obtaining, on very selective and in part misleading evidence, an interim family violence order against the father’s partner (and naming d on that order) is obviously a matter of note and proper consideration. this is to say that the order is of note, as is the quite selective evidence used by the mother to obtain it, (vi) finally, the mother’s actions in unilaterally enrolling d in school, not placing the father’s name on the enrolment form(s), and not only preventing d spending any time with the father for a number of months together with not responding at all to correspondence from the father’s lawyers (and from the father himself), all speak very poorly of her exercise of parenting responsibilities under s.60cc(3)(c), (ca), (f), and (i).   the unusual circumstances that are outlined above that led to the mother obtaining, on very selective and in part misleading evidence, an interim family violence order against the father’s partner (and naming d on that order) is obviously a matter of note and proper consideration. this is to say that the order is of note, as is the quite selective evidence used by the mother to obtain it, (vi) finally, the mother’s actions in unilaterally enrolling d in school, not placing the father’s name on the enrolment form(s), and not only preventing d spending any time with the father for a number of months together with not responding at all to correspondence from the father’s lawyers (and from the father himself), all speak very poorly of her exercise of parenting responsibilities under s.60cc(3)(c), (ca), (f), and (i).  ) finally, the mother’s actions in unilaterally enrolling d in school, not placing the father’s name on the enrolment form(s), and not only preventing d spending any time with the father for a number of months together with not responding at all to correspondence from the father’s lawyers (and from the father himself), all speak very poorly of her exercise of parenting responsibilities under s.60cc(3)(c), (ca), (f), and (i).   for the next six months from the date of d going into her father’s primary care, d shall spend one weekend per month with her mother, from friday afternoon (changeover at 5pm on friday at the town f service centre) until 5pm on sunday afternoon (changeover at 5pm at the town f service centre), (b) absent any reports by the mother to care and protection within the next six months, and absent any adverse application by the father against the mother regarding parenting also within the next six months, d’s time with her mother shall increase to every second weekend as per the same changeover times and location in the previous order, (c) once the mother’s time with d moves to each alternate weekend, the final orders from 30 june 2020 regarding holiday time will continue to apply.   absent any reports by the mother to care and protection within the next six months, and absent any adverse application by the father against the mother regarding parenting also within the next six months, d’s time with her mother shall increase to every second weekend as per the same changeover times and location in the previous order, (c) once the mother’s time with d moves to each alternate weekend, the final orders from 30 june 2020 regarding holiday time will continue to apply.   once the mother’s time with d moves to each alternate weekend, the final orders from 30 june 2020 regarding holiday time will continue to apply.
associate: dated: 15 may 2023
dated: 15 may 2023
annexure a
family law act 1975
in the federal circuit court of australia
file no: (p)cac1533/2014
between: ms markwell (applicant) and: mr solberg (first respondent) and: mr ranwick (second respondent) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge hughes date: 30 june 2020 made at: city ab
ms markwell (applicant) and: mr solberg (first respondent) and: mr ranwick (second respondent) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge hughes date: 30 june 2020 made at: city ab
and: mr solberg (first respondent) and: mr ranwick (second respondent) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge hughes date: 30 june 2020 made at: city ab
mr solberg (first respondent) and: mr ranwick (second respondent) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge hughes date: 30 june 2020 made at: city ab
and: mr ranwick (second respondent) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge hughes date: 30 june 2020 made at: city ab
and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge hughes date: 30 june 2020 made at: city ab
before: judge hughes date: 30 june 2020 made at: city ab
date: 30 june 2020 made at: city ab
made at: city ab
upon application made to the court.
the court orders that:  until 3 july 2020, in accordance with the orders of 1 march 2019, as modified by agreement between the parties, (b) from 3 july 2020: (i) during school terms, every second week from 10am wednesday to 4pm sunday to coincide with the time b is with her father, (ii) for half of the 2020 mid-year school holidays on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, from 10am on friday 10 july to 5pm on saturday 18 july, (iii) thereafter, for half of each school holiday period at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 each year, to coincide with the time b is with her father, (iv) until d turns six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term 4 each year, on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, on a week about basis starting with the first week with the mother in odd numbered years and the first week with the father in even numbered years, (v) upon d turning six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term four each year on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, the first half with her mother and the second half with her father in odd numbered years and vice versa in even numbered years and to coincide with the time b is with her father.   from 3 july 2020: (i) during school terms, every second week from 10am wednesday to 4pm sunday to coincide with the time b is with her father, (ii) for half of the 2020 mid-year school holidays on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, from 10am on friday 10 july to 5pm on saturday 18 july, (iii) thereafter, for half of each school holiday period at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 each year, to coincide with the time b is with her father, (iv) until d turns six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term 4 each year, on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, on a week about basis starting with the first week with the mother in odd numbered years and the first week with the father in even numbered years, (v) upon d turning six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term four each year on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, the first half with her mother and the second half with her father in odd numbered years and vice versa in even numbered years and to coincide with the time b is with her father.   during school terms, every second week from 10am wednesday to 4pm sunday to coincide with the time b is with her father, (ii) for half of the 2020 mid-year school holidays on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, from 10am on friday 10 july to 5pm on saturday 18 july, (iii) thereafter, for half of each school holiday period at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 each year, to coincide with the time b is with her father, (iv) until d turns six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term 4 each year, on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, on a week about basis starting with the first week with the mother in odd numbered years and the first week with the father in even numbered years, (v) upon d turning six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term four each year on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, the first half with her mother and the second half with her father in odd numbered years and vice versa in even numbered years and to coincide with the time b is with her father.  ) for half of the 2020 mid-year school holidays on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, from 10am on friday 10 july to 5pm on saturday 18 july, (iii) thereafter, for half of each school holiday period at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 each year, to coincide with the time b is with her father, (iv) until d turns six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term 4 each year, on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, on a week about basis starting with the first week with the mother in odd numbered years and the first week with the father in even numbered years, (v) upon d turning six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term four each year on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, the first half with her mother and the second half with her father in odd numbered years and vice versa in even numbered years and to coincide with the time b is with her father.  i) thereafter, for half of each school holiday period at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 each year, to coincide with the time b is with her father, (iv) until d turns six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term 4 each year, on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, on a week about basis starting with the first week with the mother in odd numbered years and the first week with the father in even numbered years, (v) upon d turning six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term four each year on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, the first half with her mother and the second half with her father in odd numbered years and vice versa in even numbered years and to coincide with the time b is with her father.  ) until d turns six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term 4 each year, on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, on a week about basis starting with the first week with the mother in odd numbered years and the first week with the father in even numbered years, (v) upon d turning six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term four each year on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, the first half with her mother and the second half with her father in odd numbered years and vice versa in even numbered years and to coincide with the time b is with her father.   upon d turning six, for half of the long summer holidays at the end of term four each year on dates to be agreed or, failing agreement, the first half with her mother and the second half with her father in odd numbered years and vice versa in even numbered years and to coincide with the time b is with her father.   denigrating the other parent(s) or any member of their family to or in the presence of the children or allowing anyone else to do so, and (b) discussing these proceedings or the issues involved in them with or in the presence or hearing of the children, except to explain the parenting arrangements.   discussing these proceedings or the issues involved in them with or in the presence or hearing of the children, except to explain the parenting arrangements.   the mother shall engage the therapists within four months, (b) the mother shall advise each other party of the name of the therapists within seven days of engaging them, (c) the independent children’s lawyer shall provide to each of the therapists: (i) a copy of these orders and reasons for judgment, (ii) a copy of the report of dr h dated 4 october 2019, and (iii) if sought by the therapists, a copy of any medical records pertaining to the mother held by the court. (d) the mother may provide a copy of these orders and reasons for decision to her general medical practitioner.   the mother shall advise each other party of the name of the therapists within seven days of engaging them, (c) the independent children’s lawyer shall provide to each of the therapists: (i) a copy of these orders and reasons for judgment, (ii) a copy of the report of dr h dated 4 october 2019, and (iii) if sought by the therapists, a copy of any medical records pertaining to the mother held by the court. (d) the mother may provide a copy of these orders and reasons for decision to her general medical practitioner.   the independent children’s lawyer shall provide to each of the therapists: (i) a copy of these orders and reasons for judgment, (ii) a copy of the report of dr h dated 4 october 2019, and (iii) if sought by the therapists, a copy of any medical records pertaining to the mother held by the court. (d) the mother may provide a copy of these orders and reasons for decision to her general medical practitioner.   a copy of these orders and reasons for judgment, (ii) a copy of the report of dr h dated 4 october 2019, and (iii) if sought by the therapists, a copy of any medical records pertaining to the mother held by the court.  ) a copy of the report of dr h dated 4 october 2019, and (iii) if sought by the therapists, a copy of any medical records pertaining to the mother held by the court.  i) if sought by the therapists, a copy of any medical records pertaining to the mother held by the court.   the mother may provide a copy of these orders and reasons for decision to her general medical practitioner.
annexure b
date
event
20 december 2022
notations that the nsw docj provided the court with information pursuant to s248 of the children and young persons act. on 15 december the mother sought to file a new aip and the father filed a new response to the aip filed by the mother on 11 january 2022. notation that the matter is already reserved in relation to the aip filed 11 january 2022 and the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 so liberty will be extended to both parties to file supplementary submissions in relation to the docj material and what, if any, changes should be made to the final orders dated 30 june 2020 pursuant to section 70nba. the parties were ordered to notify the court of school holiday arrangements and the mother was to provide a copy of her lease agreement to the court and practitioners.
15 december 2022
mr ranwick filed a response to the aip filed 11 january 2022 by ms markwell (had not previously actually filed a response). this sought that leave be granted to re-open evidence in relation to aip, orders dated 30 june 2020 in relation to d be suspended. proceedings in relation to d be bifurcated from those relating to b. d live with father and spend time with mother for half long holidays. notation that the father now contends there has been a change in circumstances significant enough to satisfy rice v asplund. ms markwell attempted to file an aip which she requires leave to do so.
ms markwell attempted to file an aip which she requires leave to do so.
24 november 2022 (judge neville)
interim hearing in relation to contravention application filed 22 july 2022 (part-heard). notations that the court received material from dcj on 23 november 2022 which appears to be the report made by the father on 6 july 2022 in relation to possible risk of abuse of d by the mother’s then partner. the material was released. notation that should the matter proceed to the question of penalty this will be done on the papers in chambers on the basis of written submissions. the email dated 15 august 2022 is mfi-1. judgement in relation to the question of liability arising from the contravention application filed 22 july 2022 reserved.
5 october 2022 (judge neville)
interim hearing in relation to contravention application filed 22 july 2022 (part-heard). declarations in relation to the contravention application filed 22 july 2022, the part-hard hearing adjourned to 24 november 2022, costs of hearing reserved and judgment in relation to aip filed 11 january 2022 and heard on 4 october 2022 reserved.
declarations in relation to the contravention application filed 22 july 2022, the part-hard hearing adjourned to 24 november 2022, costs of hearing reserved and judgment in relation to aip filed 11 january 2022 and heard on 4 october 2022 reserved.
4 october 2022 (judge neville)
interim hearing in relation to application in a proceeding filed 11 january 2022
14 september 2022 (judge neville)
contravention applications filed 10 march 2021 and 9 august 2021 withdrawn. aip filed by mother 27 january 2022 is withdrawn.
5 august 2022 (judge neville)
date for contravention application moved from 5 october 2022 to 4 october 2022. listed for pre-hearing compliance check 14 september 2022.
22 july 2022
mother filed contravention application in relation to father’s enrolling children in schools without mother’s consent, failing to facilitate time and failing to ensure children spend time together.
5 may 2022 (judge neville)
notation that counsel advised unavailable on hearing dates listed for contraventions on 5 october 2022 and aip’s on 7 october 2022.
19 april 2022 (judge neville)
listed for contravention hearing of applications filed 10 march 2021 and 9 august 2021 on 23 august 2021. listed for hearing in relation to aip filed 11 january 2022 and 27 january 2022 on 26 august 2021.
listed for hearing in relation to aip filed 11 january 2022 and 27 january 2022 on 26 august 2021.
25 march 2022 (judge neville)
orders by consent that the vexatious proceedings application withdrawn and dismissed, the mother is restrained from filing any application other than a contravention application without first obtaining leave of the court. costs reserved.
18 march 2022 (judge neville)
notation that the aip filed 8 october 2021 has resolved in principle. parties to provide consent minute to chambers by 22 march 2022.
23 february 2023 (judge neville)
vexatious litigant hearing listed for 18 march 2022.
27 january 2022 (judge neville)
mother files aip that the recovery order in orders 25 january 2022 be stayed pending family report for b. orders: notation that d was returned but b was not. recovery order issued in relation to b.
orders: notation that d was returned but b was not. recovery order issued in relation to b.
25 january 2022 (judge neville)
children to be returned by 26 january 2022 at the town ax football ground. if not a recovery order will issue immediately. costs reserved.
19 january 2022
fathers file aip for recovery order for b and d, if the mother again removes either child she may be arrested without warrant, any costs associated with return to be paid by mother, orders remain in force for 1 month and mother pay costs of $5,000.
11 january 2022
mother files aip that orders 30 june 2020 be discharged, children live with mother, a family report be ordered and various other orders.
10 january 2022 (judge neville)
extension provided in relation to procedural directions for filing of tender bundle
13 december 2021 (judge neville)
extension provided in relation to procedural directions for filing of tender bundle.
9 december 2021 (justice aldridge sitting as the full court)
appeal and the applications in an appeal filed 15 september 2021 and 21 september 2021 were dismissed.
29 november 2021 (judge neville)
procedural orders and matter listed for half day hearing in relation to application filed 8 october 2021 on 11 february 2022.
23 november 2021(1)
the application by the fathers for costs following the applicant’s unsuccessful stay application on 7 august 20220 dismissed.
23 november 2021
mother ordered to pay costs of mr solberg in sum of $3,000. in cac1831/2020 the application filed by the mother for leave to commence property proceedings out of time is dismissed.
in cac1831/2020 the application filed by the mother for leave to commence property proceedings out of time is dismissed.
15 october 2021 (judge neville)
filing directions and listed for half day hearing on date tba in relation to application filed 8 october 2021. notation that contravention applications filed 10 march 2021 and 9 august 2021 will be dealt with after the application field 8 october 2021.
8 october 2021
fathers jointly sought declaration that the mother be declared a vexatious litigant, all extant applications be dismissed and the mother prohibited from instituting proceedings under the family law act and the crimes (domestic and personal violence) act 2007 (nsw) against the fathers
25 august 2021 (judge neville)
application to adjourn granted, costs reserved, listed for contravention hearing tba.
9 august 2021
mother files contravention application that mr ranwick disseminated the reasons for judge hughes of 30 june 2020 to fff medical centre and his partner ms an.
21 july 2021 (judge neville)
contravention hearing vacated and listed for 25 august 2021.
5 july 2021
aip filed by mr ranwick on 24 june 2021 withdrawn and dismissed. response to aip filed by mother 25 june 2021 withdrawn and dismissed. mother to make contribution of $500 towards costs of applicant father within 12 months.
24 june 2021
mr ranwick files aip seeking recovery order in relation to d and costs.
12 may 2021
notation that b was returned to mr solberg’s care on 11 may 2021 and the recovery order application is no longer pressed. aip filed 10 may 2021 dismissed. mr solberg’s oral application for costs dismissed.
10 may 2021
mr solberg files an aip for recovery order of b and costs.
13 april 2021 (judge neville)
contravention application listed for hearing before judge neville on 23 july 2021.
8 april 2021
mother files an appeal in relation to the orders made 11 march 2021 (eaa33/2021).
11 march 2021
aip filed on 15 december 2020 and amended aip filed 10 march 2021 dismissed. application for recusal dismissed. noted the only outstanding applications are the contravention application filed by the mother 10 march 2021 and the property and costs application which are reserved.
10 march 2021
mother files contravention application that d was withheld on 28 february 2021.
9 march 2021
mother amends aip filed 15 december 2020 to instead seek the interim orders of 7 august 2020 be discharged and judge hughes be recused.
20 january 2021 (ainslie-wallace, ryan & aldridge jj)
appeal eaa104 of 2020 dismissed. appeal eaa 125 of 2020 withdrawn.
appeal eaa 125 of 2020 withdrawn.
17 december 2020
orders that by consent the mother may travel to victoria during period’s children are in her care in january 2021. oral application of mr ranwick to vary handover time for d at christmas day dismissed. mother’s application to discharge order 7 of orders dated 7 august 2020 adjourned.
15 december 2020
mother files aip seeking order 7 of orders dated 7 august 2020 be dismissed (which restrains either parents from taking children outside nsw/ town e). in the alternative, the mother sought permission to travel to victoria with the children for the summer holidays.
23 october 2020
mothers aip filed 15 october 2020 withdrawn and dismissed.
15 october 2020
mother files an aip seeking she be permitted to travel to city j with d to finalise the remainder of possessions at the property.
23 september 2020
mother files amended notice of appeal (eaa 104 of 2020 and eaa 125 of 2020)
9 september 2020 (justice ryan)
appeals eaa 104 of 2020 and ea 125 of 2020 consolidated.
28 august 2020
mother files an appeal against orders made 7 august 2020 (eaa125/2020).
20 august 2020
mother makes an application for property orders (cac1831/2020).
7 august 2020
application for stay dismissed. orders for b’s time with mother until mother relocates to city ab.
3 august 2020
mother’s oral application for recusal of judge hughes refused. application for stay pending appeal adjourned.
29 july 2020
mother filed aip that the application be heard by someone other than judge hughes, the orders be set aside pending appeal, that the children live with the mother in suburb am and a variety of other orders.
27 july 2020
mother files appeal of orders 30 june 2020 (eaa104/2020)
1 july 2020 (justice ryan)
orders made granting leave for the mother to make an oral application to discontinue the appeal without filing a notice of discontinuance.
30 june 2020
judgment [2020] fcca 1751 delivered by judge hughes.
8 may 2020
mother files an appeal of orders made 24 april 2020 (ea57/2020).
22, 23 and 24 april 2020
matter re-opened for hearing. matter adjourned for judgment on date tba.
16 april 2020
the matter was listed for re-opening on 22 and 23 april 2020.
11 march 2020
mr ranwick filed an aip seeking to reopen the proceedings because of a number of incidents that occurred since the end of proceedings, including despite the mother’s clear intention to do so she did not remove the children from the fvo and a final fvo issued on 6 february 2020 with the children on it. since 29 november 2019 the mother made two complaints to police alleging mr ranwick breached the fvo by coming into contact with b. since the trial in october, the mother had spent most of the time with the children in city j and failed to make both girls available to their fathers other than for 8 nights. on 1 march 2020 mr ranwick pulled over by police due to allegation of physical abuse against d. since the trial the mother made three complaints to safework nsw about the business run by the ranwick family in town e.
29 november 2019
mother conceded the issue of spousal maintenance was not pressed at trial and that mr ranwick did not have capacity to pay. the order for spousal maintenance was discharged. contravention application summarily dismissed.
28 november 2019
mother filed contravention alleging mr ranwick failed to make spousal maintenance payments.
8 – 15 october 2019
5 day final hearing. on 15 october 2019 the proceedings were adjourned for judgment on a date to be advised.
5 july 2019
interim orders for mr ranwick to pay interim periodic de facto spousal maintenance to the mother of $200 p/w. the application for lump-sum spousal maintenance dismissed.
31 may 2019
mother filed aip seeking lump-sum and de facto spousal maintenance from mr ranwick.
12 april 2019
orders made in parenting proceedings for handover to be in suburb am because of the mother’s lack of transport. orders for the mother and mr ranwick to undertake psychiatric assessment.
5 april 2019
mr ranwick filed a contravention application
15 march 2019
mother’s car towed away immediately following handover. the vehicle was transferred from mr ranwick’s name to the mother’s name in january 2019 but mr ranwick was making the loan repayments. initially the loan repayments were in lieu of child support, but eventually he was assessed to pay child support in addition to the loan repayments so he stopped paying the loan repayments. the finance company contacted him and told him the car would be repossessed and he advised them of the location, dates and times d was due to come to him because he didn’t know the mother’s address in suburb am. at changeover repossession occurred and the mother then stopped making d available to the father.
4 march 2019
mr solberg made an offer for the mother to live with the children in his house in town f and he would move away for $300 p/w. the mother rejected the offer.
1 march 2019
interim orders made for the mother and mr solberg to have espr for b and the mother and mr ranwick to have espr for d. b to return to living with her mother and spend alternate weekends with her father. mother failed to produce compelling evidence of risk to d. orders made for d to spend time with mr ranwick alternate weekends plus one night in the off week.
12 february 2019
the mother emailed the father’s solicitors advising she had obtained emergency accommodation in suburb am, a small town halfway between town e and town f.
7 february 2019
the mother wrote to the other parties indicating she was relocating to town e. mr solberg sought proof and received no response.
23 january 2019
the mother made b available to her father on 23 january 2019. two days later she requested b be returned on the basis she intended to file an appeal (she never filed this appeal).
18 january 2019
court ordered b remain living with her father from 23 january 2019 until the mother relocated in accordance with the orders dated 15 november 2018. a recovery order in relation to b was made to be executed in the event b was not made available to her father. orders for d to spend time with her father were suspended and orders were made for further information to be obtained from gp’s etc.
11 january 2019
mother filed an affidavit making a number of allegations of the risk to d in the care of her father. mother also alleged mr ranwick breached the fvo by publishing some of their communications.
8 january 2019
the mother did not return to the town e region.
7 january 2019
mr ranwick’s solicitors requested the matter be relisted because the mother had indicated she would not be returning with the children. the mother emailed the court alleging d returned from her last visit with mr ranwick with significant injuries.
december 2018
mr solberg and mr ranwick travelled to victoria together and hired accommodation to spend time with the children. the mother saw them as forming an alliance.
15 november 2018
orders made for the mother to choose from a list of rental properties provided by mr ranwick of which mr ranwick’s mother would rent in her own name and sublet to the mother for $100 per week. the parties were to split the moving costs and the mother would be paid maintenance for the first 4 weeks.
7 november 2018
the orders of 5 september 2019 were confirmed but the date extended to 8 january 2018 by which the mother had to return the children.
1 november 2018
mother filed an application in a case seeking to discharge the orders of 5 september 2018.
31 october 2018
mr solberg filed a recovery order with respect to b.
30 october 2018
the mother did not return to town e. mr ranwick filed a contravention application and an application for a recovery order with respect to d.
5 september 2018
interim hearing. two proceedings consolidated. mother ordered to return the residence of the children to the town e region by 8 october 2018.
1 august 2018
applications heard together. by consent interim orders made for children to spend time with fathers, icl appointed and proceedings adjourned for interim hearing.
30 july 2018
mr ranwick commenced proceedings seeking the return of d to town e
26 june 2018
mr solberg commenced proceedings seeking the return of b to the town e /town f district.
[1] rice & asplund [1978] famcafc 128; (1979) flc 90-725.[2] rice & asplund [1978] famcafc 128; (1979) flc 90-725.[3] sps & pls [2008] famcafc 16; (2008) 217 flr 164; (2008) flc 93–363; [2008] famcafc 16; (2009) 39 fam lr 295. warnick j was sitting as the full court.[4] warnick j’s comments in sps & pls were cited with approval by the full court (bryant cj, finn & cronin jj) in marsden v winch (2010) 42 fam lr 1 at [46] and [47].[5] miller v harrington [2008] famcafc 150; (2008) 220 flr 300; (2009) 39 fam lr 654.[6] marsden v winch (2010) 42 fam lr 1. see also the full court’s pared down, two-step, process at [58]: (i) a requirement of there being established a prima facie case of a significant change in circumstances, and (ii) consideration of whether that change is sufficient to justify embarking on a hearing.[7] poisat & poisat (2014) flc 93-597.[8] carriel v lendrum [2015] famcafc 43; (2015) 53 fam lr 157.[9] walter & walter [2016] famcafc 56.[10] cdw v lve [2015] wasca 247, at [88] per martin cj. [11] see further, the comments by the full court in shan & prasad [2020] famcafc 189; (2020) 61 fam lr 440.[12] banham v banham (2021) 64 fam lr 361.[13] mahneey & dieter [2020] famcafc 88. such matters were originally canvassed by warnick j in sps & pls [2008] famcafc 16; (2008) 217 flr 164 especially at [48].[14] childers v leslie [2008] famcafc 5; (2009) 217 flr 124; (2009) 39 fam lr 379.[15] it should be observed that perhaps the principal reason for the delay in hearing the application was because of the various periods of covid-related “lockdowns” that took place during 2022, which resulted in the hearing dates being changed.[16] transcript pg. 3. all references to the transcript from here will be denoted by ‘t’. [17] t 4. [18] t 5- 6. [19] t 7 – 8.[20] t 9.[21] t 10.[22] t 10 – 11. [23] t 11 – 12.[24] t 13. [25] t 19.[26] t 13. [27] t 13. [28] t 13 – 14.[29] t 14. [30] t 15.[31] t 15 – 17. [32] generally, see doughty & fairhall [2022] fedcfamc1a 15.[33] mahneey & dieter [2020] famcafc 88. such matters were originally canvassed by warnick j in sps & pls [2008] famcafc 16; (2008) 217 flr 164 especially at [48].[34] t 22. [35] t 27 – 29.[36] t 30. [37] t 30. [38] t 31. [39] t 32. [40] t 32 – 33. [41] t 34. [42] t 33 – 34. [43] t 41. [44] t 35 – 39. [45] t 41. [46] the transcript references from the resumed third day of the hearing will be designated “tb”. tb 4. [47] tb 5. [48] tb 6.[49] tb 7. [50] tb 8. [51] tb 9. [52] tb 12. [53] tb 13.[54] tb 13 – 14. [55] tb 14. [56] tb 15.[57] tb 16. [58] see for example tb 18. [59] tb 18.[60] tb 19. [61] tb 20. [62] tb 21. [63] tb 21 – 22. [64] tb 22. [65] tb 23. [66] tb 24 – 25.[67] tb 26. [68] tb 27. [69] tb 28. [70] tb 29 – 30. [71] tb 30. [72] tb 31. [73] tb 32. [74] in the marriage of o’brien [1992] famca 52; (1992) 16 fam lr 723 at 727. citation added and quote clarified from law report.[75] tb 34. [76] tb 35 – 36. [77] tb 37 – 39. [78] tc 2. [79] tc 3. [80] tc 4.[81] tc 5. [82] tc 9. [83] at the time that these submissions were filed, the mother was still not living in the city ab. it should be noted that among the mother’s voluminous submissions there is a document entitled “further notes” which refers to submissions by ms markwell regarding a “hearing” called a chambers listing, which she misunderstands to have been some hearing without the parties. such a listing is only an administrative listing for associates to check on documents and the like, in chambers. there was no “hearing”; nevertheless, the mother filed further submissions, which were largely of the same kind and detail as previously filed by her.[84] see transcript of 24th march 2023 at pp. 3 – 4. hereafter, all transcript references will be “t” followed by the page number. [85] t 4.[86] t 6 & 8.[87] t 7.[88] t 9.[89] t 10.[90] t 11. there was further discussion with the mother regarding the nature of her accommodation, notably that it was not “permanent” as she had deposed. see t 33 – 34.[91] t 12.[92] t 13 – 16.[93] the mother acknowledged these matters more than once, at t 20, 24, 25 & 32.[94] this was canvassed later in the mother’s evidence where she confirmed that she, in fact, never asked the father whether he would, or would not, pay half of d’s school fees. she simply never inquired of him about this aspect at all. see t 33 – 34.[95] see t 16 – 17.[96] t 19.[97] see t 20 – 23.[98] t 24.[99] see t 26 – 29.[100] t 27.[101] t 29.[102] t 29 – 30.[103] t 30 – 31.[104] see t 35 & 38. the latter reference is to the mother raising the need for and operation of a “harman undertaking” in relation to proceedings in another court – a matter or principle that does not usually feature in the vocabulary or knowledge of most self-represented litigants.[105] t 35.[106] see the discussion at t 35 – 36.[107] see t 36 – 39.[108] t 43.[109] in particular, see s.65dac(2) and (3).[110] stephens v stephens [2010] famcafc 172; (2011) 44 fam lr 117.[111] colgate-palmolive co v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536; (1993) 46 fcr 225.[112] because of the blunt assessments of the mother made in the course of these reasons based on the evidence and her conduct, to save the parties some extra cost in the hopefully unlikely event of any other applications, i propose to recuse myself (noting that i inherited this matter from judge hughes who had the primary carriage of it for many years) and that another judge in this registry, or from elsewhere, shall have the conduct of such matters into the future. again, one hopes that the litigation will end for the sake of the children, and their parents.