last updated: 29 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
carros & carros (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 564
orders
the court orders that:
real property  the respondent wife (“the wife”) pay to the applicant husband (“the husband”) the sum of $984,116 (“the payment”). (b) the wife do all acts and things necessary to discharge registered mortgage ... to g ltd (“the mortgage”) registered on the title of the real property situate at and known as h street, suburb j in the state of victoria more particularly described in certificate of title reference volume ... folio ... (“suburb j”), at her expense, and (c) the husband do all acts and things necessary and sign all documents required to the transfer to the wife all his right title and interest in suburb j, at the expense of the wife.   the wife do all acts and things necessary to discharge registered mortgage ... to g ltd (“the mortgage”) registered on the title of the real property situate at and known as h street, suburb j in the state of victoria more particularly described in certificate of title reference volume ... folio ... (“suburb j”), at her expense, and (c) the husband do all acts and things necessary and sign all documents required to the transfer to the wife all his right title and interest in suburb j, at the expense of the wife.   the husband do all acts and things necessary and sign all documents required to the transfer to the wife all his right title and interest in suburb j, at the expense of the wife.   within 10 business days from the date, the parties engage an agent to conduct the sale (“the agent”) and a solicitor to conduct the conveyance of the sale (“the conveyancer”) and for the purpose of this order: (i) within three business days of the date, the husband nominate in writing to the wife, three real estate agents and three solicitors from which the agent and the conveyancer are to be selected, (ii) within two business days of receiving the husband’s nominations pursuant to order 3(a)(i), the wife select an agent and solicitor from those nominated by the husband and failing the wife’s election the husband select the agent and the conveyancer, and (iii) failing the husband’s nomination pursuant to order 3(a)(i), the wife select the agent and the conveyancer. (b) suburb j be sold at a public auction to be conducted no earlier than 30 days from the date and no later than 90 days from the date, and (c) the conduct of the auction and terms and conditions of sale be agreed by the parties with regard to the advice of the agent.   within three business days of the date, the husband nominate in writing to the wife, three real estate agents and three solicitors from which the agent and the conveyancer are to be selected, (ii) within two business days of receiving the husband’s nominations pursuant to order 3(a)(i), the wife select an agent and solicitor from those nominated by the husband and failing the wife’s election the husband select the agent and the conveyancer, and (iii) failing the husband’s nomination pursuant to order 3(a)(i), the wife select the agent and the conveyancer.  ) within two business days of receiving the husband’s nominations pursuant to order 3(a)(i), the wife select an agent and solicitor from those nominated by the husband and failing the wife’s election the husband select the agent and the conveyancer, and (iii) failing the husband’s nomination pursuant to order 3(a)(i), the wife select the agent and the conveyancer.  i) failing the husband’s nomination pursuant to order 3(a)(i), the wife select the agent and the conveyancer.   suburb j be sold at a public auction to be conducted no earlier than 30 days from the date and no later than 90 days from the date, and (c) the conduct of the auction and terms and conditions of sale be agreed by the parties with regard to the advice of the agent.   the conduct of the auction and terms and conditions of sale be agreed by the parties with regard to the advice of the agent.   first, to meet all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale including the agent’s fees, advertising and conveyancing costs incurred by the parties with the conveyancer but excluding their own individual legal costs, (b) second, to discharge the mortgage, (c) third, from the balance then remaining, to pay an amount to the husband being the dollar equivalent of “x” in the following equation:   second, to discharge the mortgage, (c) third, from the balance then remaining, to pay an amount to the husband being the dollar equivalent of “x” in the following equation:   third, from the balance then remaining, to pay an amount to the husband being the dollar equivalent of “x” in the following equation:
x = [44% of (a + w + h)] – [h + s] where: “a” is the net proceeds remaining from the sale of suburb j after the payments made pursuant to each of orders 5(a) and 5(b) “w” is the value of property retained by the wife pursuant to these orders fixed in the sum of $44,000 “h” is the value of property retained by the husband pursuant to these orders fixed in the sum of $34,610 “s” is an adjustment in lieu of a super split fixed in the sum of $63,062   finally, the balance then remaining to the husband.   the wife have the sole right to occupy suburb j, (b) the wife pay all instalments pursuant to the mortgage (principal and interest), and all rates, taxes and outgoings with respect to suburb j as and when they fall due, (c) the wife maintain suburb j at her sole expense, (d) neither party encumber or further encumber suburb j, including by drawing down against the mortgage, without the consent in writing of the other, and (e) the parties hold their respective interests in suburb j upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the wife pay all instalments pursuant to the mortgage (principal and interest), and all rates, taxes and outgoings with respect to suburb j as and when they fall due, (c) the wife maintain suburb j at her sole expense, (d) neither party encumber or further encumber suburb j, including by drawing down against the mortgage, without the consent in writing of the other, and (e) the parties hold their respective interests in suburb j upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the wife maintain suburb j at her sole expense, (d) neither party encumber or further encumber suburb j, including by drawing down against the mortgage, without the consent in writing of the other, and (e) the parties hold their respective interests in suburb j upon trust pursuant to these orders.   neither party encumber or further encumber suburb j, including by drawing down against the mortgage, without the consent in writing of the other, and (e) the parties hold their respective interests in suburb j upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the parties hold their respective interests in suburb j upon trust pursuant to these orders.
the business
chattels  equipment to mr k, (b) equipment to mr l, (c) equipment to mr l, (d) motor vehicle 1 to mr l, (e) motor vehicle 2 to mr l, (f) motor vehicle 3 to mr l, (g) motor vehicle 4 to mr l, (h) equipment to mr l, (i) equipment to mr l, (j) equipment to mr l, and (k) equipment to mr l.   equipment to mr l, (c) equipment to mr l, (d) motor vehicle 1 to mr l, (e) motor vehicle 2 to mr l, (f) motor vehicle 3 to mr l, (g) motor vehicle 4 to mr l, (h) equipment to mr l, (i) equipment to mr l, (j) equipment to mr l, and (k) equipment to mr l.   equipment to mr l, (d) motor vehicle 1 to mr l, (e) motor vehicle 2 to mr l, (f) motor vehicle 3 to mr l, (g) motor vehicle 4 to mr l, (h) equipment to mr l, (i) equipment to mr l, (j) equipment to mr l, and (k) equipment to mr l.   motor vehicle 1 to mr l, (e) motor vehicle 2 to mr l, (f) motor vehicle 3 to mr l, (g) motor vehicle 4 to mr l, (h) equipment to mr l, (i) equipment to mr l, (j) equipment to mr l, and (k) equipment to mr l.   motor vehicle 2 to mr l, (f) motor vehicle 3 to mr l, (g) motor vehicle 4 to mr l, (h) equipment to mr l, (i) equipment to mr l, (j) equipment to mr l, and (k) equipment to mr l.   motor vehicle 3 to mr l, (g) motor vehicle 4 to mr l, (h) equipment to mr l, (i) equipment to mr l, (j) equipment to mr l, and (k) equipment to mr l.   motor vehicle 4 to mr l, (h) equipment to mr l, (i) equipment to mr l, (j) equipment to mr l, and (k) equipment to mr l.   equipment to mr l, (i) equipment to mr l, (j) equipment to mr l, and (k) equipment to mr l.   equipment to mr l, (j) equipment to mr l, and (k) equipment to mr l.   equipment to mr l, and (k) equipment to mr l.   equipment to mr l.
other property and superannuation  each party be solely entitled, to the exclusion of the other, to all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account are to be divided equally and: (i) each of the husband and the wife be restrained from drawing against joint bank accounts pending compliance with this order, and (ii) each of the husband and the wife do all such acts and things and sign all documents required to close any joint bank account, forthwith upon the request of the other, (c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in that party’s name or encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account are to be divided equally and: (i) each of the husband and the wife be restrained from drawing against joint bank accounts pending compliance with this order, and (ii) each of the husband and the wife do all such acts and things and sign all documents required to close any joint bank account, forthwith upon the request of the other, (c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in that party’s name or encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each of the husband and the wife be restrained from drawing against joint bank accounts pending compliance with this order, and (ii) each of the husband and the wife do all such acts and things and sign all documents required to close any joint bank account, forthwith upon the request of the other,  ) each of the husband and the wife do all such acts and things and sign all documents required to close any joint bank account, forthwith upon the request of the other,   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in that party’s name or encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in that party’s name or encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
execution of documents in default
costs
procedural
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge a. humphreys:
background
parties’ positions
the wife
the husband
in default of payment
the issues  if the husband failed to make full and frank disclosure of his financial circumstances in these proceedings, (b) the value to be attributed to the business, (c) if a “one pool” or “two pool” approach should be taken with respect to the parties’ non-superannuation and superannuation interests, (d) assessment of contributions, with particular consideration given to: (i) the assets held by the wife at the commencement of cohabitation and the use of those assets during the parties’ relationship, and (ii) the parties’ contributions made after separation, (e) assessment of section 75(2) factors, including: (i) the parties’ ages, (ii) the parties’ incomes and capacity to earn income, and (iii) the wife’s allegation the husband failed to make full and frank disclosure, and (f) in the event of a default sale of the former family home, if interest should be payable on the proportion of the sale proceeds to be received by the husband.   the value to be attributed to the business, (c) if a “one pool” or “two pool” approach should be taken with respect to the parties’ non-superannuation and superannuation interests, (d) assessment of contributions, with particular consideration given to: (i) the assets held by the wife at the commencement of cohabitation and the use of those assets during the parties’ relationship, and (ii) the parties’ contributions made after separation, (e) assessment of section 75(2) factors, including: (i) the parties’ ages, (ii) the parties’ incomes and capacity to earn income, and (iii) the wife’s allegation the husband failed to make full and frank disclosure, and (f) in the event of a default sale of the former family home, if interest should be payable on the proportion of the sale proceeds to be received by the husband.   if a “one pool” or “two pool” approach should be taken with respect to the parties’ non-superannuation and superannuation interests, (d) assessment of contributions, with particular consideration given to: (i) the assets held by the wife at the commencement of cohabitation and the use of those assets during the parties’ relationship, and (ii) the parties’ contributions made after separation, (e) assessment of section 75(2) factors, including: (i) the parties’ ages, (ii) the parties’ incomes and capacity to earn income, and (iii) the wife’s allegation the husband failed to make full and frank disclosure, and (f) in the event of a default sale of the former family home, if interest should be payable on the proportion of the sale proceeds to be received by the husband.   assessment of contributions, with particular consideration given to: (i) the assets held by the wife at the commencement of cohabitation and the use of those assets during the parties’ relationship, and (ii) the parties’ contributions made after separation, (e) assessment of section 75(2) factors, including: (i) the parties’ ages, (ii) the parties’ incomes and capacity to earn income, and (iii) the wife’s allegation the husband failed to make full and frank disclosure, and (f) in the event of a default sale of the former family home, if interest should be payable on the proportion of the sale proceeds to be received by the husband.   the assets held by the wife at the commencement of cohabitation and the use of those assets during the parties’ relationship, and (ii) the parties’ contributions made after separation,  ) the parties’ contributions made after separation,   assessment of section 75(2) factors, including: (i) the parties’ ages, (ii) the parties’ incomes and capacity to earn income, and (iii) the wife’s allegation the husband failed to make full and frank disclosure, and (f) in the event of a default sale of the former family home, if interest should be payable on the proportion of the sale proceeds to be received by the husband.   the parties’ ages, (ii) the parties’ incomes and capacity to earn income, and (iii) the wife’s allegation the husband failed to make full and frank disclosure, and  ) the parties’ incomes and capacity to earn income, and (iii) the wife’s allegation the husband failed to make full and frank disclosure, and  i) the wife’s allegation the husband failed to make full and frank disclosure, and   in the event of a default sale of the former family home, if interest should be payable on the proportion of the sale proceeds to be received by the husband.
the evidence
mr d
dr f
the prognosis for [the wife] regarding her [injury] is somewhat guarded. [...] [the wife] is currently unable to work full time, or part-time, in her current role as a [hospitality worker]. i think it is unlikely she will be able to return to work as a [hospitality worker] in any capacity in the future. if her pain improves in the future, she may be able to work in a role part-time that does not involve lifting, manual labour or standing for prolonged periods of time.
legal principles
parties’ property interests
assets & liabilities
superannuation
financial resources
legal costs
allegations of non-disclosure
business record-keeping
other forms of alleged non-disclosure
evidence in relation to the disputed assets and liabilities
husband’s business  this is a common occurrence in personal enterprises, (b) some of those expenses were from the financial year ended 30 june 2022, in respect of which he had applied a 0% weighting, and (c) in relation to those expenses from the financial year ended 30 june 2021, when undertaking his valuation he had adjusted the average profit of $47,000 to $50,000 to provide a “buffer” of approximately $3,000 which would readily allow for discrepancies of this scale. he noted even if there were mischaracterised expenses totalling $1,000 per annum (so, higher than the 1,300 over the 15 month period revealed in cross-examination), this would still leave a buffer of $2,000.   some of those expenses were from the financial year ended 30 june 2022, in respect of which he had applied a 0% weighting, and (c) in relation to those expenses from the financial year ended 30 june 2021, when undertaking his valuation he had adjusted the average profit of $47,000 to $50,000 to provide a “buffer” of approximately $3,000 which would readily allow for discrepancies of this scale. he noted even if there were mischaracterised expenses totalling $1,000 per annum (so, higher than the 1,300 over the 15 month period revealed in cross-examination), this would still leave a buffer of $2,000.   in relation to those expenses from the financial year ended 30 june 2021, when undertaking his valuation he had adjusted the average profit of $47,000 to $50,000 to provide a “buffer” of approximately $3,000 which would readily allow for discrepancies of this scale. he noted even if there were mischaracterised expenses totalling $1,000 per annum (so, higher than the 1,300 over the 15 month period revealed in cross-examination), this would still leave a buffer of $2,000.
assets of the business
is it just and equitable to make an order?
one pool or two pool approach?
contributions  the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage ... to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage ... to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ..., including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker ...   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage ... to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ..., including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker ...   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ..., including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker ...
non-superannuation assets  $121,000 to discharge the mortgage secured against suburb m (meaning suburb m realised approximately $520,101 net after discharge of the suburb m mortgage), (b) $115,000 to repay the balance then owing on the initial suburb j loan, (c) $16,287 to discharge other debts / meet other expenses associated with both properties, and (d) $388,000 was later applied towards construction of the former family home at suburb j and to purchase the wife’s motor vehicle ($70,000). the husband gave unchallenged evidence these funds were also used to purchase motor vehicle 5 ($15,000), two pieces of furniture (approximately $13,000) and to meet the cost of medical treatment undertaken by the wife (approximately $3,000).   $115,000 to repay the balance then owing on the initial suburb j loan, (c) $16,287 to discharge other debts / meet other expenses associated with both properties, and (d) $388,000 was later applied towards construction of the former family home at suburb j and to purchase the wife’s motor vehicle ($70,000). the husband gave unchallenged evidence these funds were also used to purchase motor vehicle 5 ($15,000), two pieces of furniture (approximately $13,000) and to meet the cost of medical treatment undertaken by the wife (approximately $3,000).   $16,287 to discharge other debts / meet other expenses associated with both properties, and (d) $388,000 was later applied towards construction of the former family home at suburb j and to purchase the wife’s motor vehicle ($70,000). the husband gave unchallenged evidence these funds were also used to purchase motor vehicle 5 ($15,000), two pieces of furniture (approximately $13,000) and to meet the cost of medical treatment undertaken by the wife (approximately $3,000).   $388,000 was later applied towards construction of the former family home at suburb j and to purchase the wife’s motor vehicle ($70,000). the husband gave unchallenged evidence these funds were also used to purchase motor vehicle 5 ($15,000), two pieces of furniture (approximately $13,000) and to meet the cost of medical treatment undertaken by the wife (approximately $3,000).   the balance of proceeds from the sale of suburb m, (b) interest from investment of that balance by the wife in the amount of $39,880 (with tax paid by her on that interest), (c) proceeds from the sale of assets (including furniture, the wife’s previous car and motor vehicle 5), and (d) a loan of $360,000 in 2013 and a further loan of $86,917 in 2016 (“the suburb j construction loans”).   interest from investment of that balance by the wife in the amount of $39,880 (with tax paid by her on that interest), (c) proceeds from the sale of assets (including furniture, the wife’s previous car and motor vehicle 5), and (d) a loan of $360,000 in 2013 and a further loan of $86,917 in 2016 (“the suburb j construction loans”).   proceeds from the sale of assets (including furniture, the wife’s previous car and motor vehicle 5), and (d) a loan of $360,000 in 2013 and a further loan of $86,917 in 2016 (“the suburb j construction loans”).   a loan of $360,000 in 2013 and a further loan of $86,917 in 2016 (“the suburb j construction loans”).   his decision to work the business on a full-time basis “was very slow on the uptake”, (b) he “ambled along casually for many years and lacked the enthusiasm to further the business”, and (c) “[t]he marriage never financially benefited from the business.”   he “ambled along casually for many years and lacked the enthusiasm to further the business”, and (c) “[t]he marriage never financially benefited from the business.”   “[t]he marriage never financially benefited from the business.”   august 2019:
only now can i see how much you’ve contributed with the everyday running of a household all the things you’ve put in place your beautiful kindness when we spoke on wednesday you’ve always been so forgiving & i’ve taken all that u do & don’t say for granted you are so worth fighting for i have been so selfish by not supporting you you have worked harder than every lately in doing my tax, i can see all that u pay for omg – i’m so sorry ...   august 2019:
i bag u for not being able to spell i again eat my words as i have no idea about internet & technology, i don’t know what to do with the [yard] i had to change [tools] over yesterday not hard but u usually did it   august 2019:
i know i took for granted all that u did the set up of wifi, the computer, the printer, scanner, the, the tv’s, the spraying of weeds, the mowing, the help with the animals, and even your being here gave me that sense of safety & security   september 2019:
the kitty cats & animals miss u especially the cats they were so happy the day u were here mowing they were so excited when i got home because u were here they were always so well taken care of when i was away thank u for all that u did
superannuation
assessment of contributions
in our opinion it is not so much a matter of erosion of contribution but a question of what weight is to be attached, in all the circumstances, to the initial contribution. it is necessary to weigh the initial contributions by a party with all other relevant contributions of both the husband and the wife. in considering the weight to be attached to the initial contribution, in this case of the husband, regard must be had to the use made by the parties of that contribution. in the present case that use was a substantial contribution to the purchase price of the matrimonial home: see also campo and campo (unreported, full court (ellis, lindenmayer and finn jj), sydney, delivered 19 may 1995 at pages 21 and 22 of the joint judgment) and zahra and zahra (unreported, full court sydney, delivered 3 october 1996, per ellis j. at page 10).
we think that there is force in the proposition that a reference to the value of an item as at the date of the commencement of cohabitation without reference to its value to the parties at the time it was realised or its value to the parties at the time of trial, if still intact, may not give adequate recognition to the importance of its contribution to the pool of assets ultimately available for distribution towards the parties. thus where the pool of assets available for distribution between the parties consists of say an investment portfolio or a block of land or a painting that has risen significantly in value as a result of market forces, it is appropriate to give recognition to its value at the time of hearing or the time it was realised rather than simply pay attention to its initial value at the time of commencement of cohabitation. but in so doing it is equally as important to give recognition to the myriad of other contributions that each of the parties has made during the course of their relationship.   in 1999, as security for the loan to acquire suburb j, (b) upon its sale in 2010, to discharge the suburb m mortgage and repay the initial suburb j loan, and (c) after its sale in 2010, the net sale proceeds and interest thereon were applied towards the construction of the former family home at suburb j.   upon its sale in 2010, to discharge the suburb m mortgage and repay the initial suburb j loan, and (c) after its sale in 2010, the net sale proceeds and interest thereon were applied towards the construction of the former family home at suburb j.   after its sale in 2010, the net sale proceeds and interest thereon were applied towards the construction of the former family home at suburb j.
matters relevant pursuant to section 75(2)
family violence
conclusions
alteration of property interests
interest in the event of a default sale
costs of mention
orders
associate: dated: 17 may 2023
dated: 17 may 2023
[1] stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52.[2] babett & falconer [2015] famcafc 124; (2015) flc 98-067 at [44]; cited with approval in perrin & perrin (no 2) [2018] famcafc 122 at [57]–[58] referring in turn to dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154. [3] weir v weir [1992] famca 69.[4] morrison v morrison [1994] famca 153; (1995) flc 92-573 at [81,671].[5] k & k [2002] famca 1150, applying chang v su (2002) famca 156 and weir v weir [1992] famca 69.[6] in the marriage of c & c [2005] famca 429.[7] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154 at [21].[8] norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17; (1986) 161 clr 513 at [524].[9] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154 at [25].[10] jabour & jabour [2019] famfafc 78 at [73] – [87]; benson & drury [2020] famfafc 303 at [35].[11] [2017] famcafc 14; (2017) flc 93-759 at [20].[12] (1998) flc 92-844 74 at [28].[13] [2019] famfafc 78 [at 55].[14] [2007] famca 313 at [26][15] jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78 [at 43].[16] [2018] famcafc 146.[17] [2019] famcafc 78.[18] [2020] famcafc 102.[19] [2022] fedcfamc1a 53.[20] demeny & ogden [2021] fedcfamc1a 21 citing with approval sinclair and sinclair [2000] famca 262.