last updated: 5 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sarina & donald [2023] fedcfamc2f 574
orders
the court orders that:  at any reasonable time when either of the children requests to do so, and (b) each tuesday at 6.30pm, and (c) each saturday at 11.30am.   each tuesday at 6.30pm, and (c) each saturday at 11.30am.   each saturday at 11.30am.
ex-tempore reasons for judgment
judge mansfield:
material
relevant law  identify the parties competing proposals, (b) identify the issues in dispute, (c) identify any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, and (d) consider the matters in section 60cc of the act and make findings if possible.   identify the issues in dispute, (c) identify any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, and (d) consider the matters in section 60cc of the act and make findings if possible.   identify any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, and (d) consider the matters in section 60cc of the act and make findings if possible.   consider the matters in section 60cc of the act and make findings if possible.   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
the parties competing proposals  the existing final parenting orders dated 24 december 2020 be suspended. (d) the children live with her, (e) the father be restrained from removing the children from her care, (f) an independent children's lawyer be appointed, (g) the parties participate in the preparation of a child impact report, (h) the father undergo a forensic psychiatric assessment, (i) the children have no physical contact with the father but be able to communicate with them at all times.   the children live with her, (e) the father be restrained from removing the children from her care, (f) an independent children's lawyer be appointed, (g) the parties participate in the preparation of a child impact report, (h) the father undergo a forensic psychiatric assessment, (i) the children have no physical contact with the father but be able to communicate with them at all times.   the father be restrained from removing the children from her care, (f) an independent children's lawyer be appointed, (g) the parties participate in the preparation of a child impact report, (h) the father undergo a forensic psychiatric assessment, (i) the children have no physical contact with the father but be able to communicate with them at all times.   an independent children's lawyer be appointed, (g) the parties participate in the preparation of a child impact report, (h) the father undergo a forensic psychiatric assessment, (i) the children have no physical contact with the father but be able to communicate with them at all times.   the parties participate in the preparation of a child impact report, (h) the father undergo a forensic psychiatric assessment, (i) the children have no physical contact with the father but be able to communicate with them at all times.   the father undergo a forensic psychiatric assessment, (i) the children have no physical contact with the father but be able to communicate with them at all times.   the children have no physical contact with the father but be able to communicate with them at all times.   provided the father agree to the safety plan proposed by cyps, the children spend time with the father from 11.00am-2.00pm every sunday in a public place, (b) a single expert witness be appointed to prepare a report as soon as practicable.   a single expert witness be appointed to prepare a report as soon as practicable.   the mother’s application be dismissed, (b) the existing final parenting orders dated 24 december 2020 remain in force, (c) the mother be restrained from withholding the children.   the existing final parenting orders dated 24 december 2020 remain in force, (c) the mother be restrained from withholding the children.   the mother be restrained from withholding the children.
issues in dispute  factual findings about the past and fact based enquiry about the future are two different things, (b) risk does not need to be established on the balance of probabilities in the same way that facts are proven, (c) risks of harm are postulated from known historical facts and present circumstances, (d) in assessing whether there is a risk that something may happen, ‘possibilities’ are a legitimate basis for finding that there is such a risk, as long as there is a proper basis for those ‘possibilities’, (e) allegations of family violence should be cast and considered in the terms of section 4 and section 4ab of the act, (f) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.   risk does not need to be established on the balance of probabilities in the same way that facts are proven, (c) risks of harm are postulated from known historical facts and present circumstances, (d) in assessing whether there is a risk that something may happen, ‘possibilities’ are a legitimate basis for finding that there is such a risk, as long as there is a proper basis for those ‘possibilities’, (e) allegations of family violence should be cast and considered in the terms of section 4 and section 4ab of the act, (f) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.   risks of harm are postulated from known historical facts and present circumstances, (d) in assessing whether there is a risk that something may happen, ‘possibilities’ are a legitimate basis for finding that there is such a risk, as long as there is a proper basis for those ‘possibilities’, (e) allegations of family violence should be cast and considered in the terms of section 4 and section 4ab of the act, (f) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.   in assessing whether there is a risk that something may happen, ‘possibilities’ are a legitimate basis for finding that there is such a risk, as long as there is a proper basis for those ‘possibilities’, (e) allegations of family violence should be cast and considered in the terms of section 4 and section 4ab of the act, (f) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.   allegations of family violence should be cast and considered in the terms of section 4 and section 4ab of the act, (f) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.   the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.
agreed or uncontested facts
child and youth protection services (cyps) material
under ‘team leader comment’
the concerns are for emotional abuse and risk of sexual abuse by the father, due to ongoing inappropriate behaviours bordering on grooming. the girls are of an age where they are coming into puberty (8 and 12) and have expressed concerns about their father’s behaviour. the father reportedly walks around naked, watches them shower, doesn’t allow them to close the door when showering, hugs them whilst he is naked despite them asking him to stop, comes into the female bathroom with them at the pool as he identifies as non- binary, despite the girls not wanting him to come in with them, comes into the girls bedroom a few times a week in the middle of the night standing over them and breathes heavily. whilst there is no overt allegation of sexual abuse, the father’s behaviour appears to be having a significant impact on the girl’s wellbeing and could be a risk factor for sexual abuse and grooming in future. there are concerns for an element of control and secrecy around the father threatening to take the girls money away if they try to shut the bathroom door, and that they are not allowed to tell their mother. the girls have reportedly seen their father pin his new partner up against the wall, grabbing and yelling at her on occasions. there have been no prior interventions. there is a history of concern in relation to the father’s behaviours: coercive control against the mother, multiple incidences of sexual abuse of the mother, grabbing and pinning [x] up against a wall. i agree with the recommendation for a 7 day appraisal due to the cumulation of concerns impacting on the girls, and the father’s alleged history of sexual violence and control.
under ‘cyps history’
this is the 8th report received in regards to the children, with the two previous reports regarding family violence occurring between the parents, the first being in 2018 previous themes of concerns reported in [early] 2022 – the mother’s partner came and then left, when the mother went upstairs and father demanded sex while in the room with the girls and started to try and rape the mother.
under ‘findings and recommendations:’
assessor has formed reasonable suspicion that the children may be at risk of emotional abuse and sexual abuse, and whilst mother is acting protectively at present, assessor is of the view that should they return to father's they may be in need of care and protection.
findings
in mid 2021 [x] began dressing in masculine clothing. she cut her hair quite short, and she was speaking with me openly about how she didn't like ‘girly things and girls’. [x] has been open about these discussions with me. after a number of months of [x] expressing herself in this way, i told her: “i want you to understand puberty and the options available if you want to speak with someone other than your mother and i about what you are feeling, you can request that”. [x] said to me: “i don’t know yet if i want to be a girl or boy in the long run” in response to this, i told her “puberty is not reversible”. i do recall that i mentioned that people going through similar things have elected to take puberty blockers. [x] said to me after this conversation “i think i am ok just being a girl”. i responded and said: “that’s absolutely fine. if you ever want to talk about it please bring it up and we can talk about it all together”. another conversation occurred sometime later, [x] and i had a neutral discussion in relation to transgender persons. we spoke about surgery options that some transgender people have for gender affirmation.
in 2021, [x] also advised me: “i’m not interested in [g] (her previous flame) anymore, i really like this girl named [h].” [x] has been open with me and content to have these communications with me. i understand [ms sarina] is resistant to my involvement. at no time did i encourage or suggest that [x] needed to be a boy, nor that she was ‘transgender,’ as alleged by [ms sarina] in her affidavit.
the matters in section 60cc of the act  there is a distinct lack of willingness or ability for the parents to communicate in order to effectively co-parent with respect to complex long-term issues like sexuality and gender identity, (b) the father is unable or unwilling to reflect upon their behaviours and consider them from the children’s perspectives, and (c) there is an absence of age appropriate focus on the children’s lives.   the father is unable or unwilling to reflect upon their behaviours and consider them from the children’s perspectives, and (c) there is an absence of age appropriate focus on the children’s lives.   there is an absence of age appropriate focus on the children’s lives.   the likelihood of ongoing and escalation of conflict as between the parents is high. (b) the likelihood of the children being exposed to conflict as between the parents is high. (c) there is a risk of the children being abused by way of indirect use in a sexual activity or by way of exposure to sexual abuse. (d) there is a higher risk of the children being psychologically harmed. (e) on the mother’s evidence, the children are not coping with the lifestyle and parenting choices of the father, the dysfunction is escalating, the father is unable or unwilling to see it and is encouraging it. on the father’s evidence, the father is appropriately managing whatever issues are being raised by the children. it is not clear to me however why the mother would be making the allegations of what the father says are false or at least misrepresented. it does not seem to me to be out of a spiteful campaign to alienate the children or to deprive the father of time with the children. my inclination is to prefer the assessment of the mother.   the likelihood of the children being exposed to conflict as between the parents is high. (c) there is a risk of the children being abused by way of indirect use in a sexual activity or by way of exposure to sexual abuse. (d) there is a higher risk of the children being psychologically harmed. (e) on the mother’s evidence, the children are not coping with the lifestyle and parenting choices of the father, the dysfunction is escalating, the father is unable or unwilling to see it and is encouraging it. on the father’s evidence, the father is appropriately managing whatever issues are being raised by the children. it is not clear to me however why the mother would be making the allegations of what the father says are false or at least misrepresented. it does not seem to me to be out of a spiteful campaign to alienate the children or to deprive the father of time with the children. my inclination is to prefer the assessment of the mother.   there is a risk of the children being abused by way of indirect use in a sexual activity or by way of exposure to sexual abuse. (d) there is a higher risk of the children being psychologically harmed. (e) on the mother’s evidence, the children are not coping with the lifestyle and parenting choices of the father, the dysfunction is escalating, the father is unable or unwilling to see it and is encouraging it. on the father’s evidence, the father is appropriately managing whatever issues are being raised by the children. it is not clear to me however why the mother would be making the allegations of what the father says are false or at least misrepresented. it does not seem to me to be out of a spiteful campaign to alienate the children or to deprive the father of time with the children. my inclination is to prefer the assessment of the mother.   there is a higher risk of the children being psychologically harmed. (e) on the mother’s evidence, the children are not coping with the lifestyle and parenting choices of the father, the dysfunction is escalating, the father is unable or unwilling to see it and is encouraging it. on the father’s evidence, the father is appropriately managing whatever issues are being raised by the children. it is not clear to me however why the mother would be making the allegations of what the father says are false or at least misrepresented. it does not seem to me to be out of a spiteful campaign to alienate the children or to deprive the father of time with the children. my inclination is to prefer the assessment of the mother.   on the mother’s evidence, the children are not coping with the lifestyle and parenting choices of the father, the dysfunction is escalating, the father is unable or unwilling to see it and is encouraging it. on the father’s evidence, the father is appropriately managing whatever issues are being raised by the children. it is not clear to me however why the mother would be making the allegations of what the father says are false or at least misrepresented. it does not seem to me to be out of a spiteful campaign to alienate the children or to deprive the father of time with the children. my inclination is to prefer the assessment of the mother.
in marvel & marvel [2010] famcafc 101, the full court commented at paragraph 120:
as has frequently been emphasised interim parenting proceedings, and orders made as a consequence, are a necessary but temporary measure until all the evidence can be tested, evaluated and weighed at a final hearing by the making of final parenting orders. decisions judicial officers have to make in interim proceedings are difficult and, often for very good reason, a conservative approach, or one which is likely to avoid harm to a child is adopted. this is often to the understandable distress of a party who may not achieve the outcome he or she desires, or thinks to be in the best interests of their child or children...
the orders  i take into account the submissions on behalf of the father that they do not necessarily disagree with the purpose of the plan to make the children feel comfortable in their home, but signing it amounts to a concession that it is necessary at all. it is not appropriate to leverage the father into a process outside of this court on pain of no time with the children. (b) the interim orders do not provide for the children to be in the father’s home which is the environment that the plan is aimed at. (c) the finding of risk is already sufficiently ameliorated by: (i) the condition that the time occur in a public place and for only 3 hours, and (ii) the reality of these now ongoing proceedings.   the interim orders do not provide for the children to be in the father’s home which is the environment that the plan is aimed at. (c) the finding of risk is already sufficiently ameliorated by: (i) the condition that the time occur in a public place and for only 3 hours, and (ii) the reality of these now ongoing proceedings.   the finding of risk is already sufficiently ameliorated by: (i) the condition that the time occur in a public place and for only 3 hours, and (ii) the reality of these now ongoing proceedings.   the condition that the time occur in a public place and for only 3 hours, and (ii) the reality of these now ongoing proceedings.  ) the reality of these now ongoing proceedings.
associate: dated: 17 may 2023
dated: 17 may 2023