last updated: 7 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
pardoe & pardoe [2023] fedcfamc2f 767
orders
the court orders that:  the sum of approximately $40,000 to b accountants,  the sum of approximately $160,000 to the applicant husband, and   the sum of approximately $120,000 to the respondent wife.   his share of the funds pursuant to order 4 above, (b) his motor vehicle 1, (c) his motor vehicle 2, (d) his motor vehicle 3, (e) his motor vehicle 4, (f) the recreational vehicle, (g) the funds in all bank accounts in his sole name, (h) his cash savings, (i) his personal items and effects, (j) his superannuation interests (if any), (k) all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   his motor vehicle 1, (c) his motor vehicle 2, (d) his motor vehicle 3, (e) his motor vehicle 4, (f) the recreational vehicle, (g) the funds in all bank accounts in his sole name, (h) his cash savings, (i) his personal items and effects, (j) his superannuation interests (if any), (k) all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   his motor vehicle 2, (d) his motor vehicle 3, (e) his motor vehicle 4, (f) the recreational vehicle, (g) the funds in all bank accounts in his sole name, (h) his cash savings, (i) his personal items and effects, (j) his superannuation interests (if any), (k) all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   his motor vehicle 3, (e) his motor vehicle 4, (f) the recreational vehicle, (g) the funds in all bank accounts in his sole name, (h) his cash savings, (i) his personal items and effects, (j) his superannuation interests (if any), (k) all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   his motor vehicle 4, (f) the recreational vehicle, (g) the funds in all bank accounts in his sole name, (h) his cash savings, (i) his personal items and effects, (j) his superannuation interests (if any), (k) all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   the recreational vehicle, (g) the funds in all bank accounts in his sole name, (h) his cash savings, (i) his personal items and effects, (j) his superannuation interests (if any), (k) all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   the funds in all bank accounts in his sole name, (h) his cash savings, (i) his personal items and effects, (j) his superannuation interests (if any), (k) all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   his cash savings, (i) his personal items and effects, (j) his superannuation interests (if any), (k) all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   his personal items and effects, (j) his superannuation interests (if any), (k) all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   his superannuation interests (if any), (k) all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   all liabilities in his sole name and he shall indemnify the respondent with respect to such liabilities.   her share of the funds pursuant to order 4 above, (b) her motor vehicle 5, (c) the funds in all bank accounts in her sole name, (d) her cash savings, (e) her personal items and effects, (f) her superannuation interests (if any), (g) her interests in c pty ltd and d pty ltd, (h) all liabilities in his sole name and she shall indemnify the applicant husband with respect to such liabilities.   her motor vehicle 5, (c) the funds in all bank accounts in her sole name, (d) her cash savings, (e) her personal items and effects, (f) her superannuation interests (if any), (g) her interests in c pty ltd and d pty ltd, (h) all liabilities in his sole name and she shall indemnify the applicant husband with respect to such liabilities.   the funds in all bank accounts in her sole name, (d) her cash savings, (e) her personal items and effects, (f) her superannuation interests (if any), (g) her interests in c pty ltd and d pty ltd, (h) all liabilities in his sole name and she shall indemnify the applicant husband with respect to such liabilities.   her cash savings, (e) her personal items and effects, (f) her superannuation interests (if any), (g) her interests in c pty ltd and d pty ltd, (h) all liabilities in his sole name and she shall indemnify the applicant husband with respect to such liabilities.   her personal items and effects, (f) her superannuation interests (if any), (g) her interests in c pty ltd and d pty ltd, (h) all liabilities in his sole name and she shall indemnify the applicant husband with respect to such liabilities.   her superannuation interests (if any), (g) her interests in c pty ltd and d pty ltd, (h) all liabilities in his sole name and she shall indemnify the applicant husband with respect to such liabilities.   her interests in c pty ltd and d pty ltd, (h) all liabilities in his sole name and she shall indemnify the applicant husband with respect to such liabilities.   all liabilities in his sole name and she shall indemnify the applicant husband with respect to such liabilities.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property (including choses in action), in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account is to be divided equally between the parties, (c) each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to, or earned by, the other, (d) all insurance policies become the sole property of the beneficiary nominated therein, (e) each party be solely liable for, and indemnify the other against: (i) any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (ii) all other liabilities in the other party’s sole name or which they are otherwise responsible for, (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account is to be divided equally between the parties, (c) each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to, or earned by, the other, (d) all insurance policies become the sole property of the beneficiary nominated therein, (e) each party be solely liable for, and indemnify the other against: (i) any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (ii) all other liabilities in the other party’s sole name or which they are otherwise responsible for, (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to, or earned by, the other, (d) all insurance policies become the sole property of the beneficiary nominated therein, (e) each party be solely liable for, and indemnify the other against: (i) any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (ii) all other liabilities in the other party’s sole name or which they are otherwise responsible for, (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   all insurance policies become the sole property of the beneficiary nominated therein, (e) each party be solely liable for, and indemnify the other against: (i) any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (ii) all other liabilities in the other party’s sole name or which they are otherwise responsible for, (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for, and indemnify the other against: (i) any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (ii) all other liabilities in the other party’s sole name or which they are otherwise responsible for, (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (ii) all other liabilities in the other party’s sole name or which they are otherwise responsible for,  ) all other liabilities in the other party’s sole name or which they are otherwise responsible for,   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment(delivered ex tempore, revised from transcript)[1]judge blake:
background  an order to file a notice of address for service by 15 december 2021, (b) an order to file a response, financial statement, financial questionnaire, e program certificate and affidavit by 5 january 2022, (c) a further order on 15 february 2022 that the wife file a notice of address for service by 22 february 2022, (d) a further order on 15 february 2022 that the wife file her responding material within 35 days from the date of that order, and (e) a further order made on 26 april 2022 that the wife file responding material by no later than 4.00 pm on 24 may 2022.   an order to file a response, financial statement, financial questionnaire, e program certificate and affidavit by 5 january 2022, (c) a further order on 15 february 2022 that the wife file a notice of address for service by 22 february 2022, (d) a further order on 15 february 2022 that the wife file her responding material within 35 days from the date of that order, and (e) a further order made on 26 april 2022 that the wife file responding material by no later than 4.00 pm on 24 may 2022.   a further order on 15 february 2022 that the wife file a notice of address for service by 22 february 2022, (d) a further order on 15 february 2022 that the wife file her responding material within 35 days from the date of that order, and (e) a further order made on 26 april 2022 that the wife file responding material by no later than 4.00 pm on 24 may 2022.   a further order on 15 february 2022 that the wife file her responding material within 35 days from the date of that order, and (e) a further order made on 26 april 2022 that the wife file responding material by no later than 4.00 pm on 24 may 2022.   a further order made on 26 april 2022 that the wife file responding material by no later than 4.00 pm on 24 may 2022.   the wife have liberty to issue subpoenas for financial records to a range of persons and entities, (b) the wife complete all accounting activities required to progress these proceedings within 90 days of the date of the orders, and (c) the wife file a trial affidavit 14 days prior to trial.   the wife complete all accounting activities required to progress these proceedings within 90 days of the date of the orders, and (c) the wife file a trial affidavit 14 days prior to trial.   the wife file a trial affidavit 14 days prior to trial.
the application to proceed undefended
the material before the court
relevant principles
should an order for the alteration of property interest be made?
assets and liabilities of the parties
contributions
consideration of the contributions
section 75(2) factors  the repeated non-compliance of the wife has caused the husband to incur costs he might not ordinarily have incurred had there been compliance. that includes not just the costs of the final hearing but also the costs incurred in repeated attendances before the court. those costs, given the costs notice that i have seen, would seem to total at least $26,000, and (b) the wife’s non-disclosure of her financial position is a matter of concern. she will walk away under the order that is proposed by the husband with the continued ownership of the d pty ltd company, whatever assets it may hold, and whatever intellectual property of c pty ltd that may be there.   the wife’s non-disclosure of her financial position is a matter of concern. she will walk away under the order that is proposed by the husband with the continued ownership of the d pty ltd company, whatever assets it may hold, and whatever intellectual property of c pty ltd that may be there.   the funds held by the victorian supreme court to be split equally between the parties with the debt to b accountants to be paid, effectively, from the wife’s share. i agree that the wife is responsible for paying b accountants. the husband ceased to have any ownership, interest or active role in c pty ltd well before liquidators were appointed. in short, the appointment of liquidators, and the events leading to it occurred on the watch of the wife. in summary, this will result in the funds from the victorian supreme court being dispersed in the following ways. approximately $40,000 to b accountants, approximately $160,000 to the husband and approximately $120,000 to the wife. (b) the parties to otherwise retain the assets in their possession. this results in the husband retaining a motor vehicle 1 valued at $5,000, a motor vehicle 2 valued at $2,000, a motor vehicle 3 valued at $12,000, a motor vehicle 4 valued at $10,000 and a recreational vehicle valued at $12,000, as well as other assets of nominal value. the wife would retain a motor vehicle 5 valued at $11,000, as well as other assets of nominal value.   the parties to otherwise retain the assets in their possession. this results in the husband retaining a motor vehicle 1 valued at $5,000, a motor vehicle 2 valued at $2,000, a motor vehicle 3 valued at $12,000, a motor vehicle 4 valued at $10,000 and a recreational vehicle valued at $12,000, as well as other assets of nominal value. the wife would retain a motor vehicle 5 valued at $11,000, as well as other assets of nominal value.
associate: dated: 23 june 2023
dated: 23 june 2023
[1] settled reasons were prepared upon the request of the respondent wife which was received on 13 june 2023.