last updated: 31 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
zidan & omran [2023] fedcfamc2f 615
orders
the court orders that:  70% to the mother, and (b) 30% to the father,   30% to the father,
taking into account the part property payments the parties have already received.   each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including superannuation and choses-in-action) held in the name or possession of that party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all shares, debentures, units in trusts and monies in bank, credit union or building society accounts in their sole name, (c) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability, bill or account in the name of that party, (d) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) each party forgoes any claim they may have had to any superannuation benefit belonging to the other.   each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all shares, debentures, units in trusts and monies in bank, credit union or building society accounts in their sole name, (c) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability, bill or account in the name of that party, (d) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) each party forgoes any claim they may have had to any superannuation benefit belonging to the other.   each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability, bill or account in the name of that party, (d) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) each party forgoes any claim they may have had to any superannuation benefit belonging to the other.   each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) each party forgoes any claim they may have had to any superannuation benefit belonging to the other.   each party forgoes any claim they may have had to any superannuation benefit belonging to the other.
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
issues in dispute
father’s application to proceed undefended and the mother’s non-compliance with orders
the mother’s non-compliance with orders
culture
family violence
incident leading to initial separation  early] 2019, we separated when [mr omran] left the former matrimonial home after he tried to strangle me and threatened me with a [weapon] and saying he would kill me if i called the police. i was too frightened to go the police.
reconciliation and final separation
department of families, fairness, and housing
the father’s concerns about the mother’s parenting
i am the mother and i cannot understand why my children were taken from my care by the police in [late] 2021. i know i am a good mother and i believe i know what is best for my children. i want to protect them and the children learned bad things from the father.
the mother’s family
withholding of the children and recovery orders
the mother’s capacity
the children’s views
i want my kids, i do not accept this. i cannot live my life without them. i cannot do anything, i am by myself ... i tell the truth that i feel.
the children’s needs
the father’s attempts to arrange for the mother to see the children
parenting general principles and conclusions  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both their parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. the second consideration prevails over the first when applicable.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. the second consideration prevails over the first when applicable.
for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful.
property
the parties’ legal and equitable interests
assessing the parties’ contributions
mortgage and section 128 certificate
relevant section 75(2) factors
property general principles and conclusions
it will be recalled that s 79(2) provides that "[t]he court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. section 79(4) prescribes matters that must be taken into account in considering what order (if any) should be made under the section. the requirements of the two sub-sections are not to be conflated. in every case in which a property settlement order under s 79 is sought, it is necessary to satisfy the court that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.” the expression “just and equitable” is a qualitative description of a conclusion reached after examination of a range of potentially competing considerations. it does not admit of exhaustive definition. it is not possible to chart its metes and bounds.” [footnotes omitted]
firstly, in order to ascertain whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order, it is necessary to identify the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. the high court emphasised the word ‘existing’. secondly, although s.79 gives the court a broad power to make property settlement orders it may not be exercised in an unprincipled fashion. there must be no assumption that the parties’ interests are or should be different to their existing interests. thirdly, when considering whether making a property settlement order is just and equitable the court must not assume that one or the other party has the right to a property adjustment order. the court must give separate consideration to s.79(2) in addition to the matters referred to in s.79(4).
associate: dated: 25 may 2023
dated: 25 may 2023