last updated: 17 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mcmanus & bracken (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 640
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
live with and spend time  during school terms in week one of a two-week cycle, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day) and in the same cycle or rotation as in place pursuant to interim orders, (b) during school terms in week two of a two-week cycle, from the conclusion of school on wednesday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day) and in the same cycle or rotation as in place pursuant to interim orders, (c) during school holiday periods: (i) for one half of the school term holiday period at dates and times as agreed, and failing agreement, the first half in 2023 and the second half in 2024 (with the mother to have the second half in 2023 and the first half in 2024), and with changeover to take place at 12:00pm (midday) on the middle saturday of the relevant holiday period. (ii) term holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of school term and conclude at the commencement of first day of school next term. (iii) during the long summer holiday period at dates and times as agreed and failing agreement on a week about basis: commencing the first week with the father in 2023/2024 summer holidays (and commencing the second week with the mother in 2023/2024). commencing the second week with the father in the 2024/2025 summer holidays (and commencing the first week with the mother in 2024/2025). the summer holidays are deemed to commence at 12noon on the day following the conclusion of school and shall conclude at 12noon on the day prior to the commencement of the school year. changeovers for week about shall take place at 12noon during the summer holidays. (d) on father’s day weekend, from 4:00pm on the saturday before father’s day, until the commencement of school on the day following father’s day. (e) on the children’s and the father’s birthday (if the children are not otherwise in his care): (i) if on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6:30pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 4:00pm save that if the father’s birthday clashes with mother’s day his time with the children shall be from 9:00am to 11:00am, and (iii) in the event the father is unable to have the children in his care on his birthday, the father provide notice to the mother as soon as practical, and in any event no less than seven (7) days, and (f) such further and/or other time as agreed.   during school terms in week two of a two-week cycle, from the conclusion of school on wednesday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day) and in the same cycle or rotation as in place pursuant to interim orders, (c) during school holiday periods: (i) for one half of the school term holiday period at dates and times as agreed, and failing agreement, the first half in 2023 and the second half in 2024 (with the mother to have the second half in 2023 and the first half in 2024), and with changeover to take place at 12:00pm (midday) on the middle saturday of the relevant holiday period. (ii) term holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of school term and conclude at the commencement of first day of school next term. (iii) during the long summer holiday period at dates and times as agreed and failing agreement on a week about basis: commencing the first week with the father in 2023/2024 summer holidays (and commencing the second week with the mother in 2023/2024). commencing the second week with the father in the 2024/2025 summer holidays (and commencing the first week with the mother in 2024/2025). the summer holidays are deemed to commence at 12noon on the day following the conclusion of school and shall conclude at 12noon on the day prior to the commencement of the school year. changeovers for week about shall take place at 12noon during the summer holidays. (d) on father’s day weekend, from 4:00pm on the saturday before father’s day, until the commencement of school on the day following father’s day. (e) on the children’s and the father’s birthday (if the children are not otherwise in his care): (i) if on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6:30pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 4:00pm save that if the father’s birthday clashes with mother’s day his time with the children shall be from 9:00am to 11:00am, and (iii) in the event the father is unable to have the children in his care on his birthday, the father provide notice to the mother as soon as practical, and in any event no less than seven (7) days, and (f) such further and/or other time as agreed.   during school holiday periods: (i) for one half of the school term holiday period at dates and times as agreed, and failing agreement, the first half in 2023 and the second half in 2024 (with the mother to have the second half in 2023 and the first half in 2024), and with changeover to take place at 12:00pm (midday) on the middle saturday of the relevant holiday period. (ii) term holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of school term and conclude at the commencement of first day of school next term. (iii) during the long summer holiday period at dates and times as agreed and failing agreement on a week about basis: commencing the first week with the father in 2023/2024 summer holidays (and commencing the second week with the mother in 2023/2024). commencing the second week with the father in the 2024/2025 summer holidays (and commencing the first week with the mother in 2024/2025). the summer holidays are deemed to commence at 12noon on the day following the conclusion of school and shall conclude at 12noon on the day prior to the commencement of the school year. changeovers for week about shall take place at 12noon during the summer holidays. (d) on father’s day weekend, from 4:00pm on the saturday before father’s day, until the commencement of school on the day following father’s day. (e) on the children’s and the father’s birthday (if the children are not otherwise in his care): (i) if on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6:30pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 4:00pm save that if the father’s birthday clashes with mother’s day his time with the children shall be from 9:00am to 11:00am, and (iii) in the event the father is unable to have the children in his care on his birthday, the father provide notice to the mother as soon as practical, and in any event no less than seven (7) days, and (f) such further and/or other time as agreed.   for one half of the school term holiday period at dates and times as agreed, and failing agreement, the first half in 2023 and the second half in 2024 (with the mother to have the second half in 2023 and the first half in 2024), and with changeover to take place at 12:00pm (midday) on the middle saturday of the relevant holiday period. (ii) term holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of school term and conclude at the commencement of first day of school next term. (iii) during the long summer holiday period at dates and times as agreed and failing agreement on a week about basis: commencing the first week with the father in 2023/2024 summer holidays (and commencing the second week with the mother in 2023/2024). commencing the second week with the father in the 2024/2025 summer holidays (and commencing the first week with the mother in 2024/2025). the summer holidays are deemed to commence at 12noon on the day following the conclusion of school and shall conclude at 12noon on the day prior to the commencement of the school year. changeovers for week about shall take place at 12noon during the summer holidays.  ) term holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of school term and conclude at the commencement of first day of school next term. (iii) during the long summer holiday period at dates and times as agreed and failing agreement on a week about basis: commencing the first week with the father in 2023/2024 summer holidays (and commencing the second week with the mother in 2023/2024). commencing the second week with the father in the 2024/2025 summer holidays (and commencing the first week with the mother in 2024/2025). the summer holidays are deemed to commence at 12noon on the day following the conclusion of school and shall conclude at 12noon on the day prior to the commencement of the school year. changeovers for week about shall take place at 12noon during the summer holidays.  i) during the long summer holiday period at dates and times as agreed and failing agreement on a week about basis: commencing the first week with the father in 2023/2024 summer holidays (and commencing the second week with the mother in 2023/2024). commencing the second week with the father in the 2024/2025 summer holidays (and commencing the first week with the mother in 2024/2025). the summer holidays are deemed to commence at 12noon on the day following the conclusion of school and shall conclude at 12noon on the day prior to the commencement of the school year. changeovers for week about shall take place at 12noon during the summer holidays.   on father’s day weekend, from 4:00pm on the saturday before father’s day, until the commencement of school on the day following father’s day. (e) on the children’s and the father’s birthday (if the children are not otherwise in his care): (i) if on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6:30pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 4:00pm save that if the father’s birthday clashes with mother’s day his time with the children shall be from 9:00am to 11:00am, and (iii) in the event the father is unable to have the children in his care on his birthday, the father provide notice to the mother as soon as practical, and in any event no less than seven (7) days, and (f) such further and/or other time as agreed.   on the children’s and the father’s birthday (if the children are not otherwise in his care): (i) if on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6:30pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 4:00pm save that if the father’s birthday clashes with mother’s day his time with the children shall be from 9:00am to 11:00am, and (iii) in the event the father is unable to have the children in his care on his birthday, the father provide notice to the mother as soon as practical, and in any event no less than seven (7) days, and (f) such further and/or other time as agreed.   if on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6:30pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 4:00pm save that if the father’s birthday clashes with mother’s day his time with the children shall be from 9:00am to 11:00am, and (iii) in the event the father is unable to have the children in his care on his birthday, the father provide notice to the mother as soon as practical, and in any event no less than seven (7) days, and  ) if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 4:00pm save that if the father’s birthday clashes with mother’s day his time with the children shall be from 9:00am to 11:00am, and (iii) in the event the father is unable to have the children in his care on his birthday, the father provide notice to the mother as soon as practical, and in any event no less than seven (7) days, and  i) in the event the father is unable to have the children in his care on his birthday, the father provide notice to the mother as soon as practical, and in any event no less than seven (7) days, and   such further and/or other time as agreed.   on the children’s birthdays: (i) if on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6:30pm. (ii) if on a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 4:00pm. (b) on mother’s day weekend, from 4:00pm on the saturday prior to the commencement of school on the day following mother’s day (save for as provided in order 4(e)(ii) herein).   if on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6:30pm. (ii) if on a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 4:00pm.  ) if on a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 4:00pm.   on mother’s day weekend, from 4:00pm on the saturday prior to the commencement of school on the day following mother’s day (save for as provided in order 4(e)(ii) herein).   if the children are in the care of the father, with the mother from 11:00am christmas day until 11:00am boxing day. (b) if the children are in the care of the mother, with the father from 11:00am christmas eve until 11:00am on christmas day.   if the children are in the care of the mother, with the father from 11:00am christmas eve until 11:00am on christmas day.
and the court orders by consent that:
schooling & medical   the children’s school to provide the other parent copies of all notices, newsletters, photographs, order forms, records or like documents. (b) the children’s treating medical practitioner/s and allied health professional/s, including psychologist/s, to communicate with the other parents as to the health and treatment of the children or either of them.   the children’s treating medical practitioner/s and allied health professional/s, including psychologist/s, to communicate with the other parents as to the health and treatment of the children or either of them.
and the court orders that:
notification
restraints
overseas travel   the travelling parent providing the other parent with 28 days written notice of the proposed travel and such notice is to include the intended days of departure and return, a copy of the return air tickets for the children and a complete itinerary, including details of where the children will be staying and a contact telephone number at all times, and (b) the travelling parent arrange travel insurance for the travelling parent and the children and provide a copy of same to the other parent no less than 14 days prior to travel.   the travelling parent arrange travel insurance for the travelling parent and the children and provide a copy of same to the other parent no less than 14 days prior to travel.
property  first, to pay any costs of sale or conveyancing of the former matrimonial home or the cost or charges relating to the funds being held on trust (if not already completed), (b) second, to reimburse such costs as were agreed and paid by either party for the repair for sale or preparation for sale to the party that paid those agreed costs (if not already completed), (c) third, to pay 63.49% of the funds remaining to the wife (‘the wife’s part’) but from the wife’s part to pay to the husband the sum of $6,500 (for the repayment of the expert reports), and (d) fourth, to pay to the husband 36.51% of the funds remaining.   second, to reimburse such costs as were agreed and paid by either party for the repair for sale or preparation for sale to the party that paid those agreed costs (if not already completed), (c) third, to pay 63.49% of the funds remaining to the wife (‘the wife’s part’) but from the wife’s part to pay to the husband the sum of $6,500 (for the repayment of the expert reports), and (d) fourth, to pay to the husband 36.51% of the funds remaining.   third, to pay 63.49% of the funds remaining to the wife (‘the wife’s part’) but from the wife’s part to pay to the husband the sum of $6,500 (for the repayment of the expert reports), and (d) fourth, to pay to the husband 36.51% of the funds remaining.   fourth, to pay to the husband 36.51% of the funds remaining.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property (including choses in action) owned by or in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party forego any further claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (d) any monies or liabilities held in any bank or credit accounts remain the sole property of the owner named in whose name the accounts are held, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (f) each party remain responsible for any debts in that party’s name, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party forego any further claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (d) any monies or liabilities held in any bank or credit accounts remain the sole property of the owner named in whose name the accounts are held, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (f) each party remain responsible for any debts in that party’s name, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (d) any monies or liabilities held in any bank or credit accounts remain the sole property of the owner named in whose name the accounts are held, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (f) each party remain responsible for any debts in that party’s name, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any monies or liabilities held in any bank or credit accounts remain the sole property of the owner named in whose name the accounts are held, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (f) each party remain responsible for any debts in that party’s name, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (f) each party remain responsible for any debts in that party’s name, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party remain responsible for any debts in that party’s name, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background
the proceedings
interim proceedings
the final hearing
documents relied upon
exhibits tendered
applicable law
standard of proof  in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account: the nature of the cause of action or defence, and the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and the gravity of the matters alleged.
credit of the parties ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events...
[citations omitted] ] in carlson & fluvium [2012] famca 32 (“carlson”) at [165] to [169] kent j made the following observations concerning the making of adverse credit findings against a parent in a parenting case:
[165] as a general proposition, civil courts usually refrain from specific adverse credit findings against litigants if the disposition of the case can legitimately be achieved otherwise. there are good reasons for that approach. for example, a specific finding that a litigant has misled the court might be tantamount to a finding of perjury. further, it can be accepted as a given that human beings have the capacity to reconstruct or rationalise or even misconstrue past events or conduct, or to engage in self-justification, particularly in recounting events in highly emotive settings or in respect of highly emotive issues. this may make the distinction between an honest, although wrong, account on the one hand, and a deliberate and calculated obfuscation on the other, difficult to draw.
...
[169] moreover, the resolution of parenting proceedings in this court usually requires consideration of not only the credibility of the parties as witnesses or litigants but appreciation of the characters and personalities of them as people whose future relationship, or the context of that relationship with their child, the court has the responsibility to decide.
[90] we agree with those observations. it follows from them that in parenting proceedings an adverse credit finding against a parent should not only be necessary to determine the real issues joined between the parties but should be soundly based, with due allowance for the limitations referred to.
34 i acknowledge the wisdom of those observations.
parenting
family law act provisions
major long‑term issues, in relation to a child, means issues about the care, welfare and development of the child of a long‑term nature and includes (but is not limited to) issues of that nature about: (a) the child’s education (both current and future), and (b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent. to avoid doubt, a decision by a parent of a child to form a relationship with a new partner is not, of itself, a major long‑term issue in relation to the child. however, the decision will involve a major long‑term issue if, for example, the relationship with the new partner involves the parent moving to another area and the move will make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with the other parent. ... 4ab definition of family violence etc. (1) for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   the child’s education (both current and future), and (b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family. ... 60ca child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. ... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests determining child's best interests (1) subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
... 60cf informing court of relevant family violence orders (1) if a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that party must inform the court of the family violence order. (2) if a person who is not a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that person may inform the court of the family violence order. (3) failure to inform the court of the family violence order does not affect the validity of any order made by the court. 60cg court to consider risk of family violence (1) in considering what order to make, the court must, to the extent that it is possible to do so consistently with the child’s best interests being the paramount consideration, ensure that the order:   is consistent with any family violence order, and (b) does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence.   for the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), the court may include in the order any safeguards that it considers necessary for the safety of those affected by the order. ... 61da presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders (1) when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   family violence.   when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. ... 65daa court to consider child spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each parent in certain circumstances equal time (1) subject to subsection (6), if a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, the court must: (a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents. substantial and significant time (2) subject to subsection (6), if: (a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,
the court must: (c) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   for the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend substantial and significant time with a parent only if:   the time the child spends with the parent includes both:  days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and (b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in: (i) the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   subsection (3) does not limit the other matters to which a court can have regard in determining whether the time a child spends with a parent would be substantial and significant. reasonable practicality (5) in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have regard to:   how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and
consent orders (6) if: (a) the court is considering whether to make a parenting order with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, and (b) the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,   the court is considering whether to make a parenting order with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, and (b) the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,   the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,
the court may, but is not required to, consider the matters referred to in paragraphs (1)(a) to (c) or (if applicable) the matters referred to in paragraphs (2)(c) to (e).   to avoid doubt, subsection (6) does not affect the application of section 60ca in relation to a parenting order. ... 65dac effect of parenting order that provides for shared parental responsibility (1) this section applies if, under a parenting order:   2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.   the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.   the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons. (3) the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision ha s been made jointly.
the husband’s parenting case
they were never going to be taken out of the school. ... i was trying to get the fees to be paid for by the school. ... i had just lost all my contracts at the time and i was massively panicking, but about three weeks later ... i got a contract from [client] to go into [workplaces] through covid, which was a bit of a godsend, and that was me thinking, “crap, are we going to get enough money?” but ... there was no intention to take the children out of school. the intention was to get the fees waived for the year, ... which i successfully did.
the wife’s parenting case
some significant events & controversies
initial contribution controversy
separation and the flight of the $110,000 cheque
... i’ve been emotionally struggling and i have struggled following your email chains... as you know that i’m struggling financially and i’ve continued to give you money even though i’m not working much. ... due to the $300 per week, rent, bills and living expenses, i cannot afford to pay the private cover. again, you could have spoken to me. maybe we should speak to the school about not paying fees due to financial problems or look at changing schools if we can’t afford [their local catholic school]. i’m happy to contact the school and inform them that we are no longer in a financial position to send the girls to their school. i am aware that catholic school fees can be waived re changed financial circumstances.
... i won’t approve a scan. we can get them for free at the hospital if she needs them. i’ve emailed the school re the fees. i’m hoping that we can get financial assistance otherwise, we’ll have to take them out of [their local catholic primary school].
c) [bank n]
we are instructed that this account was closed and consequently the remaining funds were transferred to another account. our client has made enquiries with the [bank n] head office to obtain statements for this account however, his request has been refused as he is no longer a customer.
d) deposit/transfer of funds
we are instructed that the $118,900 deposit into our clients [bank o] account were funds remaining from savings our client carried over from [country f] prior to meeting your client. we are instructed that these were proceeds from the sale of his [country f] property that our client recently gifted $110,00 of these funds to his brother as he is experiencing significant financial distress as a result of the ongoing pandemic in [country f]. the remaining $8,000 have been used by our client on general living expenses. [emphasis added]
the return of the $100,000 cheque
conclusions as to initial contributions
the pension
the wife’s interest in mr p’s estate
the husband’s income
5 february 2021 re:[the husband] to whom it may concern, we have acted as accountants and tax agents for the above-mentioned client since may 2019. in this time we have prepared the 2018/19 and 2019/20 tax returns for [the husband]. these returns declared the following taxable income:
financial year
taxable income
2018/19
$123,938
2019/20
$161,717
we have also prepared and lodged the september 2020 and december 2020 bas's for [corporate entity]. our records show [corporate entity] has earned the following for those six months and expects to distribute 100% of this income to [the husband].
item
income from counselling services (exe. gst)
$62,235
jobkeeper (exe. gst)
$10,500
expenses (exe. gst)  ,550)
net income from 01/7/20 - 31/12/20
$66,185
as of today, all tax debts due have been paid by both [the husband] and [corporate entity], please see the attached ato income tax account and ato integrated account reports. the only pending payment is [the husband’s] december 2020 payg instalment of $18,983, due to be paid on 2 march 2021. if you wish to discuss this with me, please contact [email address] or directly on my mobile [mobile phone number]. yours sincerely
ms johnson: and you – i think you indicated to his honour that you still do fly in/fly out work? the husband: i do. ms johnson: and so how many days a week would that be? you said it was once a month, but for what period of time? the husband: three days – three days of – three days without. monday – leave on a monday, fly back on a thursday. or drive and fly by. ms johnson: and that was on a sub-contracted basis from a [interstate]. is that correct? the husband: it is. ms johnson: all right. and you have a lot of other work, because you were quite respected in the industry. do you agree with that? the husband: i don’t know. ms johnson: well, you’re getting a lot of work generated, aren’t you? you’re busy? the husband: i – it’s cyclical. yes. ms johnson: and it dropped back a little bit during 2020. would you agree with that – because of covid, and you couldn’t do the fly in/fly out? the husband: i lost quite a lot of work, yes. ms johnson: yes. and i think it was in 2019 financial year, was that when you earned 166,000 in that year? the husband: 2019 to 2020, i think. ms johnson: okay. 166,000. yes, thank you? the husband: yes. ms johnson: and then – and the year prior to that it was 124,000? the husband: no, that’s actually not true.[25] ... ms johnson: ... but, [the husband], in that, there’s a report of [r consulting firm] and what they say is your taxable income in the 2019 year was 123,938. do you agree that that was the figure? the husband: yes. ms johnson: and in the 2019/2020 financial year, your taxable income was $161,717? yes. ms johnson: and it also goes on to say your net income from 1 july 2020 to 31 july – december 2020 was 66,185 – so that’s a half year. you agree - - - ? the husband: yes, possibly. yes. ms johnson: right. okay. well, just going back to what i was putting to you was that you earn a considerable income, you’re a high income earner. do you agree with that? the husband: one year.[26]
the husband: ... it was just regarding the salaries on the two thousand and – my salary was quoted as 124,000 for 2018 to 2019. but there’s 14,000 of long service leave on that which showed up in my bank account, so when i worked for [employer q], and then when you put the 10,000 into my super, it gives me an annual income of 100,000. so even though the sum showed by – by accountant then is 124, it was actually a taxable income of 100. his honour: in terms of recurring income? the husband: yes, because 14,000 was from my old employer as long service leave, and that was added onto that financial year. his honour: but you got it paid in cash? the husband: yes. just since – since the business – the – the – my – my premise of my business is that earn $100,000 a year, and the 161,000 was purely because of the death on [work site] where i flew up to [the site] on a weekly basis for a period of time to [perform work duties] to 300 [employees]. so what that saw me was attending the [work site] on a weekly basis for a couple of months, and then it dropped down to monthly, which brings my salary back to 100,000. so my actual salary of four years of being self-employed, three have been 100,000, and one has been 161. his honour: and the 161 was the – when you had the weekly basis instead of the monthly basis? the husband: in – in 2019.[27]
the husband: so my question is what – so i will make the statement. my income for 2021 was actually $100,850.[28] his honour: was it is what you mean. do you - - - the husband: yes, yes, your honour. his honour: do you agree that was - - - the husband: do you – yes. his honour: - - - my income. the husband: yes, yes. do you agree that that was my income? the wife: yes. and i can see now there might be a date error. the husband: so in your affidavit - - -? the wife: - - - ’20. the husband: in your affidavit the – in your affidavit you’ve said my income 2020 to 2021. you actually contacted the child support agency at the end of 2021 to give them that information, didn’t you? the wife: i don’t recall when i contacted them. however, it is a really confusing system and i think they work on a year behind. i’m – i’m not sure but, you know, i agree that i can see your tax return here is – it’s just over 100,000. the husband: so in your affidavit dated – and i’ve got the numbers – so i want to go to her affidavit dated – i think it was february 2021. in that affidavit you claim that i had an income of $200,000 a year. that’s correct, isn’t it? the wife: yes.[29]
the husband: ... and, just jumping back onto the salary, the $160,000 that i earned in one year, one year alone - - - his honour: yes. the husband: - - - was purely based on that one time of a death on [work site] where i was able to fly out for 10 consecutive weeks, which gave me a huge amount of income for one year. i supplied my tax returns to this court. my average salary is $100,000. i earned $100,000 last year. my current salary is $100,000. my earnings is $100,000, and i work full time for that. not only do i work full time, i’m also able to cater for the girls in the time that i work, which again is opposite to what my former partner says. ...[30]
the wife's income
the husband: and you also claim [in february 2021] that your salary was $39,000 a year. that’s correct, isn’t it? the wife: yes. and if you look at my notice of assessment. ... the husband: so working for a not-for-profit organisation you have an annual salary that differs from your taxable salary. that’s correct, isn’t it? the wife: well, it – yes. so when you – when you put in deduction ..... you’re - - - the husband: okay. so but it’s different. your actual salary ... at that time was $55,000 a year, wasn’t it? the wife: what year? sorry. what year are we talking about? the husband: in 2020. when you – 2021 when you submitted your affidavit that you earned $39,000. ... the wife: that was based ... on my tax return.[31] ... his honour: before you do – yes. before you do because i think you’re going to a different topic i just want to clarify. [the wife], being a not-for-profit – and i think what’s being suggested is that you are able to salary sacrifice. is that the case? that you’re able to salary sacrifice? the wife: i can do. yes. his honour: yes. and as at february 2021 were you salary sacrificing any of your income? yes. his honour: thank you. and as of now are you salary sacrificing any of your income? the wife: no. his honour: when did that change? the wife: last year.[32] ... the husband: so, your honour, if the – so my question relates back to the financial motivation. if i was to receive an increase in the care of the children it wouldn’t be cost effective for [the wife] to return to work, more hours, because she wouldn’t actually have as much money if she returned to work. so i’m re-putting that question that to reduce the number of time the children spend with dad is financially motivated? the wife: that’s not true. i’ve already answered that.[33]
expert evidence: the family report
interview with [the husband] [the husband] gave an overview of the relationship and post-separation period from his perspective and consistent with his affidavit material. his mood and affect were well-modulated and within a normal range. [the husband] categorically denies the allegations of family violence and alleges [the wife] has been deceptive around her narrative on the financial issues to maximise her share of the settlement. ... [the husband] categorically denies the allegations of coercive and controlling family violence and financial abuse. he informed the writer that [the wife] had unilateral access to her income, and he consistently put a minimum of $2000 a fortnight in their joint account, and sometimes more. [the husband] referred the writer to his affidavit filed 22 april 2021 (paragraphs 15-25). in summary, he describes himself as the sole contributor to their joint account in which he deposited approximately $2000 a fortnight, and sometimes more. he expressed concern about [the wife’s] spending and alleged gambling and believes that the bank statements support his narrative around this issue. as stated previously, [the husband] alleges that [the wife] allegations are designed to maximise her share of the settlement. ... as with [the wife], [the husband] believes that much of the parental conflict was encapsulated, and the children's exposure to the arguing and fighting was limited. he described agreeing to five nights a fortnight on the basis the arrangements would eventually move to a shared care structure. [the husband] notes that the post-separation relationship has been volatile from the outset but deteriorated significantly after the introduction of holiday time. he alleges [the wife] has been uncommunicative and uncooperative since october 2020, which coincides with the beginning of her new relationship. concerning [the wife’s] intervention order, he categorically denies the allegations, which he described as vexatious and a strategic move by [the wife] to limit his time with the children. [the husband] described the children asking for more time with him in the early post-separation period. he acknowledges telling the children he was “fighting for more time” when they asked and, in retrospect, accepts that he should have been more circumspect. however, he categorically denies pressuring or influencing the children around their wishes in the matter. [the husband] informed the writer he continues to work on a fly-in- fly-out basis three days a month, and he does not perceive this as a restraint to a shared care arrangement. he is of the view the children will be psychologically and emotionally disadvantaged if denied an equal time relationship with him. the children and their relationships interview with [x] (aged seven) [x] was readily engaged but a little guarded and defended around the issue of spending time and parental roles. her mood and affect were appropriately labile and within a normal range. concerning her attendance at the assessment, she informed the writer, “we’ve come because mum and dad can’t be happy. my dad wants to have equal amounts of days, but my mum doesn’t. dad talked about it this morning”. ... [x] perceives herself as having adjusted reasonably well to the spending time arrangements. however, she notes that [y] struggled during holiday time with their father and had missed her mother. [x] explained that facetime with her mother had alleviated her anxiety about not seeing her during this extended period, and both parents were flexible around facetime contact. unprompted, [x] added that she also misses her father a lot. [x’s] projective questioning, particularly around her interpersonal needs such as help with problem-solving, day-to-day caregiving, insight into her emotional life, social and domestic organisation, and knowledge about her friendships, identifies [the wife] as the primary attachment relationship. however, the writer gained the impression that [x] sensed her answers were skewed towards her mother and, unprompted, stated, “i want equal time with my parents because i miss them both a lot when i’m not with them. dad thinks it would be fair, it should be fair. i sometimes worry dad gets sad because it’s not fair”. [x] reports that [y] cries a lot when they talk about the spending time arrangements and would like her parents to reconcile. [x] appeared to become distracted and fatigued when the writer tried to discuss the pros and cons of various arrangements, and she struggled to conceptualise her father’s proposal. the writer returned [x] to the waiting room when it became apparent she had reached her threshold for concentration with this part of the assessment. interview with [y] (aged six) [y] was readily engaged but somewhat defended and cautious when answering questions concerning the spending time arrangements. her mood and affect were appropriately labile and within a normal range. [y] understood the assessment to be about her parent’s separation and the spending time arrangements and stated, “we’ve come because my parents have split up. my dad wants equal time. i want seven days with mum and seven days with dad”. ... [y] has limited memories of family life and reports her parents argued a lot, but they were mostly a happy family. she described feeling sad and upset about her parent's separation and stated, "dad says he’s fighting mum because he wants more days, and if it's not equal time, it's not fair”. [y] reports feeling homesick and missing her mother on the recent holidays. however, she was able to facetime her mother and felt better afterwards. [y] explained that both parents allow facetime communication when they ask, which makes the absences easier. [y] was somewhat defended and cautious around her responses to projective questioning and questions of proximity and intimacy. she initially stated, “the parent that knows me best is my mum because i came out of her tummy”. however, [y] became cautious and defended and appeared to be concerned about balancing her answers evenly between the parties. [y] did note that when she is anxious, she sleeps with [the wife], and her mother and sister know her moods and feelings the best. ... conjoint interview with both children the writer brought the children together to assess the sibling bond and test the consistency of their narratives. the children share a warm and reciprocated relationship. they described worrying about the possibility of being separated from each other as a result of the parental separation. while both children cautiously acknowledged their mother's primary caregiver role, they are concerned that the arrangements are fair for both parents. the children harbour no perceptions of fault with either parent concerning the parental separation, and [x] stated, “i think they like each other as friends”. observation of [the husband] with the children the children were brought to the playroom for observation with [the husband]. they separated from their mother without any sign of anxiety or apprehension. [the husband] quickly settled the children to play around the table with a game, and there was laughter and excitement around the surprise elements of the game. [y] was particularly affectionate with her father, sitting between his legs and seeking his attention. [the husband] was able to divide his time between the children in a skilled and equitable manner, and his interactions were pitched at a developmentally appropriate level. there is a warm and affectionate rapport between [the husband] and the children, who were relaxed and at ease in his care. ... the conduct of both parties throughout the assessment was exemplary, and they both impressed as skilled and intuitive parents. the parties' presentation is consistent with their view that the children's exposure to the parental conflict has been limited. ... prima facie, the accounts of the parties, when deconstructed, describe a relationship in long-term decline from before the birth of the children. there was an inability to acknowledge or understand the needs of each other, and a grumbling dissatisfaction and mutual antipathy were contained within the day-to-day functions and chores of family life. the behaviour of both parties in these circumstances closely aligns with the paradigm of “common couple conflict”. ... the children’s engagement around the concept of fairness and equal time is consistent with them entering the developmental phase of “concrete functioning” (ages 6-7). in this phase, they are able to integrate the experience of sharing with the concept of fairness (inductive reasoning). triggered by their father’s narrative and their sense of loss around the parental separation, they perceive an equal time structure as the obvious solution to the parental dispute. this reductive logic does not account for the more complex developmental and psychological issues concerning the children's attachment needs, their adjustment to the separation, and their overall readiness for this type of arrangement. in this context, the writer's view is that the children's wishes in the matter are an unreliable guide to their best interest in the current circumstances. [the husband’s] proposal for [an equal] shared care arrangement is assessed in the context of the parties’ capacity to cooperate and communicate effectively around this type of arrangement. the literature on shared care describes the prerequisite conditions for optimal outcomes with this type of structure as, a high level of constructive communication and problem-solving, alignment of parenting values, a commitment by both parents to the concept, and an absence of conflict. ... it is the writer's view that the parties' communication and cooperation is not at the sophisticated and mature levels required for optimal outcomes with this type of arrangement. in these circumstances, an equal time arrangement is contraindicated and not recommended to the court. however, if the parties can settle into a rhythm and routine around the care of the children, it should not be ruled out in the future. the parties’ should consider a review of the arrangements towards the end of the school year in 2022. this would allow the children to mature into their current developmental phase and provide for the post-separation relationship to improve from its existing low base. as stated previously, the parties have worked hard during the relationship to protect the children from the worst aspects of the parental conflict. these boundaries have become somewhat porous in the post-separation period. the children’s current triangulation into the dispute presents as the most significant risk to their psychological and emotional welfare at this point in time. the current arrangements serve to consolidate the children’s primary attachment needs with [the wife] while providing substantial time to maintain their relationship with [the husband]. this division and structure of time provides a stable platform for the children at this critical period in their adjustment to the separation. the parties should understand that children's adjustment to parental separation is largely dependent on the adult adjustment. the formula is simple, the more constructive and positive the adult adjustment, in the absence of conflict, the better the psychological and emotional outcomes for the child. recommendations the parties to have equal shared parental responsibility. the children to live with [the wife]. [the husband] to spend term time with the children, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday, and each alternate week from the conclusion of school on wednesday until the commencement of school on friday. [the husband] to spend holiday time with the children for half of all school holidays with the long summer break taken on a week about basis. the parent that has the children on the weekend following the last day of the school term to have the first week of the holidays. all milestones and days of celebration as per customary practice in these matters. in the event the one or other of the parties is unable to care for the children overnight, the party without the children to have first right of refusal to care for them. telephone and facetime contact as agreed between the parties. the parties to communicate with each other via a cloud-based app such as mymob.com or talkingparents.com. changeover as agreed between the parties. the parties to keep each other informed of any medical emergencies pertaining to the children in a prompt and timely fashion. the parties undertake to cease and desist from denigrating each other within earshot of the children. [emphasis added]
the parenting issues in dispute
ms johnson: i’ve obtained instructions from the mother, given the evidence that has been given, and she seeks a four/10 arrangement, which would be a wednesday overnight in the off week and a friday to monday with changeovers at school. so that’s - - - his honour: and she opened on a – what she wanted to start with, remind me. ms johnson: well, i think it was as per her amended response, which was more limited, which was alternate weeks between the close of school until 5 pm sunday. his honour: yes. ms johnson: so that was – and then wednesdays until 7 pm. so that was a - - - his honour: that’s right. so it was two nights plus a meal, yes. ms johnson: yes, but she accepts that the children love their father and that it’s good for them to spend time with him but she does think that the five/nine arrangement is excessive, but that a four/10 arrangement would be more in the children’s best interests.
section 60cc factors
primary considerations
meaningful relationship with both of the children’s parents
the need to protect children from physical or psychological harm
additional considerations
any views expressed by the child
nature of relationship with each of the child’s parents and other persons
extent to which the child’s parents have taken or failed to take opportunities
extent to which each parent has fulfilled or failed to fulfil obligations to maintain the child
practical difficulty and expense
capacity to provide for the child’s emotional and intellectual needs
maturity, background and culture of the children
attitude to the child and to the responsibilities of parenthood
family violence
final or interim orders
parental responsibility
conclusion as to parenting matters
property alteration
the applicable law
section 79 alteration of property interests  in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate:  in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or
including:  an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and  an order requiring: either or both of the parties to the marriage, or
to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines. the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account:  the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.
section 75 matters to be taken into consideration in relation to spousal maintenance  the matters to be so taken into account are: the age and state of health of each of the parties, and  the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and ) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and  the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and  subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,
and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and  where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  ) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  the property of the parties, or  vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and ) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and  in exercising its jurisdiction under section 74, a court shall disregard any entitlement of the party whose maintenance is under consideration to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. in this section:
"party" means a party to the marriage concerned.
section 80 general powers of court the court, in exercising its powers under this part, may do any or all of the following:  order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,  order payment of a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic sum, ) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a marriage, (c) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,  appoint or remove trustees,  order that payments be made direct to a party to the marriage, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the marriage, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,  impose terms and conditions, make an order by consent,  make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, and (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.   subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.  the making of an order of a kind referred to in paragraph (1)(ba), or of any other order under this part, in relation to the maintenance of a party to a marriage does not prevent a court from making a subsequent order in relation to the maintenance of the party.
stanford ] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife. no less importantly, the express implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship... and the assumption that any adjustment of those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4) (and/or section 90sm(3)).  ] ...the fundamental propositions that have been identified require a court have a principled reason for interfering with the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties to the marriage and whatever may have been their stated or unstated assumptions and agreements about property interest during the continuance of the marriage. [42] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife...  ] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife...
the preferred approach ] in hickey and hickey and attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143 at [39] the full court, in setting out what the case law revealed as the “preferred approach” to the determination of an application under s 79 of the act, referred to four inter-related steps, including that “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of ss. 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”. the full court did not purport to elevate the preferred approach as being mandatory, as was observed by a later full court in bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) flc 93-545 at [61]- [63], [72]. however, adoption of that preferred approach is a means by which many of the mandatory factors in s 75(2) of the act, in particular paragraph (b) – the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties, paragraph (ha) – ability of a creditor to recover debt, paragraph (n) – the terms of any proposed order under s 79 of the act, can be considered, as these must be considered, in determining any adjustment pursuant to s 75(2) of the act. conversely, if the preferred approach is not adopted there must be a means discernible from the reasons to identify that these relevant mandatory s 75(2) factors have been considered, and how they have been brought into account, in the making of any s 75(2) adjustment...  ] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79. that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) (“the other factors”) including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.
[citations omitted]
the husband’s property case
the wife’s property case
application of the preferred approach
step one: identify the property and liabilities
description
ownership
husband asserts
wife asserts
assets
1
proceeds of sale of the fmh[38]
joint
1,000,000
e1,000,000
a
2
motor vehicle 1 car
husband
35,000
e35,000
3
motor vehicle 2 car now agreed
6,000
4
bank o personal account ...91 at 17/01/22 (most recent disclosed) or $4,244 as at 15/3/20, separation.
2,777
4,244
d
5
bank o personal account ...16 at 31/12/21 (most recent disclosed) nb opened after separation and $110,000 at 31/03/21 prior balance unknown.
6,465
6
bank o account ...98 business account as at 16/01/22 (most recent disclosed), $20,217 less rent due as husband advised[39]
27,296 (2,000)  000)
20,217
7
bank o 930 [the husband] trading as [company r] 758.57 as at 15/03/20 current not disclosed
closed 20.8.19
751
8
bank n account ...6 as at 10/06/20 (most recent disclosed) $118,954 at separation)
closed
13,000 after taking account of #14 & 15
9
bank n ...95 as at 7 jan 2022 not known when opened.
wife
41
10  nk l] everyday account current
95
11  nk l] savings maximiser account current
21,499 (as at 30/6/2021)
4,600.00
12
wife’s account at separation, bank n ...44, now closed - $718
not claimed
13
wife’s account at separation, ending ...48 - $0, now closed
14
wife’s part property payment
40,000
15
husband’s paid legals from $110,000 cheque
65,000
16
wife’s progress saver #...32
$844
17
wife’s velocity points
valuable
not so valuable
assets subtotal
liabilities
mortgage for fmh
270,000
american express credit card
0 (closed)
nil
bank o visa card
0
wife’s mastercard
?
liabilities subtotal
superannuation
fund
type of interest
applicant’s value
respondent’s value
the husband’s super fund
175,935
175,935[40]
the wife’s super fund
177,383
177,383[41]
superannuation subtotal
total (assets – liabilities)
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation)
financial resources
husband’s country f entitlements
aud$200 pw from 2039
nk
wife’s entitlement under mr p’s will (half the queensland property)
300,000
e50,000
financial resources subtotal
other
addback of super’n drawdown
20,000
addback of part property settlement
now item #14
addback of husbands legal fees
now item #15
addback of wife’s legal fees
bank o account ...98 business account as at 16/01/22 (most recent disclosed), $27,296 less rent due as husband advised[42]
bank o ...30 [the husband] trading as [company r] 758.57 as at 15/03/20 current not disclosed
759
bank n account ...26 as at 10/06/20 (most recent disclosed as $118,954 at separation)
10 & 11  nk l] everyday account current & [bank l] savings maximiser account current combined  nk l] savings maximiser account current combined
21,499
848
wife’s airline points
conclusion as to the “pool”
ownership, or to be retained by husband or wife
$[55]
assets to be divided
proceeds of sale of the fmh[56]622,990.67
622,991[57]
husband’s jointly contributed ‘keep’
bank o personal account ...91
bank o personal account ...16
bank o account ...98 business account
25,296
husband’s paid legal fees
total husband’s ‘keep’
134,538
wife’s jointly contributed ‘keep’
motor vehicle 2
bank n ...95
bank l account
wife and children’s velocity points
some value
total wife’s jointly contributed ‘keep’
46,889
total ‘jointly contributed’ assets
804,418
wife’s interest in mr p’s estate (about)
125,000
total all assets
929,418
353,318
about aud$200 pw from 2039
step two: section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) contributions ] in each case, we consider that the point being made is that there is no principle or guideline (or, indeed, anything else emerging from s 79), that renders the direct contribution of income or capital more important – or “special” – when compared against indirect contributions and, in particular, contributions to the home or the welfare of the family.  ] if it is necessary to make the point again, and to highlight it for the purpose of this appeal, we add our endorsement to what has been made clear in the authorities referred and to the full court’s comments in [52] of hoffman, that the words of s 79 do not provide endorsement for any category of contribution related to any class of property (for example, high wealth) being, by virtue of that category or class, more valuable or important that another. in each case the contributions made by the parties must be evaluated in the context of the facts particular to that case.
dickons  ] there can be little doubt that the classification of contributions by reference to terms such as “initial contributions”, “contributions during the relationship”, and “post-separation contributions”, can be helpful as a convenient means of giving coherent expression to the evidence in a s 79 case and to giving coherence to the nature, form and extent of the parties’ respective contributions. however, the task of assessing contributions is holistic and but part of a yet further holistic determination of what orders, if any, represent justice and equity in the particular circumstances of this particular relationship. so much is clear from the terms of s 79 itself and, in particular, s 79(2). the essential task is to assess the nature, form and extent of the contributions of all types made by each of the parties within the context of an analysis of their particular relationship.
... hurst  ] the direct financial contribution of the suburb c property by the husband some 14 years before trial is, of course, a significant direct financial contribution weighing in his favour (s 79(4)(a)) and her honour correctly so found. but, as the authorities earlier cited make clear, a separate question within the assessment of contributions is, relevantly, the contributions made by both parties indirectly other than financially (s 79(4)(b)) and contributions to the welfare of the family including in the capacity of homemaker and parent (s 79(4)(c)).
... lovine & connor  ] contribution, either direct or indirect and financial or non-financial, to any of acquisition and/or conservation and/or improvement to property (whether or not such property has ceased to be held) or to the welfare of the family or children, falls for consideration. no order of priority is attached to individual elements. the evaluation occurs often, as in this case, with respect to such disparate kinds of contribution made over a substantial period. such evaluation, having regard to its subject matter, inevitably involves value judgments and matters of impression. [41] it follows that the assessment involves matters of estimation and is not, and cannot be, a mathematical exercise. no amount of devotion to mathematics is capable of transforming a discretionary exercise involving many component parts, each mostly unamenable to precise computation, into one of aggregating separately finely calculated components to reach an overall outcome. [42] as part of the process of ultimately determining just and equitable orders under s 79 there is included a complex of discretionary assessments and judgments of many components of contribution, only some of which are capable of measurement in money terms and then often only in historical, rather than present, money terms. any dictate to the effect that in the course of assessment each disparate component part or kind of contribution must be assigned a discrete and identifiable value or percentage is antithetical to the nature of the discretion involved.  ] it follows that the assessment involves matters of estimation and is not, and cannot be, a mathematical exercise. no amount of devotion to mathematics is capable of transforming a discretionary exercise involving many component parts, each mostly unamenable to precise computation, into one of aggregating separately finely calculated components to reach an overall outcome. [42] as part of the process of ultimately determining just and equitable orders under s 79 there is included a complex of discretionary assessments and judgments of many components of contribution, only some of which are capable of measurement in money terms and then often only in historical, rather than present, money terms. any dictate to the effect that in the course of assessment each disparate component part or kind of contribution must be assigned a discrete and identifiable value or percentage is antithetical to the nature of the discretion involved.  ] as part of the process of ultimately determining just and equitable orders under s 79 there is included a complex of discretionary assessments and judgments of many components of contribution, only some of which are capable of measurement in money terms and then often only in historical, rather than present, money terms. any dictate to the effect that in the course of assessment each disparate component part or kind of contribution must be assigned a discrete and identifiable value or percentage is antithetical to the nature of the discretion involved.  ] ... all contributions must be weighed collectively and so it is an error to segment or compartmentalise the various contributions and weigh one again the remainder. [36] that principle has a counterpart in the application factors prescribed in section 75(2) or section 90sm(3) of the act. any adjustment to the parties contribution-based- entitlements should be determined inclusively after considering all relevant factors, not by aggregating incremental adjustment in respect of each relevant factor.  ] that principle has a counterpart in the application factors prescribed in section 75(2) or section 90sm(3) of the act. any adjustment to the parties contribution-based- entitlements should be determined inclusively after considering all relevant factors, not by aggregating incremental adjustment in respect of each relevant factor.  tations omitted]
the length of the marriage can be seen to be of considerable importance in the assessment of contributions.
step three: section 75(2) factors
...in any event it is the real impact in money terms which is ultimately the critical issue.
on our adjusted figure for the value of the parties net assets ($1,503,863), adjustment of 10% in the wife’s favour results in an increase in her entitlement of $150,386, and a corresponding reduction in the husband’s entitlement, producing a differential movement between them of $300,772 ...  7] it is also important to recall what was said in phipson & phipson [2009] famcafc 28 when the full court was dealing with another appeal from the trial judge in the present proceedings:  ] it is always important to keep in mind that an adjustment of x% for s 75(2) factors leads to a disparity in the value of property received by the parties representing 2 x x%. it is that disparity, measured in “money terms”, that requires consideration in determining whether the result is just and equitable: see campbell v kuskey [1998] famca 10, (1998) flc 92-795 at 84,928.  8] the 10% adjustment his honour made on account of s 75(2) factors has led to a disparity in favour of the wife equivalent in value to 20% of the assets. in money terms this represents $187,733 out of a total asset pool of $938,665. apart from the issues associated with the care, accommodation and maintenance of the children, the s 75(2) factors largely balanced out (save that as a result of the assessment of contributions the wife would have more capital than the husband). the husband was going to have whatever responsibility remained for the care, accommodation and maintenance of j. both parties would have significant responsibility for the two younger children. it is true the wife will have the children with her about 20% more of the time than the husband, but this amounts to only a little more than 70 additional days a year. [109] in our view an assessment leading to a disparity of $187,733 in the capital/superannuation to be received by each party was outside the reasonable ambit of the trial judge’s broad discretion, even taking into account the matters found by his honour relating to the non-payment of child support in the period after the husband gave up his employment. our conclusion is sufficient to enliven appellate intervention (house v the king (1936) 55 clr 499 and norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513). the appeal will therefore be allowed.  9] in our view an assessment leading to a disparity of $187,733 in the capital/superannuation to be received by each party was outside the reasonable ambit of the trial judge’s broad discretion, even taking into account the matters found by his honour relating to the non-payment of child support in the period after the husband gave up his employment. our conclusion is sufficient to enliven appellate intervention (house v the king (1936) 55 clr 499 and norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513). the appeal will therefore be allowed.
...  2] in our view, given that the children will be with him around 40% of the time, the husband’s accommodation needs for the children would not be significantly different to those of the wife. however, in light of the agreement in relation to child support, we accept that the wife will bear the greater proportion of the burden of maintaining the two younger children (at least for the time being). the husband, on the other hand, will have whatever responsibility remains for accommodating and maintaining j. the other s 75(2) factors, in our view, are evenly balanced, save for the fact that as a result of the assessment of contributions the wife will have 4% (or $37,546) more of the assets/superannuation than the husband. [113] taking these matters into account, and the failure of the husband to pay child support after giving up his employment, we consider there should be a 4% adjustment for s 75(2) factors, creating a disparity of 8% between the parties – or in money terms an amount of $75,093.  3] taking these matters into account, and the failure of the husband to pay child support after giving up his employment, we consider there should be a 4% adjustment for s 75(2) factors, creating a disparity of 8% between the parties – or in money terms an amount of $75,093.  9] in our view, s 79(4)(e) requires those matters to be taken into account in arriving at orders that are just and equitable as between the parties. in arriving at an appropriate assessment for those factors, a dollar value of it should be uppermost in our minds [79] and, of course, the ultimate disparity in entitlements which it might produce. that dollar value is, in turn, dependent upon the value of the interests in property of the parties.
discussion of the factors
age and state of health
income, property, financial resources and capacity for employment
care of children under 18 years
commitments of each of the parties to support themselves or a child
responsibilities of either party to support any other person
pension or benefit
reasonable standard of living
would maintenance assist education or training
effect on creditors
effect party contributed to the earning capacity and property of the other
protect parties role as a parent
whether party cohabiting with another person
child support to be provided
any fact or circumstances required to take into account
conclusion as to section 75(2) adjustment
step four: just and equitable and conclusion
conclusions and calculations as to property matters
associate: dated: 26 may 2023
dated: 26 may 2023
[1] although not relied upon in either parties list of documents the husband was cross examined about this document on 4 february 2022 at tp 102.[2] wife cross examined upon on these paragraphs on 18 february 2022 at tp 241-242.[3] see blass & blass [2022] fedcfamc1a 63; (2022) flc 94-085; (2022) 64 fam lr 625 (‘blass’) at [40] & [41].[4] the wife’s outline of case page 3 of 8.[5] wife’s opening 3 feb 2022 tp 37 line 35.[6] by inference from wife’s trial affidavit at [28], “...the husband had $130,000”. [7] pages 3 & 2, statement 25, of 55 of exhibit m2. [8] see the family report at [5].[9] page 10 of 55 of exhibit m2. [10] see exhibits f1 and m2 at page 10 of 55.[11] page 1 of 55 of m2.[12] page 15 of 55 m2.[13] page 18 of 55 of m2.[14] 2nd email of m5.[15] 3rd email of m5.[16] exhibit tp56-60 being bundle of letters between solicitors relating to disclosure that the husband was cross-examined about and provided to the court but, in error, not tendered, at page 1 of 14. [17] actually the customer number.[18] page 4 of 14 of exhibit tp56-60.[19] exhibit tp56-60 at pages 6 & 7 of 14.[20] page 47 of 55 of m2 and exhibit f1 10 feb 2022.[21] townsend & townsend [1994] famca 144; (1995) flc 92-569.[22] date alleged by husband at [68] of his affidavit filed 14 jan 2022 (‘trial affidavit’) and when that paragraph responded to not qualified or denied.[23] see at tp-27.[24] see the bundle of correspondence relating to disclosure being m10.[25] tp-100 to tp-101.[26] tp-102.[27] tp-103.[28] exhibit f6, the husband’s fye 2021 ato assessment shows his taxable income as $100,850.[29] tp-240.[30] tp-350.[31] tp-240.[32] tp-243.[33] tp-246.[34] the wife’s outline of case page 3/8.[35] see tp-53.[36] drawn by the wife’s counsel after request by the court and not disputed that it accurately included both parties positions as to the asset pool.[37] as in ‘a’ agreed and ‘d’ dispute.[38] only an estimate of value at final hearing and later sold.[39] husband advised at final hearing at tp 41.[40] new figure obtained from husband after court pressed for current figures at comparable date. the husband had asserted a similar figure of $177,383 in his outline of case.[41] new figure obtained from wife’s counsel after court pressed. wife’s outline of case filed 18 jan 2022 asserted her superannuation was $153,321. [42] husband advised at final hearing, see tp-41.[43] bank l #...77 aka s everyday account being pages 330-348 of 404 page bundle.[44] bank l #736 aka savings maximiser account being pages 359-362 of the 404 page bundle.[45] by my associate “sharing” the electronic screen with the court and the parties.[46] tp-275 to tp-279.[47] see lines 10 and 11 of exhibit c1.[48] not $8,485 as erroneously suggested by the court in final address and adopted, clearly in error and likely due to a video link hearing, by counsel for the wife at tp-333.[49] and in the disclosure process the husband was advised of this then new bank l account in a timely manner.[50] page 336 of 404 in bank l #...77 of exhibit f9a.[51] page 359 of 404 of exhibit f9b.[52] see tp-217.[53] including tp-33 and tp-68.[54] all whole dollars after rounding.[55] all whole dollars after rounding.[56] $1,000,000 was only an estimate of value at final hearing and later sold and net proceeds after discharge of mortgage held in trust- $622,990.67.[57] as advised in exhibit f19.[58] see wife f18.1.22 at [27] and [28] and wife’s reply f19.1.22 at [10]-[12] and husband f7.1.122 at [10]-[13].[59] erroneously said to be merely a financial resource not an asset.[60] see at [58] and despite complaint the full court did not interfere with those findings.[61] hence with medicare levy the husband’s tax on $100,000 would be about $25,000 or in the ball park of his $521 per week assertion of what he currently pays or has paid.