last updated: 19 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rainaldo & rainaldo [2023] fedcfamc2f 655
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
material relied upon  his amended initiating application filed 22 may 2023, and (b) his affidavit filed 3 november 2022.   his affidavit filed 3 november 2022.   her response to initiating application filed 9 december 2022, (b) her notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 9 december 2022, (c) her affidavit filed 28 february 2023, and, (d) reasons for judgment of hannam j in the family court of australia at parramatta dated 2 november 2020.   her notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 9 december 2022, (c) her affidavit filed 28 february 2023, and, (d) reasons for judgment of hannam j in the family court of australia at parramatta dated 2 november 2020.   her affidavit filed 28 february 2023, and, (d) reasons for judgment of hannam j in the family court of australia at parramatta dated 2 november 2020.   reasons for judgment of hannam j in the family court of australia at parramatta dated 2 november 2020.   child responsive program memorandum of family consultant ms b dated 20 november 2019, (b) affidavit of the father filed 12 december 2019, (c) notice of discontinuance of the father filed 8 may 2020, and, (d) mother’s pleadings.   affidavit of the father filed 12 december 2019, (c) notice of discontinuance of the father filed 8 may 2020, and, (d) mother’s pleadings.   notice of discontinuance of the father filed 8 may 2020, and, (d) mother’s pleadings.   mother’s pleadings.
evidence
relevant legal principles
the principles which in my view should apply in such cases are that the court should have regard to any earlier order and to the reasons for and the material on which that order was based. it should not lightly entertain an application to reverse an earlier custody order. to do so would invite endless litigation for change in an ever present factor in human affairs. therefore, the court would need to be satisfied by the applicant that there was some changed circumstance which would justify such a serious step, some new factor arising, or, at any rate, some new factor which was not disclosed at the previous hearing which would have been material. (emphasis added) not long after that nygh j said this in mcenerney & mcenerney [1980] famca 43, (1980) flc 90-866 at 75,499: ....the principle that there be an end to litigation has equal force in custodial disputes and in some respects may have even greater force in custodial disputes. the last thing, of course, that this court would wish to see would be a perennial football match between parents, who, because the strict principles of res judicata are not applicable might seek to canvass again and again the question of custody of a child with the enormous psychological harm which they would be inflicting not only upon each other but especially upon the child. one comes back to the fundamental principle that the interest of the child are paramount and that consideration alone should lead a court to discourage a parent from coming back before the court too soon after the court has had an opportunity to consider fully the situation of the child and there is really no startling new circumstances that can be brought before the court. (emphasis added) similarly, the icl referred me to langmeil & grange (2013) famcafc 31 (“langmeil & grange”), where it was said that the rule in rice & asplund is founded on the notion that continuous litigation over children is generally not in their best interests. that consideration arises squarely in this matter. in a recent decision of the appeal division in the matter of trewitt & brock [2021] fedcfamc1a 9 (“trewitt”), there was a discussion about whether dismissal of an application such as the father’s, is a parenting order with the meaning of s 64b(1) of the act. that section provides: (1) a parenting order is: an order under this part (including an order until further order) dealing with a matter mentioned in subsection (2), or (b) an order under this part discharging, varying, suspending or reviving an order, or part of an order, described in paragraph (a). however, a declaration or order under subdivision e of division 12 is not a parenting order. the father asks me to make parenting orders. however in trewitt the appeal division reminded at [25]-[26]:
it is important to note that s 64b of the act refers in terms to the making of an order and not to the nature of the application that led to the order itself. attention must be given to the nature of the order itself and not the application that led to the order being made. here the father sought to vary the existing orders so that there was to be equal shared parental responsibility and the imposition of an equal time arrangement. if those orders were made they would unquestionably be parenting orders as defined by s 64b of the act. they were not the orders made and the application was simply dismissed. such an order of dismissal, however, does not discharge, vary, suspend or revive an order made under s 64b(2) of the act. therefore there is some difficulty in describing the order of dismissal as a parenting order.
40 relevantly, this was also held in trewitt at [29]-[31]:
the weight of authority and the terms of s 64b of the act itself point to the order dismissing the father’s application made by her honour as not being a parenting order within that section. that being so, the court is not obliged to have regard to the mandatory terms of s 60cc of the act. nonetheless, as the authorities make clear, the determination of whether there should be a reconsideration of existing parenting orders, is one that must be made in the best interests of the child. often that determination will focus on the nature of the change in circumstances, if any, and the detriment to the child of further litigation. considerations raised by s 60cc of the act may also, obviously, be relevant. the nature of the proceeding was aptly described by warnick j in sps and pls [2008] famcafc 16, (2008) flc 93-363 (“sps”) (which explanation was approved in marsden & winch (2009) 42 fam lr 1 (“marsden”) at [41]–[47], langmeil & grange [2013] famcafc 31 at [46] and poisat at [40]) as follows:
81. ... [w]hen the threshold question described in rice and asplund is determined as a preliminary matter, it remains a determination “on the merits”. where an application is dismissed at a preliminary stage, it is not dismissed for some technical reason, such as the failure of a party to appear or some lack of compliance with form and procedure but rather because, assuming the evidence of the applicant is accepted, there is an insufficient change of circumstance shown to justify embarking on a hearing. though sometimes unstated, the underlying conclusion will or ought be that the interests of the child in not being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s welfare than to allow the application to continue. hasis added) the icl referred me to the decision of king & finneran [2001] famca 344, (2001) flc 93-079, where the application was dismissed for lacking a significant change in circumstance. it echoes what was said by warnick j above, and particularly that the rice & asplund issue can be determined at a preliminary stage.
the best interests of the children
section 60cc considerations
subsection (2a): the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration
subsection (2b): the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
section 60cc additional considerations
subsection (3)(a): any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
65 the children are both in good physical health. the children have been impacted emotionally by their experience of abuse at the hands of the father. i facilitated their attendance on their psychologist to help them deal with their responses to their experiences. [w] last saw his psychologist in august 2022 and [y] in october 2022. [y] experienced challenges with his mental health last year. in or around november 2022, [w] disclosed to me that he experienced flashbacks to being kicked by his paternal grandfather, while lying on the floor. he told me that he experienced this flashback while playing roughly, as boys do, with [y]. i have spoken to each of the boys about seeing their father again. [y] is very adamant that he wants nothing to do with his father and is very angry at the thought that he may have to see him. [w] says that he feels like his father cannot be trusted and that he doesn't want trouble again.
although i accept the icl’s submission that the children’s views should be considered in the context of their young age, i attach weight to the family consultant’s comment that the older child presented as “articulate” and “mature” in her oral evidence that it was her impression that both children “clearly remembered” events that they had described. these views of the children are shared by departmental officers who noted that they observed the children to “communicate exceptionally well both during the interview with [police] and during a home visit. (emphasis added)
subsection (3)(b): the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child)
subsection (3)(c): the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, (ii) to spend time with the child, and, (iii) to communicate with the child
subsection (3)(ca): the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
subsection (3)(d): the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living
subsection (3)(e): the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
subsection (3)(f): the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
subsection (3)(g): the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant
subsection (3)(h): if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right
subsection (3)(i): the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents
subsection (3)(j): any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family
subsection (3)(k): if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter
subsection (3)(l): whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
subsection (3)(m): any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant   local court records relating to police interviews with the children, (b) a transcript of the advo proceedings in the local court relating to the children’s cross-examination, (c) the child responsive program memorandum of the family consultant (discussing, inter alia, the children’s account of the assaults) who also gave oral evidence, (d) the children’s accounts of the assaults to attending physicians of the cpu at the children’s hospital, (e) photographs of bruising and injuries sustained by the children, (f) departmental records and notes made by the children’s psychologist, (g) medical evidence of a specialist paediatrician and the maintenance of her views when cross-examined in the local court, (h) a magellan report, and, (i) an investigation by jcprp finding that the reports of physical abuse of the children were substantiated.   a transcript of the advo proceedings in the local court relating to the children’s cross-examination, (c) the child responsive program memorandum of the family consultant (discussing, inter alia, the children’s account of the assaults) who also gave oral evidence, (d) the children’s accounts of the assaults to attending physicians of the cpu at the children’s hospital, (e) photographs of bruising and injuries sustained by the children, (f) departmental records and notes made by the children’s psychologist, (g) medical evidence of a specialist paediatrician and the maintenance of her views when cross-examined in the local court, (h) a magellan report, and, (i) an investigation by jcprp finding that the reports of physical abuse of the children were substantiated.   the child responsive program memorandum of the family consultant (discussing, inter alia, the children’s account of the assaults) who also gave oral evidence, (d) the children’s accounts of the assaults to attending physicians of the cpu at the children’s hospital, (e) photographs of bruising and injuries sustained by the children, (f) departmental records and notes made by the children’s psychologist, (g) medical evidence of a specialist paediatrician and the maintenance of her views when cross-examined in the local court, (h) a magellan report, and, (i) an investigation by jcprp finding that the reports of physical abuse of the children were substantiated.   the children’s accounts of the assaults to attending physicians of the cpu at the children’s hospital, (e) photographs of bruising and injuries sustained by the children, (f) departmental records and notes made by the children’s psychologist, (g) medical evidence of a specialist paediatrician and the maintenance of her views when cross-examined in the local court, (h) a magellan report, and, (i) an investigation by jcprp finding that the reports of physical abuse of the children were substantiated.   photographs of bruising and injuries sustained by the children, (f) departmental records and notes made by the children’s psychologist, (g) medical evidence of a specialist paediatrician and the maintenance of her views when cross-examined in the local court, (h) a magellan report, and, (i) an investigation by jcprp finding that the reports of physical abuse of the children were substantiated.   departmental records and notes made by the children’s psychologist, (g) medical evidence of a specialist paediatrician and the maintenance of her views when cross-examined in the local court, (h) a magellan report, and, (i) an investigation by jcprp finding that the reports of physical abuse of the children were substantiated.   medical evidence of a specialist paediatrician and the maintenance of her views when cross-examined in the local court, (h) a magellan report, and, (i) an investigation by jcprp finding that the reports of physical abuse of the children were substantiated.   a magellan report, and, (i) an investigation by jcprp finding that the reports of physical abuse of the children were substantiated.   an investigation by jcprp finding that the reports of physical abuse of the children were substantiated.   the father’s personal growth, (b) the children’s new stepmother and half-brother whom they have not met, (c) the father’s ability to participate in proceedings, and, (d) the children’s ability to express their views.   the children’s new stepmother and half-brother whom they have not met, (c) the father’s ability to participate in proceedings, and, (d) the children’s ability to express their views.   the father’s ability to participate in proceedings, and, (d) the children’s ability to express their views.   the children’s ability to express their views.
deputy associate: dated: 31 may 2023
dated: 31 may 2023