last updated: 7 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gartrell & deakin [2023] fedcfamc2f 714
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction
what are the issues that i have to determine in this case?
section 90sb when this division applies – length of relationship etc 90sb a court may make an order under section 90se, 90sg or 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, in relation to a de facto relationship only if the court is satisfied: (a) that the period, or the total of the periods, of the de facto relationship is at least 2 years, or   that the period, or the total of the periods, of the de facto relationship is at least 2 years, or   that there is a child of the de facto relationship, or (c) that: (i) the party to the de facto relationship who applies for the order or declaration made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), and (ii) a failure to make the order or declaration would result in serious injustice to the applicant, or (d) that the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory.   the party to the de facto relationship who applies for the order or declaration made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), and (ii) a failure to make the order or declaration would result in serious injustice to the applicant, or (d) that the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory.  ) a failure to make the order or declaration would result in serious injustice to the applicant, or (d) that the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory.   that the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory.
the final hearing & material relied upon  case outline filed 3 march 2023, (b) initiating application filed 25 may 2022, (c) husband’s affidavit filed 22 february 2023, (d) husband’s financial statement filed 22 february 2023.   initiating application filed 25 may 2022, (c) husband’s affidavit filed 22 february 2023, (d) husband’s financial statement filed 22 february 2023.   husband’s affidavit filed 22 february 2023, (d) husband’s financial statement filed 22 february 2023.   husband’s financial statement filed 22 february 2023.   case outline filed 3 march 2023, (b) wife’s affidavit filed 22 february 2023, (c) wife’s financial statement filed 1 march 2023, (d) affidavit of the wife’s sister, mr g, filed 22 february 2023, (e) affidavit of the wife’s father, mr h, filed 22 february 2023, and (f) affidavit of the wife’s ex-husband, mr d, filed 22 february 2023.   wife’s affidavit filed 22 february 2023, (c) wife’s financial statement filed 1 march 2023, (d) affidavit of the wife’s sister, mr g, filed 22 february 2023, (e) affidavit of the wife’s father, mr h, filed 22 february 2023, and (f) affidavit of the wife’s ex-husband, mr d, filed 22 february 2023.   wife’s financial statement filed 1 march 2023, (d) affidavit of the wife’s sister, mr g, filed 22 february 2023, (e) affidavit of the wife’s father, mr h, filed 22 february 2023, and (f) affidavit of the wife’s ex-husband, mr d, filed 22 february 2023.   affidavit of the wife’s sister, mr g, filed 22 february 2023, (e) affidavit of the wife’s father, mr h, filed 22 february 2023, and (f) affidavit of the wife’s ex-husband, mr d, filed 22 february 2023.   affidavit of the wife’s father, mr h, filed 22 february 2023, and (f) affidavit of the wife’s ex-husband, mr d, filed 22 february 2023.   affidavit of the wife’s ex-husband, mr d, filed 22 february 2023.
issue #1: length of the de facto relationship
365 days around the [sun emoji] with this guy [love heart emoji]. we have certainly packed a lot into one year through the good and the bad. you have always been on my side. even in the moments i wasn’t sure of myself you were my biggest cheerleader propping me up and giving me the courage i needed. the world is a better place because you are in it.
section 4aa de facto relationships 4aa(1) a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if:  the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family ..., and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.
no particular finding in relation to any circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have a de facto relationship.
issue #2: the jurisdictional requirements of section 90sb(c)
...returned all those moneys to [mr gartrell] in cash, which he transferred into my account, by withdrawing those moneys from atms.
i do not believe the wife’s evidence in terms of returning all of the moneys to the husband. mr white was able to take me to various transactions where her allegation that she did so was patently untrue, and, ultimately, the wife retreated from the position set out in her affidavit and instead suggested that she had returned all of the “large” payments. i do not believe that either.
this was our happy place just before lockdown and months of partying, alcohol and drugs abuse. we can be back there. i feel it in my heart and soul.
babe, i’m begging you. please give this another go. x
i take the “x” to mean a kiss, and this was followed by a text:
the drugs was a massive part of anxiety and behaviour.
...when he brings me lunch in torrential rain that i might add he made himself.
if usual or ordinary contributions were sufficient to amount to “substantial contributions” within the meaning of section 90sb(c), then there would be little purpose in the two-year requirement being included in section 90sb(a) of the act.
the word “substantial” is not only susceptible of ambiguity, it is a word calculated to conceal a lack of precision. in the phrase “substantial loss or damage”, it can, in an appropriate context, mean real or of substance as distinct from ephemeral or nominal. it can also mean large, weighty or big. it can be used in a relative sense or can indicate an absolute significance, quantity or size. the difficulties and uncertainties which the use of the word is liable to cause are well illustrated by the guidance given by viscount simon in palser v grinling ([1948] ac 291 at 317), where, after holding that, in the context there under consideration, the meaning of the word was equivalent to “considerable, solid or big”, he said, ‘applying the word in this sense, it must be left to the discretion of the judge of fact to decide as best he can, according to the circumstances of each case... clearly the “substantial contributions” test is a subjective one. any effort to elucidate its meaning by use of other words or phrases will simply replace one subjective test with another. it will remain a matter of impression whether the contributions are considered to be “substantial”. while recognising that the test is subjective, we are nevertheless inclined to agree with thackray j, who said in thorburn & oswald [2007] fcwa 43 at 54 said that a trial judge: would need to interpret the word “substantial” in the context of the financial position of the parties. what might appear to be a “substantial contribution” for people of limited financial resources, might not be substantial in a case involving very wealthy parties.
what is the meaning of ‘serious injustice’? the meaning of “serious injustice” was considered in ollie where judge whelan at [19] to [29] said: “[19] in miller, coates fm dealt with the issue of ‘serious injustice’ in the following passage:
‘the act recognises that an injustice may occur and so sets a higher test being a serious injustice. the word serious in this context, taken from the concise oxford dictionary, must mean not slight. the macquarie encyclopedic dictionary uses the words weighty or important. these meanings show a difference by marked degree from a mere injustice’  ] his honour later referred to the difference between a ‘serious injustice’ and an order made on the basis of justice and equity:
‘while an assessment of the possible division of property without testing the evidence is to some extent a hypothetical exercise, any division of course must be made on a justice and equity basis. but because the order altering the property must be just and equitable, as well as the percentage division, it follows that this aspect of justice and equity is not the same as a person suffering a serious injustice, because a claim was not allowed to proceed’  ]the respondent referred the court to two judgments concerning similar legislation to the act provisions where the concept of ‘serious injustice’ was considered. the first of these is a judgment of potter j of the new zealand high court in x and y [2010] nzhc 287. the judgment was in an appeal against a decision of the family court concerning s.14a of the property (relationships) act 1976 (nz) (the ‘pra’). section 14a of the pra provides:
‘(1) this section applies if a de facto relationship is a relationship of short duration (as defined in section 2e). (section 2e defined a relation for a period of less than three years as a relationship of short duration). (2) if this section applies, an order cannot be made under this act for the division of relationship property unless –  the court is satisfied – that there is a child of the de facto relationship, or (ii) that the applicant has made a substantial contribution to the de facto relationship, and the court is satisfied that failure to make the order would result in serious injustice’ ] the judge at first instance had referred to the meaning of ‘serious injustice’ in various judgments where the term was considered. heath j in henry v williams [2004] 2 nzlr 132, for example, said:
‘... the term ‘serious injustice’ suggests injustice of a type that the court cannot tolerate. while not creating a standard as high as the “repugnant to the interests of justice” test used in s 13 of the 1976 act ... the term requires a degree of injustice sufficient to require the court to intervene’  ] her honour noted that both judge inglis qc in gibbons v vowles (2003) 22 frnz 946 (‘gibbons’) and judge ullrich in ls v zj [2005] nzflr 932 had considered that:
‘... the injustice must be sufficiently serious to justify departure from the general rule that where the de facto relationship is of short duration no order can be made, the primary rule being that de facto relationships of short duration do not come under the pra at all’  ] justice potter, on the appeal, found that:
‘... there is an implicit requirement for the applicant who seeks orders from the court under s 14a to place before the court evidence which will both satisfy the court that one or other of the threshold requirements has been met and that the situation is such that serious injustice would result from failure to make an order’  ] his honour quoted from the judgment of judge inglis qc in gibbons where he said:
‘i consider that this door [to s.14a(3)] cannot be opened in the absence of detailed and specific evidence indicating in precisely what respects not opening the door could result in an injustice which is sufficiently serious to justify departure from the general rule that where the de facto relationship is of short duration no order ... can be made’  ] justice potter further quoted from gibbons where his honour said:
‘the exercise of determining whether ‘serious injustice’ does or does not arise necessarily involves comparison between the consequence for the parties as the result of the determination, though other factors which may assist in a finding whether or not there is ‘serious injustice’ are not excluded’  ] the respondent also referred to the decision of besanko j in the supreme court of the act in mcmaster & wilkie-snow [2011] actsc 183, a judgment concerning s.15(1) of the domestic relationships act 1994 (act) (the ‘dra’). that matter concerned an application to set aside a domestic relationship agreement on the grounds that, in the circumstances, the enforcement of the agreement would result in serious injustice. in that judgment, her honour said the following about the term ‘serious injustice’:
‘the meaning of serious injustice was considered by riley j invan jole v cole [2000] ntsc 18, 26 fam lr 228. his honour said that the words ‘serious injustice’ in s 46 of the de facto relationships act 1991 (nt) were to be accorded their ordinary meaning which was a considerable wrong or unfairness. i accept those observations, although one could also describe the requirement in terms of significant or substantial unfairness ...’  ] in van jole v cole [2000] ntsc 18, (2000) 26 fam lr 228 (‘van jole’), riley j of the northern territory supreme court was also dealing with the issue of whether a separation agreement made under the dra should be set aside. his honour stated:
‘it is clear that the court will not interfere with a separation agreement simply because it believes a different form of agreement was more appropriate. further it will not interfere where there is simple injustice. rather, it must be satisfied that a failure to intervene would result in “serious injustice” between the parties... an injustice is the opposite of justice and includes the concepts of a wrong or unfairness. the word serious in this context suggests weighty, grave or considerable’  ] in lf v ra [2005] qsc 375, (2005) 34 fam lr 536, white j of the queensland supreme court was dealing with an application for a property adjustment order pursuant to s.286 of the property law act 1974 (qld) (the ‘pla’). the parties had entered into a cohabitation agreement. section 276 of the pla provided that, on application for a property adjustment order, the court may vary the provisions of such an agreement if it was satisfied that enforcement would result in serious injustice for a party to the agreement. his honour adopted the approach in van jole and commented:
it is not, of course, a serious imbalance of itself which will give rise to a conclusion of serious injustice. the detail of the relationship and the parties’ financial and other contributions to the acquisition of the assets in the course of the relationship will be determinative of that question’”   there must be something more than just “mere injustice” or “simple injustice”, (b) the injustice must be “sufficiently serious” where there is “considerable wrong” or “unfairness”, (c) there is more to be taken into account than a “comparison of consequences”, (d) there must be a “weighty, grave or considerable” serious “imbalance”.   the injustice must be “sufficiently serious” where there is “considerable wrong” or “unfairness”, (c) there is more to be taken into account than a “comparison of consequences”, (d) there must be a “weighty, grave or considerable” serious “imbalance”.   there is more to be taken into account than a “comparison of consequences”, (d) there must be a “weighty, grave or considerable” serious “imbalance”.   there must be a “weighty, grave or considerable” serious “imbalance”.
wife: you do know this is our business, not just mine? babe, i can desk – [which i think that is meant to read “i can deal”] with everything else, but please don’t start giving me a hard time about this, as i am about to lose it, literally. husband: babe, i just get worried we’ll have no savings left. that is all, and that stresses me. x wife: what do you think i’m doing, babe? i’ve killer [sic] myself this week to make sure you aren’t stressed and the one thing i need is causing stress. i can’t fucking win. wife: what do you want from me? wife: tell me. husband: i’m sorry, babe. it’s all good. i love you. xx
i might try win 40g. i can’t believe my account is in 20g vibes. going to be less soon. i could die tomorrow so all is good. get a bag.
the wife responds:
baby, seriously, it’s fine. the business opens in a week and a half. we got this. it’s going to be amazing. xx husband: i love you more than love.
i love you and care about you so much and i’ll make sure that you have everything you deserve and more from the house and this relationship, but i can’t continue in this world we created. it’s killing me.
issue #3: is it “just and equitable” to make an order?
issue #4: contributions assessment
issue #5: future factors
postscript
conclusion & orders
associate: dated: 31 may 2023
dated: 31 may 2023