last updated: 17 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
viswan & parveen (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 666
orders
the court orders that:  in the event of any disagreement with respect to a listing agent at any time, either party may make application to the president for the time being of the real estate institute of nsw who shall then, upon such application being made, appoint an agent to act on behalf of the parties and the parties shall then: (i) engage and instruct that agent to act on their behalf. (ii) provide all co-operation and assistance to the agent as is required to enable the agent to effectively list the property, advertise the property for sale and undertake and allow inspections of the property by prospective purchasers. (iii) sign all documents necessary with respect to the engagement of such agent and negotiate payment of commission to the agent as is customary for work of that nature and that in the event of any disagreement or impasse with respect to commission, the president for the time being of the real estate institute of nsw shall determine such dispute upon application of either party or the agents so instructed. (b) in the event of any disagreement as to listing price then the parties shall obtain from the agent with whom the property is at such time listed, a realistic appraisal of the selling price of the property on the basis of an eager but not overanxious vendor and the parties shall then list the property for sale at 105% of that price and shall accept all and any offer or purchase at that price or 95% thereof, and (c) in the event of any disagreement as to the solicitor/conveyancer to be engaged by the parties on sale, then either party may make application to the president for the time being of the law society of nsw who shall then appoint a solicitor to so act and each party shall thereafter do all things and sign all documents necessary to engage and instruct that solicitor and provide full and timely instructions to the solicitor with respect to the sale and such solicitor shall be paid such fees as are negotiated between the parties and that solicitor or in the absence of agreement with respect to same as are determined by the president for the time being of the law society of nsw on the application of either party or the solicitors who are instructed.   engage and instruct that agent to act on their behalf. (ii) provide all co-operation and assistance to the agent as is required to enable the agent to effectively list the property, advertise the property for sale and undertake and allow inspections of the property by prospective purchasers. (iii) sign all documents necessary with respect to the engagement of such agent and negotiate payment of commission to the agent as is customary for work of that nature and that in the event of any disagreement or impasse with respect to commission, the president for the time being of the real estate institute of nsw shall determine such dispute upon application of either party or the agents so instructed.  ) provide all co-operation and assistance to the agent as is required to enable the agent to effectively list the property, advertise the property for sale and undertake and allow inspections of the property by prospective purchasers. (iii) sign all documents necessary with respect to the engagement of such agent and negotiate payment of commission to the agent as is customary for work of that nature and that in the event of any disagreement or impasse with respect to commission, the president for the time being of the real estate institute of nsw shall determine such dispute upon application of either party or the agents so instructed.  i) sign all documents necessary with respect to the engagement of such agent and negotiate payment of commission to the agent as is customary for work of that nature and that in the event of any disagreement or impasse with respect to commission, the president for the time being of the real estate institute of nsw shall determine such dispute upon application of either party or the agents so instructed.   in the event of any disagreement as to listing price then the parties shall obtain from the agent with whom the property is at such time listed, a realistic appraisal of the selling price of the property on the basis of an eager but not overanxious vendor and the parties shall then list the property for sale at 105% of that price and shall accept all and any offer or purchase at that price or 95% thereof, and (c) in the event of any disagreement as to the solicitor/conveyancer to be engaged by the parties on sale, then either party may make application to the president for the time being of the law society of nsw who shall then appoint a solicitor to so act and each party shall thereafter do all things and sign all documents necessary to engage and instruct that solicitor and provide full and timely instructions to the solicitor with respect to the sale and such solicitor shall be paid such fees as are negotiated between the parties and that solicitor or in the absence of agreement with respect to same as are determined by the president for the time being of the law society of nsw on the application of either party or the solicitors who are instructed.   in the event of any disagreement as to the solicitor/conveyancer to be engaged by the parties on sale, then either party may make application to the president for the time being of the law society of nsw who shall then appoint a solicitor to so act and each party shall thereafter do all things and sign all documents necessary to engage and instruct that solicitor and provide full and timely instructions to the solicitor with respect to the sale and such solicitor shall be paid such fees as are negotiated between the parties and that solicitor or in the absence of agreement with respect to same as are determined by the president for the time being of the law society of nsw on the application of either party or the solicitors who are instructed.   list the property with such agents as provided herein at such price as advised by the president of the real estate institute with further reviews of such price on a monthly basis until the property is sold, and (b) the parties shall further adopt such marketing program as may be advised by the president of the real estate institute nsw.   the parties shall further adopt such marketing program as may be advised by the president of the real estate institute nsw.   payment of mortgage. (b) payment of agent's commission, legal fees on sale and other costs incidental to the sale. (c) to the wife the sum of $225,992 less her half share of the payments in (b) above. (d) to the husband the sum of $143,770 less his half share of the payments in (b) above.   payment of agent's commission, legal fees on sale and other costs incidental to the sale. (c) to the wife the sum of $225,992 less her half share of the payments in (b) above. (d) to the husband the sum of $143,770 less his half share of the payments in (b) above.   to the wife the sum of $225,992 less her half share of the payments in (b) above. (d) to the husband the sum of $143,770 less his half share of the payments in (b) above.   to the husband the sum of $143,770 less his half share of the payments in (b) above.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
material relied upon  case outline filed 2 march 2023, (b) amended initiating application filed 30 june 2022, (c) her financial statement filed 1 march 2023, (d) her affidavit filed 18 august 2022, (e) affidavit of ms j filed 3 may 2021, (f) her solicitor’s written submissions (15 pages), (g) her solicitor’s medical summary (2 pages).   amended initiating application filed 30 june 2022, (c) her financial statement filed 1 march 2023, (d) her affidavit filed 18 august 2022, (e) affidavit of ms j filed 3 may 2021, (f) her solicitor’s written submissions (15 pages), (g) her solicitor’s medical summary (2 pages).   her financial statement filed 1 march 2023, (d) her affidavit filed 18 august 2022, (e) affidavit of ms j filed 3 may 2021, (f) her solicitor’s written submissions (15 pages), (g) her solicitor’s medical summary (2 pages).   her affidavit filed 18 august 2022, (e) affidavit of ms j filed 3 may 2021, (f) her solicitor’s written submissions (15 pages), (g) her solicitor’s medical summary (2 pages).   affidavit of ms j filed 3 may 2021, (f) her solicitor’s written submissions (15 pages), (g) her solicitor’s medical summary (2 pages).   her solicitor’s written submissions (15 pages), (g) her solicitor’s medical summary (2 pages).   her solicitor’s medical summary (2 pages).   case outline filed 2 march 2023, (b) his financial statement filed 6 march 2023, (c) his affidavits filed 25 october 2019 and 12 august 2022, (d) his counsel’s written submissions filed 8 may 2023.   his financial statement filed 6 march 2023, (c) his affidavits filed 25 october 2019 and 12 august 2022, (d) his counsel’s written submissions filed 8 may 2023.   his affidavits filed 25 october 2019 and 12 august 2022, (d) his counsel’s written submissions filed 8 may 2023.   his counsel’s written submissions filed 8 may 2023.   exhibit a: affidavit of mr q affirmed 8 september 2020, (b) exhibit b: subpoena to mr r dated 16 september 2019 and response to subpoena, (c) exhibit c: wife’s statement of claim in the district court of nsw, (d) exhibit d: affidavit of wife filed 27 june 2019, (e) exhibit e: joint balance sheet (as at trial date), (f) exhibit f: anz account of husband and husband’s recent mortgage statements, (g) exhibit g: anz loan account documents and superannuation documents, (h) exhibit h: minute of consent orders regarding further evidence to be adduced, (i) exhibit i: joint balance sheet (as at separation), (j) exhibit j: anz letters regarding home loan balances on properties.   exhibit b: subpoena to mr r dated 16 september 2019 and response to subpoena, (c) exhibit c: wife’s statement of claim in the district court of nsw, (d) exhibit d: affidavit of wife filed 27 june 2019, (e) exhibit e: joint balance sheet (as at trial date), (f) exhibit f: anz account of husband and husband’s recent mortgage statements, (g) exhibit g: anz loan account documents and superannuation documents, (h) exhibit h: minute of consent orders regarding further evidence to be adduced, (i) exhibit i: joint balance sheet (as at separation), (j) exhibit j: anz letters regarding home loan balances on properties.   exhibit c: wife’s statement of claim in the district court of nsw, (d) exhibit d: affidavit of wife filed 27 june 2019, (e) exhibit e: joint balance sheet (as at trial date), (f) exhibit f: anz account of husband and husband’s recent mortgage statements, (g) exhibit g: anz loan account documents and superannuation documents, (h) exhibit h: minute of consent orders regarding further evidence to be adduced, (i) exhibit i: joint balance sheet (as at separation), (j) exhibit j: anz letters regarding home loan balances on properties.   exhibit d: affidavit of wife filed 27 june 2019, (e) exhibit e: joint balance sheet (as at trial date), (f) exhibit f: anz account of husband and husband’s recent mortgage statements, (g) exhibit g: anz loan account documents and superannuation documents, (h) exhibit h: minute of consent orders regarding further evidence to be adduced, (i) exhibit i: joint balance sheet (as at separation), (j) exhibit j: anz letters regarding home loan balances on properties.   exhibit e: joint balance sheet (as at trial date), (f) exhibit f: anz account of husband and husband’s recent mortgage statements, (g) exhibit g: anz loan account documents and superannuation documents, (h) exhibit h: minute of consent orders regarding further evidence to be adduced, (i) exhibit i: joint balance sheet (as at separation), (j) exhibit j: anz letters regarding home loan balances on properties.   exhibit f: anz account of husband and husband’s recent mortgage statements, (g) exhibit g: anz loan account documents and superannuation documents, (h) exhibit h: minute of consent orders regarding further evidence to be adduced, (i) exhibit i: joint balance sheet (as at separation), (j) exhibit j: anz letters regarding home loan balances on properties.   exhibit g: anz loan account documents and superannuation documents, (h) exhibit h: minute of consent orders regarding further evidence to be adduced, (i) exhibit i: joint balance sheet (as at separation), (j) exhibit j: anz letters regarding home loan balances on properties.   exhibit h: minute of consent orders regarding further evidence to be adduced, (i) exhibit i: joint balance sheet (as at separation), (j) exhibit j: anz letters regarding home loan balances on properties.   exhibit i: joint balance sheet (as at separation), (j) exhibit j: anz letters regarding home loan balances on properties.   exhibit j: anz letters regarding home loan balances on properties.
application to set aside the financial agreement
evidence
wife’s affidavit filed 18 august 2022
the wife said: “if you want to marry me, why do i need to sign the agreement?” the husband said: “if you don’t sign the agreement, i will not marry you”. the wife said: “what do i do?” the husband said: “my lawyer has prepared the agreement, and you need to sign”. the wife said: “where is the document?”
the husband said: “if you don’t sign the agreement, i will not marry you”. the wife said: “what do i do?” the husband said: “my lawyer has prepared the agreement, and you need to sign”. the wife said: “where is the document?”
the wife said: “what do i do?” the husband said: “my lawyer has prepared the agreement, and you need to sign”. the wife said: “where is the document?”
the husband said: “my lawyer has prepared the agreement, and you need to sign”. the wife said: “where is the document?”
the wife said: “where is the document?”
the wife said: “what is really in the agreement?” the husband said: “whatever property i have is now mine, and whatever you have now is yours, and whatever we have during the relationship is ours”. the wife said: “well, i do not understand the law here, but why [do] i have to go see a lawyer?” the husband said: “he will have to explain the document that i have signed and then you sign”.
the husband said: “whatever property i have is now mine, and whatever you have now is yours, and whatever we have during the relationship is ours”. the wife said: “well, i do not understand the law here, but why [do] i have to go see a lawyer?” the husband said: “he will have to explain the document that i have signed and then you sign”.
the wife said: “well, i do not understand the law here, but why [do] i have to go see a lawyer?” the husband said: “he will have to explain the document that i have signed and then you sign”.
the husband said: “he will have to explain the document that i have signed and then you sign”.
the wife said: “why is that?” the husband said: “that is the law”. the wife said: “what do we do now?” the husband said: “meet me at train station p”.
the husband said: “that is the law”. the wife said: “what do we do now?” the husband said: “meet me at train station p”.
the wife said: “what do we do now?” the husband said: “meet me at train station p”.
the husband said: “meet me at train station p”.
husband’s affidavit filed 25 october 2019
husband’s affidavit filed 12 august 2022
oral evidence of the wife
oral evidence of the husband
mr r
mr q
the wife said: “what are the consequence if i signed this agreement?” [mr q] replied: “if you separate you are not able to claim any more of the family assets. this financial agreement lists all the property your husband has and your assets are almost zero. you will not be able to claim on his assets notwithstanding what happens during the marriage.”   q] replied: “if you separate you are not able to claim any more of the family assets. this financial agreement lists all the property your husband has and your assets are almost zero. you will not be able to claim on his assets notwithstanding what happens during the marriage.”
wife: “i have no option but to sign the agreement.” [mr q]: “why?” wife: “if i do not sign the agreement he will not marry me and i may have to go back to india because he may not sponsor me any more with the partner visa.” [mr q]: “my job here is to give you independent legal advice so that you know what you are signing. if you sign this you will not be able to bring a claim for property settlement for a share of your husband’s assets in the event you separate. depending on the length of time of your marriage this could be quite serious for you. i also need to explain the advantages and disadvantages. an advantage may be that you will avoid litigation and both parties are very clear about your contributions during the marriage which may promote harmony. the disadvantage is that you are only entitled to your own assets as set out in the financial agreement and your husband has many more assets. what would you like to do?” wife: “i have no choice i have to sign this agreement otherwise i won’t be married.” [mr q]: “you don’t have to sign the agreement.” wife: “i want to.”   q]: “why?” wife: “if i do not sign the agreement he will not marry me and i may have to go back to india because he may not sponsor me any more with the partner visa.” [mr q]: “my job here is to give you independent legal advice so that you know what you are signing. if you sign this you will not be able to bring a claim for property settlement for a share of your husband’s assets in the event you separate. depending on the length of time of your marriage this could be quite serious for you. i also need to explain the advantages and disadvantages. an advantage may be that you will avoid litigation and both parties are very clear about your contributions during the marriage which may promote harmony. the disadvantage is that you are only entitled to your own assets as set out in the financial agreement and your husband has many more assets. what would you like to do?” wife: “i have no choice i have to sign this agreement otherwise i won’t be married.” [mr q]: “you don’t have to sign the agreement.” wife: “i want to.”
wife: “if i do not sign the agreement he will not marry me and i may have to go back to india because he may not sponsor me any more with the partner visa.” [mr q]: “my job here is to give you independent legal advice so that you know what you are signing. if you sign this you will not be able to bring a claim for property settlement for a share of your husband’s assets in the event you separate. depending on the length of time of your marriage this could be quite serious for you. i also need to explain the advantages and disadvantages. an advantage may be that you will avoid litigation and both parties are very clear about your contributions during the marriage which may promote harmony. the disadvantage is that you are only entitled to your own assets as set out in the financial agreement and your husband has many more assets. what would you like to do?” wife: “i have no choice i have to sign this agreement otherwise i won’t be married.” [mr q]: “you don’t have to sign the agreement.” wife: “i want to.”   q]: “my job here is to give you independent legal advice so that you know what you are signing. if you sign this you will not be able to bring a claim for property settlement for a share of your husband’s assets in the event you separate. depending on the length of time of your marriage this could be quite serious for you. i also need to explain the advantages and disadvantages. an advantage may be that you will avoid litigation and both parties are very clear about your contributions during the marriage which may promote harmony. the disadvantage is that you are only entitled to your own assets as set out in the financial agreement and your husband has many more assets. what would you like to do?” wife: “i have no choice i have to sign this agreement otherwise i won’t be married.” [mr q]: “you don’t have to sign the agreement.” wife: “i want to.”
wife: “i have no choice i have to sign this agreement otherwise i won’t be married.” [mr q]: “you don’t have to sign the agreement.” wife: “i want to.”   q]: “you don’t have to sign the agreement.” wife: “i want to.”
wife: “i want to.”
i asked her, “do you understand the consequence if you sign this agreement?”...and she said she understood, but she has to sign, because if she refused (to) sign he will not marry her. she will lose her permanent resident entitlement.”
i told her that my job is to provide independent legal advice. i need to ensure she is willing to enter into this agreement, not by force, not by coerce.
“i did not give her advice that she should not sign...as long as she was willing to sign...she can sign as long as she was aware of the consequence of signing the agreement.”
legal principles
... there are different ways to prove the existence of undue influence. one method of proof is by direct evidence of the circumstances of the particular transaction...another way in which undue influence can be proved is by presumption.... a presumption, in the sense used here, arises where common experience is that the existence of one fact means that another fact also exists. common experience gives rise to a presumption that a transaction was not the exercise of a person’s free will if (i) the person is proved to be in a particular relationship, and (ii) the transaction is one, commonly involving a “substantial benefit” to another, which cannot be explained by “ordinary motives”, or “is not readily explicable by the relationship of the parties”. although the classes are not closed, in johnson v buttress latham cj described the relationships that could give rise to the presumption as including parent and child, guardian and ward, trustee and beneficiary, solicitor and client, physician and patient, and cases of religious influence. (footnotes omitted)   whether the agreement was offered on a basis that it was not subject to negotiation, (ii) the emotional circumstances in which the agreement was entered including any explicit or implicit threat to end a marriage or to end an engagement,  ) the emotional circumstances in which the agreement was entered including any explicit or implicit threat to end a marriage or to end an engagement,  i) whether there was any time for careful reflection, (iv) the nature of the parties’ relationship, (v) the relative financial positions of the parties, and (vi) the independent advice that was received and whether there was time to reflect on that advice.  ) the independent advice that was received and whether there was time to reflect on that advice.  otnotes omitted)
“in the latter the will of the innocent party is not independent and voluntary because it is overborne. in the former the will of the innocent party, even if independent and voluntary, is the result of the disadvantageous position in which he is placed and of the other party unconscientiously taking advantage of that position.” otnote omitted)
undue influence
i said: “if you want to marry me, why do i need to sign the agreement?” he said: “if you don’t sign the agreement, i will not marry you”. i said: ‘what do i do?” he said: “my lawyer has prepared the agreement, and you need to sign”. i said: ‘where is the document?” (court’s italics)
i said: ‘what is really in the agreement.” he said: ‘whatever property i have is now mine, and whatever you have now is yours, and whatever we have during the relationship is ours”. i said: ‘well, i do not understand the law here, but why [do] i have to go see a lawyer?” he said: “he will have to explain the document that i have signed and then you sign”.” (court’s italics)   effectively, prior to late 2013, the husband had told the wife that the proposed agreement was not subject to negotiation. in particular, in about late 2013, the husband had told the wife that if she did not sign the agreement he would not marry her, (b) the above statement by the husband to the wife (that is, if she did not sign the agreement he would not marry her) had a significant impact upon her and likely operated upon her mind up to and including late 2013. namely, by late 2013 when the wife signed the agreement before mr q, this statement by the husband to the wife had led her to believe that if she did not sign the agreement the husband would not marry her and she may have to return to india because the husband might not sponsor her anymore in relation to her partner visa. (the court observes that the wife did not obtain australian permanent residency status until 2016). indeed, in late 2013 she had told mr q that if she did not sign the agreement the husband would not marry her and she “may have to go back to india because (the husband) may not sponsor me any more with the partner visa”. moreover, the wife had told mr q in late 2013 that she had no option but to sign the agreement and had told him that she had “no choice” and that she had to sign the agreement, “otherwise i won’t be married.” and this belief of the wife persisted in the face of mr q’s advices to the wife that there were distinct disadvantages to the wife in entering into the agreement and that she did not have to sign the agreement. the court observes that after the agreement was signed the husband told the wife that now he could get married to her, (c) the wife had had no time for careful reflection in relation to the contents of the agreement prior to late 2013, the wife had not seen the agreement prior to late 2013, (d) the wife had met mr q for the first time in late 2013, she had received his advices for the first time on that date, and had signed the agreement before mr q immediately following his advices to her in relation to the agreement. effectively, she had had no sufficient time to reflect upon mr q’s advices in relation to the agreement.   the above statement by the husband to the wife (that is, if she did not sign the agreement he would not marry her) had a significant impact upon her and likely operated upon her mind up to and including late 2013. namely, by late 2013 when the wife signed the agreement before mr q, this statement by the husband to the wife had led her to believe that if she did not sign the agreement the husband would not marry her and she may have to return to india because the husband might not sponsor her anymore in relation to her partner visa. (the court observes that the wife did not obtain australian permanent residency status until 2016). indeed, in late 2013 she had told mr q that if she did not sign the agreement the husband would not marry her and she “may have to go back to india because (the husband) may not sponsor me any more with the partner visa”. moreover, the wife had told mr q in late 2013 that she had no option but to sign the agreement and had told him that she had “no choice” and that she had to sign the agreement, “otherwise i won’t be married.” and this belief of the wife persisted in the face of mr q’s advices to the wife that there were distinct disadvantages to the wife in entering into the agreement and that she did not have to sign the agreement. the court observes that after the agreement was signed the husband told the wife that now he could get married to her, (c) the wife had had no time for careful reflection in relation to the contents of the agreement prior to late 2013, the wife had not seen the agreement prior to late 2013, (d) the wife had met mr q for the first time in late 2013, she had received his advices for the first time on that date, and had signed the agreement before mr q immediately following his advices to her in relation to the agreement. effectively, she had had no sufficient time to reflect upon mr q’s advices in relation to the agreement.   the wife had had no time for careful reflection in relation to the contents of the agreement prior to late 2013, the wife had not seen the agreement prior to late 2013, (d) the wife had met mr q for the first time in late 2013, she had received his advices for the first time on that date, and had signed the agreement before mr q immediately following his advices to her in relation to the agreement. effectively, she had had no sufficient time to reflect upon mr q’s advices in relation to the agreement.   the wife had met mr q for the first time in late 2013, she had received his advices for the first time on that date, and had signed the agreement before mr q immediately following his advices to her in relation to the agreement. effectively, she had had no sufficient time to reflect upon mr q’s advices in relation to the agreement.
in this context, prior to late 2013 the husband had told the wife that his lawyer had prepared the agreement and she needed to sign it. on or about late 2013 he had told her that the agreement was ready and she would have to sign it. when the wife asked the husband why she had to go see a lawyer in relation to the agreement, the husband told her that the lawyer would have to explain the document that he had signed and “then you sign”, (e) in 2013 (but prior to late 2013) the husband had told the wife that he wanted to marry her subject to her signing the agreement. the husband asserts that the parties were engaged in india in 2012. the agreement, in recital d, refers to the parties intending to marry in 2013, (f) the husband, at the time of the parties entering into the agreement, had net assets of about $470,000 whereas the wife had net assets of $5,000. at this time the husband was employed as a professional and the wife was unemployed. again, the wife believed that if she did not sign the agreement, the husband would not marry her and she might have to return to india because of her australian immigration status. if the wife had to return to india, there was a real prospect that she would live with her elderly parents there and support and assist them as she did prior to the relationship, (g) the independent legal advice that mr q gave to the wife effectively included advice that in the event of the parties’ separation, the wife would not be able to claim on the husband’s “separate property” referred to in the agreement notwithstanding what happened during the marriage, and the wife would not be able to bring a claim for property settlement “for a share of your husband’s assets” in the event of separation. despite this advice, and her apparent understanding of it, the wife signed the agreement, (h) the court would assess that the agreement was not fair or reasonable to the wife.   in 2013 (but prior to late 2013) the husband had told the wife that he wanted to marry her subject to her signing the agreement. the husband asserts that the parties were engaged in india in 2012. the agreement, in recital d, refers to the parties intending to marry in 2013, (f) the husband, at the time of the parties entering into the agreement, had net assets of about $470,000 whereas the wife had net assets of $5,000. at this time the husband was employed as a professional and the wife was unemployed. again, the wife believed that if she did not sign the agreement, the husband would not marry her and she might have to return to india because of her australian immigration status. if the wife had to return to india, there was a real prospect that she would live with her elderly parents there and support and assist them as she did prior to the relationship, (g) the independent legal advice that mr q gave to the wife effectively included advice that in the event of the parties’ separation, the wife would not be able to claim on the husband’s “separate property” referred to in the agreement notwithstanding what happened during the marriage, and the wife would not be able to bring a claim for property settlement “for a share of your husband’s assets” in the event of separation. despite this advice, and her apparent understanding of it, the wife signed the agreement, (h) the court would assess that the agreement was not fair or reasonable to the wife.   the husband, at the time of the parties entering into the agreement, had net assets of about $470,000 whereas the wife had net assets of $5,000. at this time the husband was employed as a professional and the wife was unemployed. again, the wife believed that if she did not sign the agreement, the husband would not marry her and she might have to return to india because of her australian immigration status. if the wife had to return to india, there was a real prospect that she would live with her elderly parents there and support and assist them as she did prior to the relationship, (g) the independent legal advice that mr q gave to the wife effectively included advice that in the event of the parties’ separation, the wife would not be able to claim on the husband’s “separate property” referred to in the agreement notwithstanding what happened during the marriage, and the wife would not be able to bring a claim for property settlement “for a share of your husband’s assets” in the event of separation. despite this advice, and her apparent understanding of it, the wife signed the agreement, (h) the court would assess that the agreement was not fair or reasonable to the wife.   the independent legal advice that mr q gave to the wife effectively included advice that in the event of the parties’ separation, the wife would not be able to claim on the husband’s “separate property” referred to in the agreement notwithstanding what happened during the marriage, and the wife would not be able to bring a claim for property settlement “for a share of your husband’s assets” in the event of separation. despite this advice, and her apparent understanding of it, the wife signed the agreement, (h) the court would assess that the agreement was not fair or reasonable to the wife.   the court would assess that the agreement was not fair or reasonable to the wife.
the court observes that under the proposed agreement not only would the wife not be able to claim on the husband’s “separate property” referred to in the agreement (see annexure a to the agreement) in the event of separation, but should the husband acquire property in his own name during the relationship (which in fact the husband did, namely he acquired the e street, suburb f property in 2017) such property would effectively remain the property of the husband: see clause 3(b) (“joint property is all property which is not defined as separate property as per paragraph 2 herein”), clause 4(b) (“any property acquired...by the parties shall be recorded in writing or by title documentation to be the asset...of one or other or both of them”), and clause 6(b) (“joint property will be divided between them in accordance with their entitlements as evidenced in writing or title documentation...”), accordingly, by entering into the agreement, not only would the wife be unable to bring to account a contribution to the husband’s “separate property” as set out in the agreement, but she would be unable to bring to account a contribution to the husband’s property acquired in his name during their relationship, and she would be unable to bring to account a contribution as homemaker made during their relationship.
“i told her that my job is to provide independent legal advice. i need to ensure she is willing to enter into this agreement, not by force, not by coerce.”
unconscionable conduct
causation  that she had no option but to sign the agreement, (b) that if she did not sign the agreement the husband would not marry her and she may have to go back to india because the husband may not sponsor her anymore with the partner visa, (c) that she had no choice and had to sign the agreement otherwise she would not be married, and, (d) that she wanted to sign the agreement despite mr q telling her that she did not have to sign the agreement,   that if she did not sign the agreement the husband would not marry her and she may have to go back to india because the husband may not sponsor her anymore with the partner visa, (c) that she had no choice and had to sign the agreement otherwise she would not be married, and, (d) that she wanted to sign the agreement despite mr q telling her that she did not have to sign the agreement,   that she had no choice and had to sign the agreement otherwise she would not be married, and, (d) that she wanted to sign the agreement despite mr q telling her that she did not have to sign the agreement,   that she wanted to sign the agreement despite mr q telling her that she did not have to sign the agreement,
with the wife, according to mr q, then proceeding to sign the agreement, the court would infer that the wife’s above statements to mr q (that is, that the agreement was just a piece of paper and it didn’t bother her) were likely made to mr q at some stage prior to the wife asking mr q to explain the consequences of her signing the agreement (see the opening lines of paragraph 20 of mr q’s affidavit) and prior to the wife’s statements to mr q in (a)-(d) above.
property
balance sheet
section 79(2) of the act
contributions
section 75(2) of the act
justice and equity  the 3 properties: $2,795,000 (b) bank accounts: $600 (c) bf pty ltd: $50 (d) his superannuation entitlements: $236,000   bank accounts: $600 (c) bf pty ltd: $50 (d) his superannuation entitlements: $236,000   bf pty ltd: $50 (d) his superannuation entitlements: $236,000   his superannuation entitlements: $236,000
totalling $3,031,650, less mortgage loan liabilities, $1,867,288, leaving net $1,164,362, and the wife retain: (a) bank accounts: $5,200 (b) jewellery: $2,000 (c) her superannuation: $1,400, totalling $8,600, then the husband will need to pay the wife the sum of $225,992 ($234,592 less $8,600). the husband should be given 10 weeks to pay this sum to the wife, failing which the property at b street, suburb c should be sold (the court observes that this property is probably the only property with sufficient equity to enable $225,992 to be paid to the wife: exhibit j. the court also observes that the wife had sought orders that all 3 properties be sold).
less mortgage loan liabilities, $1,867,288, leaving net $1,164,362, and the wife retain: (a) bank accounts: $5,200 (b) jewellery: $2,000 (c) her superannuation: $1,400, totalling $8,600, then the husband will need to pay the wife the sum of $225,992 ($234,592 less $8,600). the husband should be given 10 weeks to pay this sum to the wife, failing which the property at b street, suburb c should be sold (the court observes that this property is probably the only property with sufficient equity to enable $225,992 to be paid to the wife: exhibit j. the court also observes that the wife had sought orders that all 3 properties be sold).
leaving net $1,164,362, and the wife retain: (a) bank accounts: $5,200 (b) jewellery: $2,000 (c) her superannuation: $1,400, totalling $8,600, then the husband will need to pay the wife the sum of $225,992 ($234,592 less $8,600). the husband should be given 10 weeks to pay this sum to the wife, failing which the property at b street, suburb c should be sold (the court observes that this property is probably the only property with sufficient equity to enable $225,992 to be paid to the wife: exhibit j. the court also observes that the wife had sought orders that all 3 properties be sold).
and the wife retain: (a) bank accounts: $5,200 (b) jewellery: $2,000 (c) her superannuation: $1,400, totalling $8,600, then the husband will need to pay the wife the sum of $225,992 ($234,592 less $8,600). the husband should be given 10 weeks to pay this sum to the wife, failing which the property at b street, suburb c should be sold (the court observes that this property is probably the only property with sufficient equity to enable $225,992 to be paid to the wife: exhibit j. the court also observes that the wife had sought orders that all 3 properties be sold).   bank accounts: $5,200 (b) jewellery: $2,000 (c) her superannuation: $1,400, totalling $8,600, then the husband will need to pay the wife the sum of $225,992 ($234,592 less $8,600). the husband should be given 10 weeks to pay this sum to the wife, failing which the property at b street, suburb c should be sold (the court observes that this property is probably the only property with sufficient equity to enable $225,992 to be paid to the wife: exhibit j. the court also observes that the wife had sought orders that all 3 properties be sold).   jewellery: $2,000 (c) her superannuation: $1,400, totalling $8,600, then the husband will need to pay the wife the sum of $225,992 ($234,592 less $8,600). the husband should be given 10 weeks to pay this sum to the wife, failing which the property at b street, suburb c should be sold (the court observes that this property is probably the only property with sufficient equity to enable $225,992 to be paid to the wife: exhibit j. the court also observes that the wife had sought orders that all 3 properties be sold).   her superannuation: $1,400, totalling $8,600, then the husband will need to pay the wife the sum of $225,992 ($234,592 less $8,600). the husband should be given 10 weeks to pay this sum to the wife, failing which the property at b street, suburb c should be sold (the court observes that this property is probably the only property with sufficient equity to enable $225,992 to be paid to the wife: exhibit j. the court also observes that the wife had sought orders that all 3 properties be sold).
totalling $8,600, then the husband will need to pay the wife the sum of $225,992 ($234,592 less $8,600). the husband should be given 10 weeks to pay this sum to the wife, failing which the property at b street, suburb c should be sold (the court observes that this property is probably the only property with sufficient equity to enable $225,992 to be paid to the wife: exhibit j. the court also observes that the wife had sought orders that all 3 properties be sold).
then the husband will need to pay the wife the sum of $225,992 ($234,592 less $8,600). the husband should be given 10 weeks to pay this sum to the wife, failing which the property at b street, suburb c should be sold (the court observes that this property is probably the only property with sufficient equity to enable $225,992 to be paid to the wife: exhibit j. the court also observes that the wife had sought orders that all 3 properties be sold).   her above assets and superannuation totalling $8,600,
then she will need to receive cash of $225,992 (being $234,592 less $8,600). such cash can be paid to the wife from the net sale proceeds of the b street, suburb c property.   the properties at g street, suburb h, act, and e street, suburb f: $1,600,000 (b) bank accounts: $600 (c) bf pty ltd: $50 (d) his superannuation entitlements: $236,000
totalling $1,836,650, less mortgage loan debt attaching to g street, suburb h and e street, suburb f of $1,042,051, leaving $794,599, then the husband will need to receive cash of $143,770 (being $938,369 less $794,599). such cash can be paid from the net sale proceeds of the b street, suburb c property.
less mortgage loan debt attaching to g street, suburb h and e street, suburb f of $1,042,051, leaving $794,599, then the husband will need to receive cash of $143,770 (being $938,369 less $794,599). such cash can be paid from the net sale proceeds of the b street, suburb c property.
leaving $794,599, then the husband will need to receive cash of $143,770 (being $938,369 less $794,599). such cash can be paid from the net sale proceeds of the b street, suburb c property.
then the husband will need to receive cash of $143,770 (being $938,369 less $794,599). such cash can be paid from the net sale proceeds of the b street, suburb c property.
associate: dated: 1 june 2023
dated: 1 june 2023
[1] hoult & hoult [2013] famcafc 109 at [100]- [101].