last updated: 7 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
fadel & gibbons [2023] fedcfamc2f 679
orders
the court orders that:  allowing the child to come into any form of contact with mr e, being the mother’s current partner, (b) allowing the child to come into contact with the mother if they are of the belief that she is under the influence of either illicit substances and/or alcohol.   allowing the child to come into contact with the mother if they are of the belief that she is under the influence of either illicit substances and/or alcohol.
reasons for judgment
judge street
undefended hearing against the first respondent
“a respondent who merely wishes to ask the court to dismiss the appellant’s application (and seeks no other order) and who wishes to place no evidence before the court, but who wishes to submit that the application should be dismissed even on the applicant’s evidence, is certainly not obliged by the rules to file any answer or affidavit, but only a notice of address for service. however, if such a respondent then attends the hearing and in fact makes no submissions against the application (as the husband did in this case) then, in anyone’s language, the application is ‘undefended’ or ‘unopposed’. unlike some other jurisdictions, such a circumstance does not and cannot lead, in this court, to a ‘judgment by default’ in favour of the applicant, because the court must still decide, on the evidence before it, that the applicant is entitled, in law, to the relief claimed and that, in the exercise of its discretion, it is appropriate to grant that relief. nevertheless, the proceedings in such a case are clearly ‘undefended’, and it would be a misuse of language to describe them otherwise. they certainly could not be described as ‘defended’.”
chronology
documents relied upon  affidavit of mr fadel filed 29 may 2023,   affidavit of ms b haneen filed 4 may 2023, (b) affidavit of mr c haneen filed 4 may 2023,   affidavit of mr c haneen filed 4 may 2023,
evidence
parenting principles
the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
best interests of the child
...no doubt in the majority of cases, there will be a positive benefit for the child having a significant relationship with both parents, but there will also be some cases where there will be no positive benefit to be derived by a child by a court attempting to craft orders to foster a relationship with one parent, if this would not be in the child’s best interests.
... having a “meaningful relationship” with both parents is but one part of a set of arrangements that makes up a care arrangement. all parts of the arrangement must be considered before deciding what outcome is in the child’s best interests.
there is no legislative definition of “meaningful relationship” but for there to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child. (emphasis added)
and that desirability only operates when there is a chance of a meaningful relationship, which is beneficial to the child. it is not, in other words, a question of contact for contact sake. if there is a situation where contact with a parent is, on balance, likely to cause more harm to the child than good, or even is not likely to confer any benefit, then little purpose is served by this court making orders for such contact. that does not detract from the desirability of the child having a meaningful relationship, but the possibility of a meaningful relationship must first exist. (emphasis added)
issue of risk
138. the assessment of risk is a predictive exercise and while it is, naturally enough, liable to be influenced by factual findings about past events, the contemplation of risk entails the foresight of possible harm. it is an oddity to expect that the mere possibility of future harm can or should be proven as a probability, as has been implied before (potter and potter [2007] famca 350, (2007) flc 93-326 at [110], [129]). risks of harm must be heeded even if they are improbable eventualities. 139. speaking of the risk of some future occurrence is just another way of expressing the chance of it happening. the concept of chance lies along a continuum, encompassing all outcomes which lie in the range between highly probable and remotely possible, assuming the polar extremes of certainty are ignored. in the current context, the higher the chance of the children’s sexual abuse, the greater the risk of their physical or psychological harm. at some point on the continuum the risk of such harm becomes so potent it cannot be tolerated: it is unacceptable. ... 142. as was recognised by hale lj (as her ladyship then was) in re c and b (children) (care order: future harm) [2001] 1 f.l.r 611 at [28], in child-related proceedings, a comparatively small risk of really serious harm can justify action, while even the virtual certainty of slight harm might not. it could hardly be otherwise, because no prudent adult would willingly expose a child to the risk of sexual abuse when there is an unacceptably high chance of its occurrence, even though the chance is not proven by the evidence to be probable. requiring the proof of any possible future child abuse as a probability would pervert the law as settled by the high court in m v m and malec. (emphasis in the original)   it is now well established that “unacceptable risk” includes not merely physical harm but also includes an assessment of the risk of emotional harm: see a v a [1998] famca 25, (1998) flc 92-800 at 84,996, m v m (1988) 166 clr 69 at 77. (b) such an unacceptable risk can include any or all matters that compromise the safety, welfare and well-being of a child, and is examined in light of an accumulation of factors proved: see director general, department of family and community services (nsw) and the colt children [2013] nswchc 5 at [146]–[148]. (c) the components which lead to a conclusion that an unacceptable risk exists need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of “unacceptable risk” from the accumulation of factors, none or only some of which are proved to that standard: see johnson & page [2007] famca 1235, (2007) flc 93-344 at [68], endorsing and applying the principles set out in a paper prepared by the hon john fogarty am, “unacceptable risk: a return to basics” (2006) 20 australian journal of family law 249. (d) while each factor establishing risk need not be proved to the standard of s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), insofar as determining whether an unacceptable risk exists involves a prediction of the future, based on findings of fact: “the confidence one will have in the prediction will be, in part, a reflection of the confidence one has in the factual findings that base the prediction”.   such an unacceptable risk can include any or all matters that compromise the safety, welfare and well-being of a child, and is examined in light of an accumulation of factors proved: see director general, department of family and community services (nsw) and the colt children [2013] nswchc 5 at [146]–[148]. (c) the components which lead to a conclusion that an unacceptable risk exists need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of “unacceptable risk” from the accumulation of factors, none or only some of which are proved to that standard: see johnson & page [2007] famca 1235, (2007) flc 93-344 at [68], endorsing and applying the principles set out in a paper prepared by the hon john fogarty am, “unacceptable risk: a return to basics” (2006) 20 australian journal of family law 249. (d) while each factor establishing risk need not be proved to the standard of s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), insofar as determining whether an unacceptable risk exists involves a prediction of the future, based on findings of fact: “the confidence one will have in the prediction will be, in part, a reflection of the confidence one has in the factual findings that base the prediction”.   the components which lead to a conclusion that an unacceptable risk exists need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of “unacceptable risk” from the accumulation of factors, none or only some of which are proved to that standard: see johnson & page [2007] famca 1235, (2007) flc 93-344 at [68], endorsing and applying the principles set out in a paper prepared by the hon john fogarty am, “unacceptable risk: a return to basics” (2006) 20 australian journal of family law 249. (d) while each factor establishing risk need not be proved to the standard of s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), insofar as determining whether an unacceptable risk exists involves a prediction of the future, based on findings of fact: “the confidence one will have in the prediction will be, in part, a reflection of the confidence one has in the factual findings that base the prediction”.   while each factor establishing risk need not be proved to the standard of s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), insofar as determining whether an unacceptable risk exists involves a prediction of the future, based on findings of fact: “the confidence one will have in the prediction will be, in part, a reflection of the confidence one has in the factual findings that base the prediction”.
additional considerations
issues relating to the children – their views, level of maturity, culture and relationships:
issues relating to the parents – decision making, time spent with children, fulfilled obligations, attitude, capacity and exercise of responsibility:
issues of family violence:
effect of change:
practical difficulty of implementation:
avoiding further proceedings:
other relevant matters:
submissions
findings and conclusion
associate: dated: 2 june 2023
dated: 2 june 2023