last updated: 25 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
jerome & jerome [2023] fedcfamc2f 754
orders
by consent until further order:  within 30 days of the date of these orders, the parties will appoint a real estate agent agreed in writing to sell the b street, suburb c property. (b) if within 14 days of the date of these orders the parties are unable to agree on a real estate agent to sell the b street, suburb c property, the parties will request the president of the real estate institute of victoria to nominate a real estate agent and the parties will appoint that nominated real estate agent to sell the b street, suburb c property. (c) the parties will have the joint conduct of the sale of the b street, suburb c property, and to the extent that it may be necessary, the husband hereby irrevocably authorises, requests and directs the real estate agent appointed to sell the b street, suburb c property to: (i) provide to the wife all information about the sale of the b street, suburb c property, including any offers made to purchase the b street, suburb c property. (ii) act only in accordance with joint instructions from the parties in relation to the sale of the b street, suburb c property. (d) the wife be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the real estate agent appointed to sell the b street, suburb c property. (e) the b street, suburb c property will be sold by public auction on a date to be agreed after consultation with the real estate agent. (f) the reserve price for the b street, suburb c property will be as agreed between the parties upon the advice of the agent. (g) if the b street, suburb c property does not sell at public auction, the b street, suburb c property will be offered for private sale with a reserve price of $1,950,000 or such other reserve price as agreed between the parties after consultation with the selling agent.   if within 14 days of the date of these orders the parties are unable to agree on a real estate agent to sell the b street, suburb c property, the parties will request the president of the real estate institute of victoria to nominate a real estate agent and the parties will appoint that nominated real estate agent to sell the b street, suburb c property. (c) the parties will have the joint conduct of the sale of the b street, suburb c property, and to the extent that it may be necessary, the husband hereby irrevocably authorises, requests and directs the real estate agent appointed to sell the b street, suburb c property to: (i) provide to the wife all information about the sale of the b street, suburb c property, including any offers made to purchase the b street, suburb c property. (ii) act only in accordance with joint instructions from the parties in relation to the sale of the b street, suburb c property. (d) the wife be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the real estate agent appointed to sell the b street, suburb c property. (e) the b street, suburb c property will be sold by public auction on a date to be agreed after consultation with the real estate agent. (f) the reserve price for the b street, suburb c property will be as agreed between the parties upon the advice of the agent. (g) if the b street, suburb c property does not sell at public auction, the b street, suburb c property will be offered for private sale with a reserve price of $1,950,000 or such other reserve price as agreed between the parties after consultation with the selling agent.   the parties will have the joint conduct of the sale of the b street, suburb c property, and to the extent that it may be necessary, the husband hereby irrevocably authorises, requests and directs the real estate agent appointed to sell the b street, suburb c property to: (i) provide to the wife all information about the sale of the b street, suburb c property, including any offers made to purchase the b street, suburb c property. (ii) act only in accordance with joint instructions from the parties in relation to the sale of the b street, suburb c property. (d) the wife be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the real estate agent appointed to sell the b street, suburb c property. (e) the b street, suburb c property will be sold by public auction on a date to be agreed after consultation with the real estate agent. (f) the reserve price for the b street, suburb c property will be as agreed between the parties upon the advice of the agent. (g) if the b street, suburb c property does not sell at public auction, the b street, suburb c property will be offered for private sale with a reserve price of $1,950,000 or such other reserve price as agreed between the parties after consultation with the selling agent.   provide to the wife all information about the sale of the b street, suburb c property, including any offers made to purchase the b street, suburb c property. (ii) act only in accordance with joint instructions from the parties in relation to the sale of the b street, suburb c property.  ) act only in accordance with joint instructions from the parties in relation to the sale of the b street, suburb c property.   the wife be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the real estate agent appointed to sell the b street, suburb c property. (e) the b street, suburb c property will be sold by public auction on a date to be agreed after consultation with the real estate agent. (f) the reserve price for the b street, suburb c property will be as agreed between the parties upon the advice of the agent. (g) if the b street, suburb c property does not sell at public auction, the b street, suburb c property will be offered for private sale with a reserve price of $1,950,000 or such other reserve price as agreed between the parties after consultation with the selling agent.   the b street, suburb c property will be sold by public auction on a date to be agreed after consultation with the real estate agent. (f) the reserve price for the b street, suburb c property will be as agreed between the parties upon the advice of the agent. (g) if the b street, suburb c property does not sell at public auction, the b street, suburb c property will be offered for private sale with a reserve price of $1,950,000 or such other reserve price as agreed between the parties after consultation with the selling agent.   the reserve price for the b street, suburb c property will be as agreed between the parties upon the advice of the agent. (g) if the b street, suburb c property does not sell at public auction, the b street, suburb c property will be offered for private sale with a reserve price of $1,950,000 or such other reserve price as agreed between the parties after consultation with the selling agent.   if the b street, suburb c property does not sell at public auction, the b street, suburb c property will be offered for private sale with a reserve price of $1,950,000 or such other reserve price as agreed between the parties after consultation with the selling agent.
it is noted that it is understood that if the parties are unable to agree on a reserve price or any other aspect of the sale an application about that issue may be made to the court.   first to pay the costs, commission and expenses of sale. (b) second, to discharge the bank d mortgage (registration ...) affecting the property. (c) the balance be paid into the wife’s solicitor’s trust account pending further order or written agreement between the parties.   second, to discharge the bank d mortgage (registration ...) affecting the property. (c) the balance be paid into the wife’s solicitor’s trust account pending further order or written agreement between the parties.   the balance be paid into the wife’s solicitor’s trust account pending further order or written agreement between the parties.
and it is ordered that:
8a on or before 4:00 pm each wednesday commencing 13 december 2022 and each week thereafter the husband will pay to the wife by way of spouse maintenance the sum of $827. 8b from 22 february 2023 the sum in order 8a is reduced to $256. 8c from 30 june 2023 the amount in order 8a continues to accrue but payment is suspended on condition that: (i) the husband pay to the wife the lump sum of $3,840 forthwith, which amount shall be deducted from any arrears owing under these orders, and (ii) the husband resumes by 30 june 2023, and provides evidence to the wife of having done so, payment of the mortgage on the b street, suburb c property.   the husband pay to the wife the lump sum of $3,840 forthwith, which amount shall be deducted from any arrears owing under these orders, and (ii) the husband resumes by 30 june 2023, and provides evidence to the wife of having done so, payment of the mortgage on the b street, suburb c property.  ) the husband resumes by 30 june 2023, and provides evidence to the wife of having done so, payment of the mortgage on the b street, suburb c property.
reasons for judgment
judge young:
associate: dated: 2 june 2023
dated: 2 june 2023