last updated: 14 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
maples & maples [2023] fedcfamc2f 782
orders
the court orders that:
parenting orders  each alternate week from after school wednesday until before school the following monday, commencing the first week of each school term, (b) at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 in even numbered years from 9.00am on the first saturday until 5.00pm on the second sunday and in odd numbered years from 5.00pm on the second sunday until 5.00pm on the third sunday, (c) during the end of term 4 school holidays: in even numbered years for two weeks from 2.00pm on 24 december. (d) during the end of term 4 school holidays: in odd numbered years for two weeks from 2.00pm on 26 december.   at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 in even numbered years from 9.00am on the first saturday until 5.00pm on the second sunday and in odd numbered years from 5.00pm on the second sunday until 5.00pm on the third sunday, (c) during the end of term 4 school holidays: in even numbered years for two weeks from 2.00pm on 24 december. (d) during the end of term 4 school holidays: in odd numbered years for two weeks from 2.00pm on 26 december.   during the end of term 4 school holidays: in even numbered years for two weeks from 2.00pm on 24 december. (d) during the end of term 4 school holidays: in odd numbered years for two weeks from 2.00pm on 26 december.   during the end of term 4 school holidays: in odd numbered years for two weeks from 2.00pm on 26 december.
authorities
restraints  possessing, consuming or being in any way affected by any illicit substance, (b) consuming alcohol to such an extent that the parent would not lawfully be able to drive a motor vehicle noting however that this specific alcohol injunction is not intended to limit the right of either parent to make other appropriate care arrangements pursuant to s 65dae of the act if the parent intends to consume alcohol.   consuming alcohol to such an extent that the parent would not lawfully be able to drive a motor vehicle noting however that this specific alcohol injunction is not intended to limit the right of either parent to make other appropriate care arrangements pursuant to s 65dae of the act if the parent intends to consume alcohol.
passports and international travel  unless otherwise agreed in writing, such travel is not to interfere with the children’s time with the other parent in accordance with these orders, (b) the travelling parent provides the other parent with at least five (5) weeks’ notice, in writing, of the proposed departure and return dates, and destination(s), and (c) at least two (2) weeks prior to departure, the travelling parent must provide the other parent with a copy of all return tickets and travel itineraries for the children, telephone contact numbers for the children while overseas, details of the accommodation provider and copies of travel insurance documents.   the travelling parent provides the other parent with at least five (5) weeks’ notice, in writing, of the proposed departure and return dates, and destination(s), and (c) at least two (2) weeks prior to departure, the travelling parent must provide the other parent with a copy of all return tickets and travel itineraries for the children, telephone contact numbers for the children while overseas, details of the accommodation provider and copies of travel insurance documents.   at least two (2) weeks prior to departure, the travelling parent must provide the other parent with a copy of all return tickets and travel itineraries for the children, telephone contact numbers for the children while overseas, details of the accommodation provider and copies of travel insurance documents.
property orders  transfer to the wife all of the husband’s right, title and interest in and to the former matrimonial home situated at c street, town d and being the whole of the land comprised in title reference ... (“the town d property”), (b) transfer to the husband all of the wife’s right, title and interest in and to the real property situated at e street, town f and being the whole of the land comprised in title reference ... (“the town f property”), (c) in the husband’s case, vacate the town d property, (d) in the wife’s case, vacate the town f property.   transfer to the husband all of the wife’s right, title and interest in and to the real property situated at e street, town f and being the whole of the land comprised in title reference ... (“the town f property”), (c) in the husband’s case, vacate the town d property, (d) in the wife’s case, vacate the town f property.   in the husband’s case, vacate the town d property, (d) in the wife’s case, vacate the town f property.   in the wife’s case, vacate the town f property.   the husband is to discharge the mortgage encumbering the town d property so that the wife receives it unencumbered, (b) the husband is to refinance the mortgage encumbering the town f property so that the wife is removed as a borrower and mortgagor.   the husband is to refinance the mortgage encumbering the town f property so that the wife is removed as a borrower and mortgagor.   on account of any loans owed by either party to maples pty ltd (or to any other entity referred to in order 27) which may potentially attract the operation of division 7a of the income tax assessment act 1936 (clth), (b) in respect of the outstanding bills of the parties referred to in these reasons in the amount of $52,710, (c) in respect of the joint post-separation payments made by the husband referred to in these reasons of $179,672.   in respect of the outstanding bills of the parties referred to in these reasons in the amount of $52,710, (c) in respect of the joint post-separation payments made by the husband referred to in these reasons of $179,672.   in respect of the joint post-separation payments made by the husband referred to in these reasons of $179,672.
superannuation   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property, including chases-in-action, in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (c) each party foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save as provided for in these orders, (d) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (c) each party foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save as provided for in these orders, (d) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   each party foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save as provided for in these orders, (d) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.
notation:  dial: ... (b) enter conference id: ...#   enter conference id: ...#
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction
the hearing / material relied upon / witness observations
part i – the parenting proceedingsthe law
the limited issues in dispute
brief factual background
best interests
“it is sad that [y]'s parents cannot work cooperatively to his advantage”.
discussion of the disputed issues
conclusion & orders
part ii – the property settlement proceedingsthe law
the balance sheet
balance sheet
assets
liabilities
superannuation should add here that the wife has since separated from mr v, having re-partnered with mr r.)
is it just & equitable to make any order?
assessment of contributions
initial contributions
contributions during the relationship
look at these two proud property owners.
the only people the husband could be referring to there were himself and his father.
post-separation contributions
...and collected what was left before those items went missing.
overall assessment of contributions
relevant future factors
a “just & equitable” outcome?
conclusion & form of order
associate: dated: 6 june 2023
dated: 6 june 2023
[1] upon revising my oral reasons, i note that i had erroneously referred to the “oo street” property in this sentence when i clearly intended to refer to aa street. accordingly, i have made that correction.