last updated: 17 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
guanyu & bai [2023] fedcfamc2f 698
orders
the court orders that:
costs
service and s 121 orders  the real estate agent acting on the sales of the properties at d(1) street, suburb e and d(2) street, suburb e (“the suburb e properties”), (b) the vendor’s solicitor(s) as stated on the contracts of sale of the suburb e properties, (c) the commonwealth bank of australia and any other mortgagee listed on the titles to the b street, suburb c property, the suburb e properties and the property at f street, suburb g (“the f street, suburb g property”), and (d) the new south wales land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the b street, suburb c property, the suburb e properties and the f street, suburb g property.   the vendor’s solicitor(s) as stated on the contracts of sale of the suburb e properties, (c) the commonwealth bank of australia and any other mortgagee listed on the titles to the b street, suburb c property, the suburb e properties and the property at f street, suburb g (“the f street, suburb g property”), and (d) the new south wales land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the b street, suburb c property, the suburb e properties and the f street, suburb g property.   the commonwealth bank of australia and any other mortgagee listed on the titles to the b street, suburb c property, the suburb e properties and the property at f street, suburb g (“the f street, suburb g property”), and (d) the new south wales land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the b street, suburb c property, the suburb e properties and the f street, suburb g property.   the new south wales land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the b street, suburb c property, the suburb e properties and the f street, suburb g property.   australian federal police, (b) australian border force or equivalent chinese agency, and (c) australian department of foreign affairs and trade and its equivalent chinese agency.   australian border force or equivalent chinese agency, and (c) australian department of foreign affairs and trade and its equivalent chinese agency.   australian department of foreign affairs and trade and its equivalent chinese agency.
parenting
application in a proceeding
reasons for judgment
judge eldershaw:
introduction
documents
applications
proceeding ex parte
background  .] on 23 september 2022 i arranged a meeting with [mr guanyu] to discuss us working together to achieve consent orders to finalise the matter and avoid the need for a final hearing. the meeting didn’t go well. [mr guanyu] was yelling at me and he was demanding and aggressive during our discussion. i felt intimidated and scared when [mr guanyu] was talking to me. [mr guanyu] said words to me to the following effect “it is your fault that [x] is not well education” and “it is your fault your relationship with [x] was not good’’. i recall having a conversation with [mr guanyu] to the following words: [father]: she doesn’t want to spend time with you. she may forgive you when you are older, or she may not want to talk to you ever again. [mother]: i would like to try and slowly build a more fun relationship with [x]. i am okay with seeing her every second weekend, and then more if she would like to when she is ready. why don’t we agree to this as consent orders? [father]: if you are okay seeing [x] every alternate weekend, how about [x] living in china with me and i will make sure she spends one month a year with you. that is equivalent to a weekend every fortnight. [mother]: no [mr guanyu], that won’t work. [x] needs to live in australia. [mother]: okay. on 4 november 2022 i organised to meet with [mr guanyu] at [suburb c] shopping centre, to discuss the upcoming family therapy. i didn’t invite [mr guanyu] to my house as i felt safer in public, as i thought he might be less aggressive. during the meeting i suggested that even if we cannot work out a solution about parenting [x] between ourselves, we should work together with the therapist and support each other for [x]’s benefit. [mr guanyu] was a lot more patient this time and he didn’t yell at me. [mr guanyu] agreed with me that we would work with [ms h]. on 7 november 2022 and 15 november 2022, i attended my intake sessions with [ms h] and discussed what had happened with my relationship with [x].   per the original)
...i sent a message to [mr guanyu] on whatsapp at about 1pm. the message was not received until a few hours later. later than night at about 8.30 pm [mr guanyu] called me back. [mr guanyu] put [x] on the phone and i could hear [x] say words to the following effect to [mr guanyu]“i don’t want to talk to her, i already told her not to talk to me in january. don’t pass the phone to me, i have told you not to do that anymore.” [x] then hung-up the phone without talking to me. [mr guanyu] called back a few minutes later and passed the phone to [x] again. [x] said words to me to the effect of “do not call me for the rest of january.” [x] then hung the phone up again. i called back and spoke with [mr guanyu] asking him whether he was still in sydney. [mr guanyu] told me he was. (as per the original)  ther]: are you still in sydney. [father]: yes, i am. [mother]: how is [x]? [father]: she is okay. (as per the original)
the legal framework   subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just. (2a) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to: (a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   such other matters as the court considers relevant.   all relevant matters in s 117(2a) of the act “must all be taken into account and all balanced in order to determine whether the overall circumstances justify the making of an order for costs:” i & i (no. 2) (1995) flc 92–625 at 82,277, (b) no one factor under s 117(2a) of the act prevails over any other factor. rather, it is a matter of weight that is accorded to each of the relevant factors in the trial judge’s discretion: medlon & medlon (no. 6) (indemnity costs) (2015) flc 93–664 at [24], (c) there is nothing to prevent any factor in s 117(2a) of the act being the sole foundation for an order for costs: pbf as child representative for af (legal aid commission of tasmania) & trf & lkl [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 at [41], and (d) neither special circumstances nor an exceptional case is required before an order for costs can be made: penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311.   no one factor under s 117(2a) of the act prevails over any other factor. rather, it is a matter of weight that is accorded to each of the relevant factors in the trial judge’s discretion: medlon & medlon (no. 6) (indemnity costs) (2015) flc 93–664 at [24], (c) there is nothing to prevent any factor in s 117(2a) of the act being the sole foundation for an order for costs: pbf as child representative for af (legal aid commission of tasmania) & trf & lkl [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 at [41], and (d) neither special circumstances nor an exceptional case is required before an order for costs can be made: penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311.   there is nothing to prevent any factor in s 117(2a) of the act being the sole foundation for an order for costs: pbf as child representative for af (legal aid commission of tasmania) & trf & lkl [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 at [41], and (d) neither special circumstances nor an exceptional case is required before an order for costs can be made: penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311.   neither special circumstances nor an exceptional case is required before an order for costs can be made: penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311.   seven properties listed. these include the b street, suburb c property valued at $784,000, the property d(1) street, suburb e valued at $800,000, the property at d(2) street, suburb e valued at $800,000 and the property f street, suburb g valued at $1,900,000, (b) six existing mortgages. the mortgages total about $4 million. the “total commonwealth group credit facilities” are stated as $3,120,000, and (c) a net surplus of $2,810,193.   six existing mortgages. the mortgages total about $4 million. the “total commonwealth group credit facilities” are stated as $3,120,000, and (c) a net surplus of $2,810,193.   a net surplus of $2,810,193.   in the midst of family law proceedings, and with final hearing dates approaching, the father removed x from the jurisdiction and took her to a country that is not a signatory to the hague convention. the mother cannot seek a return order, (b) the father has defeated the court’s jurisdiction for all practical purposes, (c) x is 12 years old and was due to start year 7 at a school in sydney in 2023. she remains reliant on her parents, (d) x was to engage in family therapy to improve her relationship with the mother, (e) on 25 december 2022 and 16 january 2023, the father mislead the mother by telling her that he, and tacitly, x, were in sydney, (f) the father has ceased all communication with the mother since 16 january 2023. (g) the mother found it necessary to issue subpoenas to the department of foreign affairs and trade and the department of home affairs to establish x’s whereabouts, and (h) the mother has been deprived of the benefit of the litigation.   the father has defeated the court’s jurisdiction for all practical purposes, (c) x is 12 years old and was due to start year 7 at a school in sydney in 2023. she remains reliant on her parents, (d) x was to engage in family therapy to improve her relationship with the mother, (e) on 25 december 2022 and 16 january 2023, the father mislead the mother by telling her that he, and tacitly, x, were in sydney, (f) the father has ceased all communication with the mother since 16 january 2023. (g) the mother found it necessary to issue subpoenas to the department of foreign affairs and trade and the department of home affairs to establish x’s whereabouts, and (h) the mother has been deprived of the benefit of the litigation.   x is 12 years old and was due to start year 7 at a school in sydney in 2023. she remains reliant on her parents, (d) x was to engage in family therapy to improve her relationship with the mother, (e) on 25 december 2022 and 16 january 2023, the father mislead the mother by telling her that he, and tacitly, x, were in sydney, (f) the father has ceased all communication with the mother since 16 january 2023. (g) the mother found it necessary to issue subpoenas to the department of foreign affairs and trade and the department of home affairs to establish x’s whereabouts, and (h) the mother has been deprived of the benefit of the litigation.   x was to engage in family therapy to improve her relationship with the mother, (e) on 25 december 2022 and 16 january 2023, the father mislead the mother by telling her that he, and tacitly, x, were in sydney, (f) the father has ceased all communication with the mother since 16 january 2023. (g) the mother found it necessary to issue subpoenas to the department of foreign affairs and trade and the department of home affairs to establish x’s whereabouts, and (h) the mother has been deprived of the benefit of the litigation.   on 25 december 2022 and 16 january 2023, the father mislead the mother by telling her that he, and tacitly, x, were in sydney, (f) the father has ceased all communication with the mother since 16 january 2023. (g) the mother found it necessary to issue subpoenas to the department of foreign affairs and trade and the department of home affairs to establish x’s whereabouts, and (h) the mother has been deprived of the benefit of the litigation.   the father has ceased all communication with the mother since 16 january 2023. (g) the mother found it necessary to issue subpoenas to the department of foreign affairs and trade and the department of home affairs to establish x’s whereabouts, and (h) the mother has been deprived of the benefit of the litigation.   the mother found it necessary to issue subpoenas to the department of foreign affairs and trade and the department of home affairs to establish x’s whereabouts, and (h) the mother has been deprived of the benefit of the litigation.   the mother has been deprived of the benefit of the litigation.
what costs order is just?   where it appears the action has been commenced or continued in circumstances where a party, properly advised, should have known they had no chance of success. in such cases, the action must be presumed to have been commenced or continued for some ulterior motive or because of some wilful regard for known facts: fountain selected meats (sales) pty ltd v international produce merchants pty ltd (1988) 81 alr 397 (“fountain selected meats”), (b) making allegations of fraud, knowing them to be false, and the making of irrelevant allegations of fraud: fountain selected meats. (c) evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and other parties: tetijo holdings pty ltd v keeprite australia pty ltd [1991] fca 187, (d) the making of allegations which ought never to have been made, or the undue prolongation of the case by groundless contentions: ragata developments pty ltd v westpac banking corporation [1993] fca 356, (1993) 43 fcr 280, (e) the imprudent refusal of an offer of compromise, and (f) failure to make an offer of compromise: rimac & rimac (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 159.   making allegations of fraud, knowing them to be false, and the making of irrelevant allegations of fraud: fountain selected meats. (c) evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and other parties: tetijo holdings pty ltd v keeprite australia pty ltd [1991] fca 187, (d) the making of allegations which ought never to have been made, or the undue prolongation of the case by groundless contentions: ragata developments pty ltd v westpac banking corporation [1993] fca 356, (1993) 43 fcr 280, (e) the imprudent refusal of an offer of compromise, and (f) failure to make an offer of compromise: rimac & rimac (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 159.   evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and other parties: tetijo holdings pty ltd v keeprite australia pty ltd [1991] fca 187, (d) the making of allegations which ought never to have been made, or the undue prolongation of the case by groundless contentions: ragata developments pty ltd v westpac banking corporation [1993] fca 356, (1993) 43 fcr 280, (e) the imprudent refusal of an offer of compromise, and (f) failure to make an offer of compromise: rimac & rimac (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 159.   the making of allegations which ought never to have been made, or the undue prolongation of the case by groundless contentions: ragata developments pty ltd v westpac banking corporation [1993] fca 356, (1993) 43 fcr 280, (e) the imprudent refusal of an offer of compromise, and (f) failure to make an offer of compromise: rimac & rimac (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 159.   the imprudent refusal of an offer of compromise, and (f) failure to make an offer of compromise: rimac & rimac (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 159.   failure to make an offer of compromise: rimac & rimac (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 159.
quantum   i will make an order that authorises the mother to be informed and kept informed by the listing agent of the sale(s) of the suburb e properties and to obtain a copy of the contract of sale so she may see the solicitor acting on the sale for the father, (b) the mother can instruct her solicitors to conduct title searches of the suburb e and f street, suburb g properties to confirm whether the mortgagee remains the commonwealth bank of australia, consistent with the b street, suburb c property, (c) i will grant the mother leave to provide a copy of the orders to: (i) the real estate agent acting on the sales of the suburb e properties, (ii) the vendor’s solicitor(s) as stated on the contracts of sale, (iii) the commonwealth bank of australia and any other mortgagee listed on the titles to the suburb e and/or f street, suburb g properties, and (iv) the nsw land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the four properties.   the mother can instruct her solicitors to conduct title searches of the suburb e and f street, suburb g properties to confirm whether the mortgagee remains the commonwealth bank of australia, consistent with the b street, suburb c property, (c) i will grant the mother leave to provide a copy of the orders to: (i) the real estate agent acting on the sales of the suburb e properties, (ii) the vendor’s solicitor(s) as stated on the contracts of sale, (iii) the commonwealth bank of australia and any other mortgagee listed on the titles to the suburb e and/or f street, suburb g properties, and (iv) the nsw land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the four properties.   i will grant the mother leave to provide a copy of the orders to: (i) the real estate agent acting on the sales of the suburb e properties, (ii) the vendor’s solicitor(s) as stated on the contracts of sale, (iii) the commonwealth bank of australia and any other mortgagee listed on the titles to the suburb e and/or f street, suburb g properties, and (iv) the nsw land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the four properties.   the real estate agent acting on the sales of the suburb e properties, (ii) the vendor’s solicitor(s) as stated on the contracts of sale, (iii) the commonwealth bank of australia and any other mortgagee listed on the titles to the suburb e and/or f street, suburb g properties, and (iv) the nsw land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the four properties.  ) the vendor’s solicitor(s) as stated on the contracts of sale, (iii) the commonwealth bank of australia and any other mortgagee listed on the titles to the suburb e and/or f street, suburb g properties, and (iv) the nsw land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the four properties.  i) the commonwealth bank of australia and any other mortgagee listed on the titles to the suburb e and/or f street, suburb g properties, and (iv) the nsw land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the four properties.  ) the nsw land registry services for the purpose of registering the orders on the titles to the four properties.
parenting orders
conclusion
associate: dated: 13 june 2023
dated: 13 june 2023