last updated: 25 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
walcott & pane [2023] fedcfamc2f 761
orders
the court orders that:  the registrar of the magistrates court of victoria (interim intervention order case number ...), (b) the commissioner of the victorian police, and (c) the children’s most recent case manager or investigating officer at the department of families, fairness and housing.   the commissioner of the victorian police, and (c) the children’s most recent case manager or investigating officer at the department of families, fairness and housing.   the children’s most recent case manager or investigating officer at the department of families, fairness and housing.   the applicant to attend at 9.00am, and (b) the respondent to attend at 10.30am.   the respondent to attend at 10.30am.
microsoft teams links will be provided to the parties by the court child expert prior to the event. part 2 of the event will occur in person at the melbourne registry on the morning of 4 august 2023. specific details regarding the attendance of the parties and child on this date will be provided to the parties in part 1 of the event.   any agreement reached between the parties, (b) identification of key issues requiring resolution, (c) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   identification of key issues requiring resolution, (c) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   material produced by a child protection authority pursuant to subpoena or a section 69zw order made in these proceedings, (b) material produced by a police service pursuant to subpoena or section 69zw of the family law act 1975 (cth) or section 245d of the children and young persons (care and protection) act 1998 (nsw) made in these proceedings, (c) any other relevant material presently before the court in admissible form.   material produced by a police service pursuant to subpoena or section 69zw of the family law act 1975 (cth) or section 245d of the children and young persons (care and protection) act 1998 (nsw) made in these proceedings, (c) any other relevant material presently before the court in admissible form.   any other relevant material presently before the court in admissible form.
noting:
reasons for judgment
judge young
associate: dated: 22 june 2023
dated: 22 june 2023