last updated: 15 november 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rinakis & rinakis (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 795
orders
the court orders that:  travel internationally with the mother, (b) have an australian travel document issued to them, without the need for the consent of the father, pursuant to s 11(1)(b) of the australian passports act 2005 (cth).   have an australian travel document issued to them, without the need for the consent of the father, pursuant to s 11(1)(b) of the australian passports act 2005 (cth).   by letter once each month, (b) the father shall be permitted, on no more than four occasions each year, to provide photographs and gifts to the children by mail, and within 14 days of the date of this order the mother is to provide the father with an address to send such items, (c) the mother shall consider the content of any correspondence, the nature of any photograph, and the appropriateness of any gift. the decision to pass these items to the children will be at the mother’s sole discretion and any item not appropriate shall be returned to the father at the father’s cost.   the father shall be permitted, on no more than four occasions each year, to provide photographs and gifts to the children by mail, and within 14 days of the date of this order the mother is to provide the father with an address to send such items, (c) the mother shall consider the content of any correspondence, the nature of any photograph, and the appropriateness of any gift. the decision to pass these items to the children will be at the mother’s sole discretion and any item not appropriate shall be returned to the father at the father’s cost.   the mother shall consider the content of any correspondence, the nature of any photograph, and the appropriateness of any gift. the decision to pass these items to the children will be at the mother’s sole discretion and any item not appropriate shall be returned to the father at the father’s cost.   within 200 metres of where the mother resides from time to time, (b) the mother’s workplace.   the mother’s workplace.   the school attended by the children or either of them, (b) the venue of any extra-curricular activity attended by the children or either of them.   the venue of any extra-curricular activity attended by the children or either of them.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun
introduction
proposals
material relied upon  his case outline filed 24 march 2023, (b) his amended initiating application filed 25 february 2021, (c) his affidavit filed 17 march 2023, (d) affidavit of ms cc filed 18 december 2019, (e) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   his amended initiating application filed 25 february 2021, (c) his affidavit filed 17 march 2023, (d) affidavit of ms cc filed 18 december 2019, (e) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   his affidavit filed 17 march 2023, (d) affidavit of ms cc filed 18 december 2019, (e) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   affidavit of ms cc filed 18 december 2019, (e) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   her case outline filed 24 march 2023, (b) her amended response filed 27 february 2023, (c) her affidavit filed 3 march 2023, (d) affidavit of ms ee filed 2 march 2023, (e) affidavit of mr ff filed 2 march 2023, (f) affidavit of dr gg filed 9 march 2023, (g) single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021(see exhibit e), (h) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   her amended response filed 27 february 2023, (c) her affidavit filed 3 march 2023, (d) affidavit of ms ee filed 2 march 2023, (e) affidavit of mr ff filed 2 march 2023, (f) affidavit of dr gg filed 9 march 2023, (g) single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021(see exhibit e), (h) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   her affidavit filed 3 march 2023, (d) affidavit of ms ee filed 2 march 2023, (e) affidavit of mr ff filed 2 march 2023, (f) affidavit of dr gg filed 9 march 2023, (g) single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021(see exhibit e), (h) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   affidavit of ms ee filed 2 march 2023, (e) affidavit of mr ff filed 2 march 2023, (f) affidavit of dr gg filed 9 march 2023, (g) single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021(see exhibit e), (h) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   affidavit of mr ff filed 2 march 2023, (f) affidavit of dr gg filed 9 march 2023, (g) single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021(see exhibit e), (h) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   affidavit of dr gg filed 9 march 2023, (g) single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021(see exhibit e), (h) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021(see exhibit e), (h) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022.   case outline filed 27 march 2023, (b) family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (c) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (c) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit a: m contact centre contact report dated 8 december 2019, (b) exhibit b: nsw police cops event record dated late 2022, (c) exhibit c: hh contact centre contact reports dated 25 february 2023 and 11 march 2023, (d) exhibit d: hh contact centre case notes containing phone record dated 28 february 2023 and email dated 4 march 2023, (e) exhibit e: single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021, (f) exhibit f: jj corrections centre case note report dated 9 december 2020, (g) exhibit g: nsw department of corrective services custodial case note report dated 26 october 2020, (h) exhibit h: r clinic records of father’s medical history, (i) exhibit i: father’s court attendance notice regarding incident in mid-2019, (j) exhibit j: father’s complete criminal history, (k) exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit b: nsw police cops event record dated late 2022, (c) exhibit c: hh contact centre contact reports dated 25 february 2023 and 11 march 2023, (d) exhibit d: hh contact centre case notes containing phone record dated 28 february 2023 and email dated 4 march 2023, (e) exhibit e: single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021, (f) exhibit f: jj corrections centre case note report dated 9 december 2020, (g) exhibit g: nsw department of corrective services custodial case note report dated 26 october 2020, (h) exhibit h: r clinic records of father’s medical history, (i) exhibit i: father’s court attendance notice regarding incident in mid-2019, (j) exhibit j: father’s complete criminal history, (k) exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit c: hh contact centre contact reports dated 25 february 2023 and 11 march 2023, (d) exhibit d: hh contact centre case notes containing phone record dated 28 february 2023 and email dated 4 march 2023, (e) exhibit e: single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021, (f) exhibit f: jj corrections centre case note report dated 9 december 2020, (g) exhibit g: nsw department of corrective services custodial case note report dated 26 october 2020, (h) exhibit h: r clinic records of father’s medical history, (i) exhibit i: father’s court attendance notice regarding incident in mid-2019, (j) exhibit j: father’s complete criminal history, (k) exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit d: hh contact centre case notes containing phone record dated 28 february 2023 and email dated 4 march 2023, (e) exhibit e: single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021, (f) exhibit f: jj corrections centre case note report dated 9 december 2020, (g) exhibit g: nsw department of corrective services custodial case note report dated 26 october 2020, (h) exhibit h: r clinic records of father’s medical history, (i) exhibit i: father’s court attendance notice regarding incident in mid-2019, (j) exhibit j: father’s complete criminal history, (k) exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit e: single expert report of dr h dated 28 october 2021, (f) exhibit f: jj corrections centre case note report dated 9 december 2020, (g) exhibit g: nsw department of corrective services custodial case note report dated 26 october 2020, (h) exhibit h: r clinic records of father’s medical history, (i) exhibit i: father’s court attendance notice regarding incident in mid-2019, (j) exhibit j: father’s complete criminal history, (k) exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit f: jj corrections centre case note report dated 9 december 2020, (g) exhibit g: nsw department of corrective services custodial case note report dated 26 october 2020, (h) exhibit h: r clinic records of father’s medical history, (i) exhibit i: father’s court attendance notice regarding incident in mid-2019, (j) exhibit j: father’s complete criminal history, (k) exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit g: nsw department of corrective services custodial case note report dated 26 october 2020, (h) exhibit h: r clinic records of father’s medical history, (i) exhibit i: father’s court attendance notice regarding incident in mid-2019, (j) exhibit j: father’s complete criminal history, (k) exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit h: r clinic records of father’s medical history, (i) exhibit i: father’s court attendance notice regarding incident in mid-2019, (j) exhibit j: father’s complete criminal history, (k) exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit i: father’s court attendance notice regarding incident in mid-2019, (j) exhibit j: father’s complete criminal history, (k) exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit j: father’s complete criminal history, (k) exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit k: cops record of police dated mid-2019, (l) exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit l: combined corrective services records, (m) exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit m: letter from father dated 28 november 2021, (n) exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit n: report of dr v dated 13 december 2019, (o) exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit o: hh contact centre supervised contact summaries dated 3 december 2022, 17 december 2022, and 14 january 2023, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit p: family report of ms dd dated 9 september 2022, (q) exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.   exhibit q: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 december 2019.
evidence
oral evidence of the father
oral evidence of the mother
the maternal grandmother
19. the priest and another man came to help us. my husband then made a complaint to the police. i was very scared and my husband was very scared. the police arrested [mr rinakis]. (as per original)
the maternal grandfather  rinakis] said “that's lies.” i said “that's not a lie that's the truth”. [ms ee] and i then started to walk away from [mr rinakis]. at this time i heard [mr rinakis] insulting me to the priest. my wife and i walked to the car. at this time it was around 11:15am. i rang the police, whilst sitting in the car. i saw that [mr rinakis] had got into his car and was leaving.
dr h, consultant forensic psychiatrist e father’s] history of verbal abuse and physical assaults against his wife are likely partially related to his depression as well as substance use and partially constitutional, however it is certain that when [mr rinakis] is abstinent from substances and is well and stable in his mental state, his propensity to be verbally abusive and physically violent behaviour is significantly mitigated.  unsel] now, noting that you assessed [mr rinakis] in october 2021, just assume for the purposes of this question that the court will have evidence before it firstly, that [mr rinakis] has been described as aggressive and conflictual towards new south wales police and some family support workers who have been supervising his contact with the children since the time that you’ve assessed him. does that lead you to have any concerns about, firstly, whether his behaviour that you identified as problematic is more consistent with it being part of his constitution, that’s one of the terms that you use, rather than his substance use if it is accepted by the court that his substance use has remained abstinent, that is he has not used since 2013 as [mr rinakis] indicates? [witness] ... yes. so if we assume that he hasn’t used substances and, you know, his assertions are true, then obviously substance use is sort of out of the picture so then it’s not related to his substance use. then the next question is, well, is it due to his, you know, constitution or, i suppose, personality structure or due to his mental illness. so then the question is, well, if his mental illness is optimally treated, then – and, you know, he’s not using substances, then, you know, it just leaves us with his, you know, constitutional factors, that is his personality factors, and how he responds to, you know, things that are going on around him in the world, basically.  tness] look, i mean – well, long-term psychological therapy can be effective and can be – can – can amend and mitigate people’s personalities, particularly if there’s no severe personality disorder which – you know, [mr rinakis] doesn’t have a severe personality disorder, so meaning that if individuals are psychologically minded and they have a degree of insight and they engage with a psychologist – i mean, we’re talking about periods of years. yes. you know, obviously, then there can be some changes made, but they – they are unpredictable as to – yes. with some people, that – you know, it’s not, sort of, like, treating someone with [antidepressants] for a major depressive disorder and they become more depressed. it’s not as – it’s not going to be as straightforward as that. it’s going to be a long process, and whether it works or not is – is questionable. so – and especially at [mr rinakis’] age, being in his 50s, i believe, it's going to be pretty unlikely as opposed to someone who’s younger. [counsel] and when you’re talking about that long-term psychological therapeutic intervention, are you talking about a dialectical behavioural therapy-type model? [witness] no. i mean dialectical behaviour therapy is more for – specifically for individuals with borderline personality disorder and self-harm. it’s not really what i’m – i was referring to. it’s more – basically examining someone’s personality in a sort of a psychodynamic model. it’s, sort of, more to do – you know, if you’ve been back to freudian or... you know, this is going back, obviously, and this is just – so a psychoanalysis – you know, we’re talking about seeing a psychotherapist at least a couple of times a week over long periods of time in order to examine the underlying reasons in their psyche as to why they’re behaving the way they are or why they are feeling their emotions the way they are and then kind of bringing it out into the consciousness and then trying to – trying to resolve some sort of conflict – subconscious conflict that they might have. so this is what i’m saying – is it’s not a – it’s not just straightforward, sort of, like, “okay. we will give him, you know, 10 sessions and then he will become this much better.” it’s not going to be like that. no.
family report
28. each parent reported that the mother suffers from anxiety.
... [ms rinakis] said that [mr rinakis] was not controlling of her, but was emotionally and verbally intimidating. [ms rinakis] said that [mr rinakis] was physically abusive towards her on a few occasions. she said that the worst instance was on a [holiday] towards the end of their relationship, and she alleged he had pushed her into a railing causing injuries to her back. she said that he had choked her twice, once when she challenged him regarding his drug use, and a second time when he was trying to take her phone from her, causing her to feel breathless. she said that he removed his hands when she released her phone. ... [mr rinakis] said that he is unaware of what caused the advo to be made. he said that the incident which occurred prior to the advo involved him trying to take [mr rinakis’] phone off her, because he realised she was recording him, after he had challenged her about having an affair. he said that he was charged with common assault because he placed his arms around her to try to get to the phone. he acknowledged that [ms rinakis] may have felt intimidated on occasion when he raised his voice, but denied ever physically harming [ms rinakis], denied calling her names and threatening her. [ms rinakis] alleged that [mr rinakis] physically assaulted the maternal grandfather at his church and threatened to kill her and the maternal grandparents, leading to incarceration and a further advo. she said that after he was released from jail, he was again arrested after driving past [x]’s school and talking with her. [mr rinakis] said that he has participated in counselling with “[d counselling]”, a violence prevention organisation. [mr rinakis] said that he takes “one hundred percent” responsibility for his actions leading to his incarceration, saying that he should not have attended the maternal grandparents’ church. however, he did not acknowledge physically or verbally abusing the maternal grandfather. he also said that he should not have driven past [x]’s school, however, he said that this was incidental, and that he was in the area for a doctor’s appointment, and that he had not intended to have contact with [x] at the time. ... [ms rinakis] expressed concern that [mr rinakis] will use his contact with the children to undermine her relationship with them. for instance, she said that he has made the children drawings, of him as a “knight in shining armour” coming to rescue the children, and has written to them that “mean people” are preventing them from seeing him. she said [y] has stated that [mr rinakis] told her that “mummy is trying to put him in jail”. she said that he has told the children that [ms rinakis] is a “...” (her maiden name) and that he and the children are [rinakis]. [ms rinakis] alleged that [x] had witnessed [mr rinakis’] violence and abuse of her. she said that after separation, [x] had expressed concern that [ms rinakis] might be harmed. she said that whilst he was not directly abusive towards the children he verbally abused her in front of the children, and would tell them to shut up if they become scared or distressed. she also said that he exposed the children to risk when angry, such as pulling the handbrake on abruptly when driving. ... [mr rinakis] said that he has ongoing contact with a counsellor, [mr e], and that he sought psychiatric support. he said that he currently maintains counselling, and that he maintains strategies to assist him with his mental health, including exercising, participating in charity work and participating in substance use support programs. he stated that his mental health is currently good. ... [ms rinakis] reported experiencing anxiety, but said that this does not impact generally on her functioning or care of the children. she said that her anxiety was exacerbated by the violence and conflict that she experienced during her relationship with [mr rinakis]. ... [ms rinakis] said that when she is experiencing heightened anxiety she may appear upset and become quieter. she said that she is conscious of not exposing the children to her anxieties and that she has learned to self-sooth by contacting her supports, meditating and exercising.
133. it is recommended that the children live with [ms rinakis]. if the court finds veracity to [ms rinakis’] account of family violence and that the children would be at increased risk of harm if they were to spend extended periods of time with their father, it is recommended that the children spend day time only with [mr rinakis], each alternate saturday. if the court finds veracity to [mr rinakis’] account of family violence and that the children would not be at an increased risk of harm, it is recommended that the children spend alternate weekends with [mr rinakis] from saturday morning to sunday afternoon.  unsel] for the benefit of the court, i can identify the documents that were provided to this witness as being exhibit a, exhibit b, exhibit c, exhibit j, as well as the documents that now have been tendered and form a part of exhibit o. now, [ms dd], upon considering that documentation, do you have any amendment to the recommendations that you’ve made? [witness] so upon considering the documentation that i was provided, my – my concern regarding the persistence and the pervasiveness of some of the problematic behaviours by the father has increased, such that in the event that the court finds the – the veracity to those accounts, that i – i would have to recommend that the children have no contact with their father at this time.  unsel] and the extra material that you’ve been provided – would you accept that the extra material that you’ve been provided in relation to [mr rinakis’] behaviour principally centres around the [hh contact centre] contact reports dated 25 february and 11 march? [witness] yes. ... [counsel] so is it principally on the basis of that report that you’ve changed your recommendation to no contact? [witness] that was one of the major considerations yes. [counsel] what was the other major considerations? [witness] the other major consideration was that i was provided some information about criminal matters not relating to – or issues not relating to family court matters, but some – some incidences of aggression that appear to have occurred in public. [counsel] and what was the context of those incidences in public? [witness] so i think there was a traffic incident where it was alleged that [mr rinakis] had dodged a barrier and driven dangerously along a footpath. there was, i think, one other incident where it appeared he had been in an altercation with another motorist on the road, leading to some accident.  unsel] so if, as your honour has suggested, you ignore the second traffic incident and if you assume that [mr rinakis] has given an explanation in court as we’ve discussed, that he was abiding by directions and - - -? [witness] yes. [counsel] - - - he was not aggressive, does that change your change in recommendation? [witness] no. there’s still sufficient concerns raised by the [hh contact centre] notes to cause me to believe that contact with their father is not in the children’s best interests at this time. [counsel] okay. so let’s talk about what’s in the [hh contact centre] notes. the [hh contact centre] notes, i would suggest to you – and you can say that they go further, but i would suggest to you they disclose the following inappropriate behaviour, that is, that the father gave a gift to the child in breach of the service agreement? [witness] yes. [counsel] he is alleged to have had a surreptitious conversation with [y] regarding living arrangements? [witness] yes. [counsel] and that he challenged staff – and there’s a description of his behaviour as being aggressive. he challenged the staff and is alleged to have been aggressive in relation to the question of whether he was in breach of the service agreement? [witness] yes. [counsel] and you say that those three – is there anything else that you gleaned from the contact reports that was of concern? [witness] they were the primary concerns. [counsel] and you say that those three concerns standing alone cause you to change your recommendation from daytime only – unsupervised daytime only - - -? [witness] yes. [counsel] - - - to no contact? [witness] yes. [counsel] why? [witness] the – the – those behaviours that you described show an ongoing lack of insight and ongoing ability to abide by boundaries and rules and regulations, even when there is another person present supervising, even when there has been explicit discussion about those rules and boundaries immediately before these incidents occurred. and it shows – it appears that there has been no – no increase in insight around those concerns, despite having had some contact with the children over recent times. so that – that leaves me concerned that contact with their father will expose the children to increased anxiety. it will cause them to be exposed to – to a situation where they’re requested to take on responsibility for their father’s emotional state. it – it concerns me that inappropriate things may be said to him – said to them while – while with him, which leads to the conclusion that unsupervised time will be detrimental to them, which – which leaves, i guess, few options in terms of contact. obviously, ongoing supervised time is a potential option, but there are significant concerns about ongoing supervised time, apart from pragmatic concerns about costs and being able to – to find someone who’s willing to – to do that, but the other concerns are that it creates quite an artificial environment where it’s difficult for the children to form a meaningful relationship with their father. it – it also shows that even in a supervised context, they’re still likely to be exposed to a certain amount of inappropriate and anxiety inducing behaviour. and so all of those factors together lead me to believe that it’s – it’s not in their best interests to have that time.  unsel] so [y] said, “when can i come to your house”, and he responded, “do you want it to be supervised, or unsupervised?” so assuming the court accepts that evidence, would you still hold views that that was inappropriate behaviour? [witness] yes. that’s not a conversation for that forum, and i guess a neutral reply such as, you know, “let’s not talk about this now”, or, you know, some distraction would have been an appropriate response. [counsel] yes. but was it so inappropriate as to form part of a fairly radical change in recommendation? [witness] to form part of it, yes. not in and of itself, but as part of the whole picture that has been described, yes.
if – if the court accepts that there was no aggression, if the court accepts that there was no surreptitious attempts to break the rules, if the court accepts that he – he did not initiate inappropriate conversations with the children, then i – i would not change my recommendations.  unsel] assume from me that the father also gave evidence, and his honour will find that the father’s evidence was that the mother has fabricated her fear of him, and that the mother fabricates her distress in response to the father, what, if anything, does that view currently held by the father, do to your concerns about risks to the children? [witness] it – it increases my concern. it makes me worried that the father does not understand the impacts of his behaviour on the mother. but also it would make concerned that he doesn’t the impacts – how those impacts might flow on to the children. and it makes me believe that it’s unlikely that he will change his behaviours, because he doesn’t view them as problematic. [counsel] and if his honour accepts evidence that the father has given – and that is that he has been engaged in ongoing group therapy, firstly, from 2013 to 2019, and thereafter, therapy with a psychologist through [d counselling], it would heighten your concerns, wouldn’t it, if the father continued to hold that attitude despite that lengthy of therapeutic intervention? [witness] yes. [counsel] and that would lead you to hold greater concerns, would it not, using your professional experience, that the father is unlikely to change, firstly, his attitude? sorry, you have to give a verbal answer for the transcript? [witness] yes. sorry. [counsel] and, secondly, his behaviour - - -? [witness] yes. [counsel] - - - that flows from the attitude - - -? [witness] yes. [counsel] - - - that he demonstrates.  unsel] now, assume, for the purposes of this next question, that the following events have occurred during the course of these proceedings. that is, that during the course of the father’s cross-examination, the mother requested a break from proceedings as she was upset – well, she indicated that she was upset, and that his honour adjourned the court to allow the mother that break, and that as the mother exited the courtroom that the father concedes that he stood from the witness chair where you’re sitting, leaned over the bench - - -? [witness] yes. [counsel] - - - and said, “i can’t see any tears”? [witness] yes. [counsel] that would cause you concern, would it not, about the father’s ability, firstly, to conduct himself in even a contained environment - - -? [witness] yes. [counsel] - - - like the court. it would give you concerns, wouldn’t it, about the father’s lack of insight into the effects of his behaviour, on the mother? [witness] yes. [counsel] it demonstrates a lack of even basic empathy? [witness] yes. [counsel] and that would be a concern of yours, would it not, even if the court were accept the father’s evidence that he was making that comment to his brother-in-law who was seated in court? [witness] yes. [counsel] and it wasn’t intended for the mother to hear? [witness] yes. that would still be concern. [counsel] the fact that that was the father’s response to the mother exhibiting distress is the issue of concern, isn’t it? [witness] yes. it is. ... [counsel] and, again, even if his honour were to accept – assume for a moment that his honour will accept the father’s evidence that he has been engaged in long term therapeutic intervention - - -? [witness] yes. [counsel] - - - and if his honour were accept the father’s evidence that he has been compliant with his mental health treatment - - -? [witness] yes. [counsel] - - - that type of example of behaviour demonstrated by the father, does it surprise you that he would behave that way given that therapeutic intervention? [witness] yes. i would expect that if the therapeutic intervention were effective, that he would understand that that behaviour was not appropriate. [counsel] and that would be the case even if the father genuinely thought that the mother was fabricating her distress, you would expect, would you not, that the father would understand that that type of behaviour was problematic? [witness] yes.  unsel] and what is likely to be the long term effects on the mother, firstly, in terms of her parenting capacity, of being exposed to continuing behaviour by the father that would be consistent with coercive and controlling violence, or any form of family violence? [witness] so in terms of parenting capacity, the increase of anxiety that’s caused by ongoing exposure to coercive tactics makes it very difficult to focus in a calm and child-focused manner on the decisions that you make. it – it can mean that you react in a way as to avoid that anxiety or to – to manage that situation, rather than being able to look at the long term benefits for the children, and the long term needs of the children. so it causes very reactive parenting. it causes very anxious parenting. it can – it – it’s overall detrimental, i guess, to parenting capacity. [counsel] and the flow on effect for the children if they are exposed to that reactive, anxious parenting style, can you describe what the short and long term implications for children of being exposed to that? [witness] yes. so it causes children also to be reactive, and causes them to make decisions that around looking out for and avoiding danger, and looking out for and avoiding anxiety – anxiety provoking situations, rather than them being able to freely explore and develop as a child should. it can lead to them being very conscious of the parent who is anxious, and feeling the need to protect and look after them, which, once again, is not an appropriate task for a child. it can lead to them being very cautious towards the parent who is – who is using those tactics, which may lead to overly affectionate or overly compliant behaviour, or alternatively, could lead to avoidant behaviour, or a little bit of both. so it impacts pretty seriously on their relationship with both of their parents. and the cumulative long term effect is that it impacts on their mental health. [counsel] and when you did your assessment of the children last year, it is fair to say, isn’t it, that you were already concerned about [x]’s [sic] responses, particularly, in terms of her need to act protectively towards the mother? [witness] yes. [counsel] and you already identified that both children, but more so, [x] [sic], were showing some nervousness about their interactions with the father? [witness] yes. [counsel] and you assessed the children’s behaviour to be consistent with their experience rather than coaching? [witness] yes. [counsel] you did not have a concern, did you, that the mother had coached the children into saying certain things to you, or behaving in a certain way? [witness] no. [counsel] and that assessment was based, firstly, on your observation of the personality features of the children? [witness] yes. [counsel] you would describe them as intuitive children, from your observations? [witness] yes. [counsel] and you would describe them as intelligent children? [witness] yes. [counsel] both intellectually and emotionally - - -? [witness] yes.  unsel] ... and you would have observed that during the march 2023 visit, that the family support workers at [hh contact centre], observed there to be nervousness by [x] [sic], particularly, in her interaction with the father? [witness] yes. [counsel] and that was the visit that occurred immediately after the 25 february 2023 visit, where it said that there were issues with the father’s behaviour? [witness] yes. [counsel] you’re aware of that. and the workers at [hh contact centre] described the children, in that visit, as showing emotional dysregulation? [witness] yes. [counsel] do you recall reading that? and that [x] [sic] was taking steps to separate herself physically from the proximity of the father? [witness] yes. [counsel] and do you recall reading, in that report, that the workers describe the children’s – particularly [x]’s [sic] presentation on that date – and both children in terms of their emotional dysregulation, as quite different from the other observations? [witness] yes. [counsel] and would you agree with me that the behaviour reported by the family support workers at [hh contact centre], of the children, is consistent with what you’re describing is a way that the children might react to the exposure to concerning behaviour by their father? [witness] yes. [counsel] and so it is the case, isn’t it, that based on your assessment, and what you’ve read in the [hh contact centre] records, that the children themselves are already showing signs of the emotional impact of their behaviour, or of exposure to their father? [witness] yes. [counsel] and is it likely that with continued exposure to the father’s conduct that those emotional difficulties for the children will continue to elevate? [witness] yes.  unsel] it is the case, isn’t it, that you would have difficulty identifying matters now, that might mitigate the risk to the children into the future, having regard to what you have described as the father’s continued persistent and pervasive behaviours? [witness] yes. the usual mitigating things that we put in place, well, don’t appear to have been effective so far. and so i – i don’t imagine any of those things would be effective once – once, i guess, the spectre of court and the involvement of these other people is removed. i – i would imagine that any of the mitigating factors that we would put in would be not very effective. [counsel] and even if supervision were a way to protect the children’s immediate physical needs, from what you have seen from the [hh contact centre] records, and, in particular, i will ask you to consider two matters, the first is the children’s expressions of fear to the workers about the father’s behaviour in the february visit? [witness] yes. [counsel] you recall reading that? [witness] yes. [counsel] and you would recall that [x], particularly, indicated that she was worried that her father was going to assault the worker? [witness] yes. [counsel] and she expressed a concern of how that made her feel personally? [witness] yes. [counsel] and she expressed that she was fearful of her father? [witness] yes. [counsel] and [y] also reported that she felt nervous about her father trying to speak to her when she knew that wasn’t the - - -? [witness] yes. [counsel] - - - right thing. so knowing those matters, even if supervision were to give them an immediate physical protection, supervision would not, in your mind, protect the children from emotional or psychological harm into the future, would it? [witness] no. no. [counsel] it would be necessary, wouldn’t it, in order to mitigate some of the risks that we’ve discussed today, for his honour to be satisfied, firstly, that the father had an acceptance of his own family violence perpetration upon the mother? [witness] yes. [counsel] his honour would need to be satisfied that the father was not blaming the mother, or holding her responsible, for his behaviour? [witness] yes. [counsel] his honour would need to be satisfied, wouldn’t he, in terms of your assessment, that the father had demonstrated a deep insight into the effect of his behaviour on the mother and the children? [witness] yes. [counsel] and in order to mitigate the risks, in your mind, it would also be necessary for the father to have shown an understanding, not at a superficial level, but a cognitive understanding of the mother’s fear of him? [witness] yes. [counsel] and, finally, the risk to the children into the future is also exacerbated, isn’t it, if the court is satisfied that the father has a history in which he demonstrates an inability to follow reasonable directions? [witness] yes. [counsel] and the concern about that, is it not, is that, particularly as the children develop into their own independence in adolescence, that he will have no respect for their boundaries? [witness] yes. [counsel] and part of the concern about that – correct me if i’m wrong – is the father’s breaches of the apprehended domestic violence orders? [witness] yes. [counsel] the father’s behaviour at [hh contact centre]? [witness] yes. [counsel] the incident that you’ve become aware of august with the report, the traffic - - -? [witness] yes. [counsel] - - - bollard, and also i’m going to suggest to you, one of the elements of that is if his honour accepts the father’s behaviour in this court room, that would be another example of that? [witness] yes. [counsel] and it would also be the case, wouldn’t it, that his honour were to find that the father agreed, in evidence, that during arguments, if the mother said to him, “i don’t want to talk to you” that he persisted in insisting that conversation happening, that that would be another example of risk to the children if they were to challenge the father in the future, in that he wouldn’t respect their boundaries about that? [witness] quite potentially, yes.  unsel] now, firstly, do you agree with me that the content of that letter is manipulative towards [x] [sic], in that, particularly, it seeks to place the blame on others as to why [x] [sic] is not seeing her father at that point in time? [witness] yes. [counsel] it is a letter that is inappropriate, do you agree with that? [witness] yes. [counsel] and it lacks insight into the position that that puts [x] in? [witness] yes.  s honour] okay. yes. so i’ve just got a couple of questions to ask. [ms dd], you gave evidence earlier this morning about long term supervision? [witness] yes. [his honour] could you summarise that evidence and, perhaps, unpack it a little bit more in terms of the advantages and disadvantages to these children of long term supervision? [witness] yes. so having a relationship via supervision in the long term, i guess, can – can have the benefit, and is sometimes used in situations where children might not have any experience of their parents or of their own biological background. it can give them a chance to have that experience over time, to be able to know a little bit about their family, and a little bit about their parents, in a safe environment. generally, in – in matters such as these, where the children have that information about their background, have that information about their parents, it wouldn’t be considered appropriate, because the purpose of supervision in family law matters, and when we recommend that, it’s usually for the purpose of allowing the children to safety reconnect with a parent who, perhaps, they haven’t seen for a long time, or to maintain safely, a relationship with a parent who they may or may not continue to see. so, i guess, they’re the advantages, and they’re what – what supervision is usually recommended for. the disadvantage of supervision, as i think i said before, is that it’s an artificial environment, it does impose lots of boundaries and restrictions, which makes it difficult for a parent and child to develop a natural and meaningful relationship. and so, generally, it – it’s not considered a – a good long term option. it’s generally considered that if a parent is not able to maintain a safe and meaningful relationship without oversight then the – they also won’t be able to maintain a safe and meaningful relationship even with oversight. and, i – i guess, in this particular case, the long term effects of supervision would be that the children continue to be exposed to behaviours that don’t seem to be constrained by having a supervisor present. so many of those detriments to having an unsupervised relationship might continue despite the fact that there is a supervisor there.  s honour] accepting, for the moment, those risks that you appear to have identified, can the risks to the children of being exposed to such risks being minimized or lessened significantly, if there was only limited daytime unsupervised time, noting that in your earlier recommendation in your family report, you had referred, in paragraph 134, to unsupervised time - - -? [witness] yes. [his honour] - - - “each alternate saturday”? [witness] - - - yes. [his honour] so i’m asking you to consider what i’ve just asked, if, in lieu of there being unsupervised daytime time during the whole day, there was some lesser period of unsupervised time? [witness] there are a few concerns. the need for communication between the parents, even if it’s very minimal, in this case, is quite concerning. so even if the communication is merely, “here’s the drop off point” or, you know, “we’re not coming today. we’re sick” or, you know, that very minimal communication that’s required, i think, would – is likely to cause quite high distress. [his honour] well, just on that point, if you assume, for the moment, added to the question i’ve just asked you, if there was supervised changeovers - - -? [witness] yes. [his honour] - - - for that lessened daytime unsupervised time? [witness] yes. so my concern is that it – it does not appear that the behaviours of concern that [mr rinakis] has displayed, they don’t appear predictable. there doesn’t appear to be a – a pattern to them. they haven’t necessarily – sometimes they’ve occurred in the context of his distress around, you know, perhaps not seeing the children or, you know, parental conflict. but other times it appears those behaviours have occurred in other contexts, as well. so, you know, in – in some situations we might say that, you know, that very limited time might be okay because we can control a lot of the factors. we can control some of that distress. we can make sure that that behaviour won’t happen. in this case, i don’t feel confident to say that there are any limitations that the court could impose upon that time that would guarantee that those behaviours don’t happen. [his honour] so in light of what you’ve just stated, for example, if there was to be some limited unsupervised daytime time, and the court was to make an injunction against the father denigrating the mother to the children, would that – how would you regard that as a safeguard or otherwise? [witness] yes. i – i guess, at – at this point in time i have no confidence that that safeguard would be followed by the father.  unsel] in terms of just the evidence that you’ve given, if the court was to make an order where there was no contact or time spent with the father, what would your view be of limited contact to the extent of – is it relationship identification? is that the term, in terms of sending cards, presents. would that be something that you could see as not being problematic? or that of itself, would that have problems? [witness] i – i think if that could be mediated by – by a third party, that – that could be a positive way that the children could maintain their – their positive – the positive aspects of their relationship with their father, whilst, i guess, they – they are maturing and are able to make their own – their own decisions about that relationship.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc considerations a) (the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration) ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.  b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence (a primary consideration)  in early 2013 he assaulted the mother, inter alia, by grabbing her throat with both hands. this assault against the mother was particularly violent and serious. it is likely that at this time the father had not yet addressed his cannabis drug addiction with related adverse symptomatology, noting he was admitted to r clinic in early 2013. the court refers to the clinical notes from that clinic relating to that admission. the father had agreed in his oral evidence that early 2013 was a period when he was at the height of his drug addiction, (b) in early 2013 he had thrown a chair causing it to break during an argument with the mother. the father had admitted doing this in his oral evidence, (c) in about early 2019, on a holiday, the father, during an argument with the mother, ordered the mother out of his room, forcefully placed his hands on the mother’s arms and with force threw her backwards and outside of the open door, and then swore at the mother, the maternal grandmother who had gone on the holiday had observed the father angry and had seen the mother on the floor crying, and a short time later the maternal grandfather had gone to the father’s room and had told the father that “it was not a good thing to do to hurt [ms rinakis]”. the mother had told her gp in late 2018 that the father was seeking therapy for anger management, (d) in early 2019 the father assaulted the mother when trying to take the mother’s phone from her, including grabbing her throat and pulling her neck back forcefully, with the eldest child being present for a significant period during this event. this assault against the mother was particularly violent and serious. the court observes that this assault occurred after the father had received treatment at r clinic, having been discharged from that clinic in early 2019 in a stable condition, and the father had pleaded not guilty to this assault in relation to which he was later convicted. the father had agreed in his oral evidence that the facts upon which he had been convicted included putting his hands around the mother’s throat and having pushed her, (e) in mid-2019 when the father had dropped the children at the home of the maternal grandparents, and when the father came to the door, he aggressively said to the maternal grandfather, words to the effect of, “you better put your wife and daughter in order, your family is disgraceful, your house will burn and i will take you to the courts.” the maternal grandmother had heard the father at this time threaten the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father, (f) in about mid-2019, the father scratched the mother’s car to a significant extent outside the youngest child’s day care centre. on ascertaining that her car had been scratched the mother had reported the incident to the police, the court infers that the mother likely felt scared and intimidated on observing her scratched car. the father was charged by the police with malicious damage and breach of advo. in his oral evidence, the father admitted scratching the mother’s car on this occasion. the court observes that the father had denied to the police that he had damaged the mother’s car, and the father had in about mid-2020 defended the criminal charges in the local court. in the father’s affidavit under the heading “damage to [ms rinakis’] vehicle” he had stated, “i did not do this”. (g) in mid-2019 a final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother after a defended hearing at the local court. in late 2019 and on a further occasion the father sent text messages to the mother abusing her, in these messages he had called her a slut and an ugly slut respectively. in relation to at least the latter occasion the mother felt scared, harassed, and intimidated, the mother had reported this behaviour to the police, and the father had admitted in his oral evidence of having called the mother ugly and a slut during their relationship, (h) in about early 2020, the father, having confronted the maternal grandfather after a church service, assaulted the maternal grandfather by grabbing his arm with force and grabbing his left chest area, and verbally threatened to kill him, the mother, and her brother. after this incident the mother became very scared about her parents’ safety, the father was convicted of assaulting the maternal grandfather and an advo was made against the father for the protection of the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father,   in early 2013 he had thrown a chair causing it to break during an argument with the mother. the father had admitted doing this in his oral evidence, (c) in about early 2019, on a holiday, the father, during an argument with the mother, ordered the mother out of his room, forcefully placed his hands on the mother’s arms and with force threw her backwards and outside of the open door, and then swore at the mother, the maternal grandmother who had gone on the holiday had observed the father angry and had seen the mother on the floor crying, and a short time later the maternal grandfather had gone to the father’s room and had told the father that “it was not a good thing to do to hurt [ms rinakis]”. the mother had told her gp in late 2018 that the father was seeking therapy for anger management, (d) in early 2019 the father assaulted the mother when trying to take the mother’s phone from her, including grabbing her throat and pulling her neck back forcefully, with the eldest child being present for a significant period during this event. this assault against the mother was particularly violent and serious. the court observes that this assault occurred after the father had received treatment at r clinic, having been discharged from that clinic in early 2019 in a stable condition, and the father had pleaded not guilty to this assault in relation to which he was later convicted. the father had agreed in his oral evidence that the facts upon which he had been convicted included putting his hands around the mother’s throat and having pushed her, (e) in mid-2019 when the father had dropped the children at the home of the maternal grandparents, and when the father came to the door, he aggressively said to the maternal grandfather, words to the effect of, “you better put your wife and daughter in order, your family is disgraceful, your house will burn and i will take you to the courts.” the maternal grandmother had heard the father at this time threaten the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father, (f) in about mid-2019, the father scratched the mother’s car to a significant extent outside the youngest child’s day care centre. on ascertaining that her car had been scratched the mother had reported the incident to the police, the court infers that the mother likely felt scared and intimidated on observing her scratched car. the father was charged by the police with malicious damage and breach of advo. in his oral evidence, the father admitted scratching the mother’s car on this occasion. the court observes that the father had denied to the police that he had damaged the mother’s car, and the father had in about mid-2020 defended the criminal charges in the local court. in the father’s affidavit under the heading “damage to [ms rinakis’] vehicle” he had stated, “i did not do this”. (g) in mid-2019 a final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother after a defended hearing at the local court. in late 2019 and on a further occasion the father sent text messages to the mother abusing her, in these messages he had called her a slut and an ugly slut respectively. in relation to at least the latter occasion the mother felt scared, harassed, and intimidated, the mother had reported this behaviour to the police, and the father had admitted in his oral evidence of having called the mother ugly and a slut during their relationship, (h) in about early 2020, the father, having confronted the maternal grandfather after a church service, assaulted the maternal grandfather by grabbing his arm with force and grabbing his left chest area, and verbally threatened to kill him, the mother, and her brother. after this incident the mother became very scared about her parents’ safety, the father was convicted of assaulting the maternal grandfather and an advo was made against the father for the protection of the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father,   in about early 2019, on a holiday, the father, during an argument with the mother, ordered the mother out of his room, forcefully placed his hands on the mother’s arms and with force threw her backwards and outside of the open door, and then swore at the mother, the maternal grandmother who had gone on the holiday had observed the father angry and had seen the mother on the floor crying, and a short time later the maternal grandfather had gone to the father’s room and had told the father that “it was not a good thing to do to hurt [ms rinakis]”. the mother had told her gp in late 2018 that the father was seeking therapy for anger management, (d) in early 2019 the father assaulted the mother when trying to take the mother’s phone from her, including grabbing her throat and pulling her neck back forcefully, with the eldest child being present for a significant period during this event. this assault against the mother was particularly violent and serious. the court observes that this assault occurred after the father had received treatment at r clinic, having been discharged from that clinic in early 2019 in a stable condition, and the father had pleaded not guilty to this assault in relation to which he was later convicted. the father had agreed in his oral evidence that the facts upon which he had been convicted included putting his hands around the mother’s throat and having pushed her, (e) in mid-2019 when the father had dropped the children at the home of the maternal grandparents, and when the father came to the door, he aggressively said to the maternal grandfather, words to the effect of, “you better put your wife and daughter in order, your family is disgraceful, your house will burn and i will take you to the courts.” the maternal grandmother had heard the father at this time threaten the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father, (f) in about mid-2019, the father scratched the mother’s car to a significant extent outside the youngest child’s day care centre. on ascertaining that her car had been scratched the mother had reported the incident to the police, the court infers that the mother likely felt scared and intimidated on observing her scratched car. the father was charged by the police with malicious damage and breach of advo. in his oral evidence, the father admitted scratching the mother’s car on this occasion. the court observes that the father had denied to the police that he had damaged the mother’s car, and the father had in about mid-2020 defended the criminal charges in the local court. in the father’s affidavit under the heading “damage to [ms rinakis’] vehicle” he had stated, “i did not do this”. (g) in mid-2019 a final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother after a defended hearing at the local court. in late 2019 and on a further occasion the father sent text messages to the mother abusing her, in these messages he had called her a slut and an ugly slut respectively. in relation to at least the latter occasion the mother felt scared, harassed, and intimidated, the mother had reported this behaviour to the police, and the father had admitted in his oral evidence of having called the mother ugly and a slut during their relationship, (h) in about early 2020, the father, having confronted the maternal grandfather after a church service, assaulted the maternal grandfather by grabbing his arm with force and grabbing his left chest area, and verbally threatened to kill him, the mother, and her brother. after this incident the mother became very scared about her parents’ safety, the father was convicted of assaulting the maternal grandfather and an advo was made against the father for the protection of the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father,   in early 2019 the father assaulted the mother when trying to take the mother’s phone from her, including grabbing her throat and pulling her neck back forcefully, with the eldest child being present for a significant period during this event. this assault against the mother was particularly violent and serious. the court observes that this assault occurred after the father had received treatment at r clinic, having been discharged from that clinic in early 2019 in a stable condition, and the father had pleaded not guilty to this assault in relation to which he was later convicted. the father had agreed in his oral evidence that the facts upon which he had been convicted included putting his hands around the mother’s throat and having pushed her, (e) in mid-2019 when the father had dropped the children at the home of the maternal grandparents, and when the father came to the door, he aggressively said to the maternal grandfather, words to the effect of, “you better put your wife and daughter in order, your family is disgraceful, your house will burn and i will take you to the courts.” the maternal grandmother had heard the father at this time threaten the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father, (f) in about mid-2019, the father scratched the mother’s car to a significant extent outside the youngest child’s day care centre. on ascertaining that her car had been scratched the mother had reported the incident to the police, the court infers that the mother likely felt scared and intimidated on observing her scratched car. the father was charged by the police with malicious damage and breach of advo. in his oral evidence, the father admitted scratching the mother’s car on this occasion. the court observes that the father had denied to the police that he had damaged the mother’s car, and the father had in about mid-2020 defended the criminal charges in the local court. in the father’s affidavit under the heading “damage to [ms rinakis’] vehicle” he had stated, “i did not do this”. (g) in mid-2019 a final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother after a defended hearing at the local court. in late 2019 and on a further occasion the father sent text messages to the mother abusing her, in these messages he had called her a slut and an ugly slut respectively. in relation to at least the latter occasion the mother felt scared, harassed, and intimidated, the mother had reported this behaviour to the police, and the father had admitted in his oral evidence of having called the mother ugly and a slut during their relationship, (h) in about early 2020, the father, having confronted the maternal grandfather after a church service, assaulted the maternal grandfather by grabbing his arm with force and grabbing his left chest area, and verbally threatened to kill him, the mother, and her brother. after this incident the mother became very scared about her parents’ safety, the father was convicted of assaulting the maternal grandfather and an advo was made against the father for the protection of the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father,   in mid-2019 when the father had dropped the children at the home of the maternal grandparents, and when the father came to the door, he aggressively said to the maternal grandfather, words to the effect of, “you better put your wife and daughter in order, your family is disgraceful, your house will burn and i will take you to the courts.” the maternal grandmother had heard the father at this time threaten the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father, (f) in about mid-2019, the father scratched the mother’s car to a significant extent outside the youngest child’s day care centre. on ascertaining that her car had been scratched the mother had reported the incident to the police, the court infers that the mother likely felt scared and intimidated on observing her scratched car. the father was charged by the police with malicious damage and breach of advo. in his oral evidence, the father admitted scratching the mother’s car on this occasion. the court observes that the father had denied to the police that he had damaged the mother’s car, and the father had in about mid-2020 defended the criminal charges in the local court. in the father’s affidavit under the heading “damage to [ms rinakis’] vehicle” he had stated, “i did not do this”. (g) in mid-2019 a final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother after a defended hearing at the local court. in late 2019 and on a further occasion the father sent text messages to the mother abusing her, in these messages he had called her a slut and an ugly slut respectively. in relation to at least the latter occasion the mother felt scared, harassed, and intimidated, the mother had reported this behaviour to the police, and the father had admitted in his oral evidence of having called the mother ugly and a slut during their relationship, (h) in about early 2020, the father, having confronted the maternal grandfather after a church service, assaulted the maternal grandfather by grabbing his arm with force and grabbing his left chest area, and verbally threatened to kill him, the mother, and her brother. after this incident the mother became very scared about her parents’ safety, the father was convicted of assaulting the maternal grandfather and an advo was made against the father for the protection of the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father,   in about mid-2019, the father scratched the mother’s car to a significant extent outside the youngest child’s day care centre. on ascertaining that her car had been scratched the mother had reported the incident to the police, the court infers that the mother likely felt scared and intimidated on observing her scratched car. the father was charged by the police with malicious damage and breach of advo. in his oral evidence, the father admitted scratching the mother’s car on this occasion. the court observes that the father had denied to the police that he had damaged the mother’s car, and the father had in about mid-2020 defended the criminal charges in the local court. in the father’s affidavit under the heading “damage to [ms rinakis’] vehicle” he had stated, “i did not do this”. (g) in mid-2019 a final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother after a defended hearing at the local court. in late 2019 and on a further occasion the father sent text messages to the mother abusing her, in these messages he had called her a slut and an ugly slut respectively. in relation to at least the latter occasion the mother felt scared, harassed, and intimidated, the mother had reported this behaviour to the police, and the father had admitted in his oral evidence of having called the mother ugly and a slut during their relationship, (h) in about early 2020, the father, having confronted the maternal grandfather after a church service, assaulted the maternal grandfather by grabbing his arm with force and grabbing his left chest area, and verbally threatened to kill him, the mother, and her brother. after this incident the mother became very scared about her parents’ safety, the father was convicted of assaulting the maternal grandfather and an advo was made against the father for the protection of the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father,   in mid-2019 a final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother after a defended hearing at the local court. in late 2019 and on a further occasion the father sent text messages to the mother abusing her, in these messages he had called her a slut and an ugly slut respectively. in relation to at least the latter occasion the mother felt scared, harassed, and intimidated, the mother had reported this behaviour to the police, and the father had admitted in his oral evidence of having called the mother ugly and a slut during their relationship, (h) in about early 2020, the father, having confronted the maternal grandfather after a church service, assaulted the maternal grandfather by grabbing his arm with force and grabbing his left chest area, and verbally threatened to kill him, the mother, and her brother. after this incident the mother became very scared about her parents’ safety, the father was convicted of assaulting the maternal grandfather and an advo was made against the father for the protection of the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father,   in about early 2020, the father, having confronted the maternal grandfather after a church service, assaulted the maternal grandfather by grabbing his arm with force and grabbing his left chest area, and verbally threatened to kill him, the mother, and her brother. after this incident the mother became very scared about her parents’ safety, the father was convicted of assaulting the maternal grandfather and an advo was made against the father for the protection of the maternal grandfather. the court observes that there is a coercive element to this behaviour of the father,   in early 2013 the father slammed the table and told the maternal grandparents to get the fuck out of his house. the father had admitted such behaviour in his oral evidence, (b) in mid-2018 the father told the mother in the driveway of their home that he would rather kill himself than live with the mother and told her to fuck off. the father had admitted such behaviour in his oral evidence, (c) in early 2019 at the former matrimonial home the father had said to the mother that he was going to take her to court every day and make her life a misery. the father had admitted such behaviour in his oral evidence. the court observes that there is probably a coercive element to this behaviour of the father, (d) in a conversation that the father had with the maternal grandfather in mid-2019, the father stated that in the country oo language he said to the maternal grandfather, “your wife and daughter have become prostitutes and you need to put them in their place because you’re meant to be the man of the house. get some order in your house.” in this context, the father explained that the male was the head of the house and should guide smaller members of the house. the court observes that there is probably a coercive element to this behaviour of the father.   in mid-2018 the father told the mother in the driveway of their home that he would rather kill himself than live with the mother and told her to fuck off. the father had admitted such behaviour in his oral evidence, (c) in early 2019 at the former matrimonial home the father had said to the mother that he was going to take her to court every day and make her life a misery. the father had admitted such behaviour in his oral evidence. the court observes that there is probably a coercive element to this behaviour of the father, (d) in a conversation that the father had with the maternal grandfather in mid-2019, the father stated that in the country oo language he said to the maternal grandfather, “your wife and daughter have become prostitutes and you need to put them in their place because you’re meant to be the man of the house. get some order in your house.” in this context, the father explained that the male was the head of the house and should guide smaller members of the house. the court observes that there is probably a coercive element to this behaviour of the father.   in early 2019 at the former matrimonial home the father had said to the mother that he was going to take her to court every day and make her life a misery. the father had admitted such behaviour in his oral evidence. the court observes that there is probably a coercive element to this behaviour of the father, (d) in a conversation that the father had with the maternal grandfather in mid-2019, the father stated that in the country oo language he said to the maternal grandfather, “your wife and daughter have become prostitutes and you need to put them in their place because you’re meant to be the man of the house. get some order in your house.” in this context, the father explained that the male was the head of the house and should guide smaller members of the house. the court observes that there is probably a coercive element to this behaviour of the father.   in a conversation that the father had with the maternal grandfather in mid-2019, the father stated that in the country oo language he said to the maternal grandfather, “your wife and daughter have become prostitutes and you need to put them in their place because you’re meant to be the man of the house. get some order in your house.” in this context, the father explained that the male was the head of the house and should guide smaller members of the house. the court observes that there is probably a coercive element to this behaviour of the father.
the court child expert had stated, in relation to these words spoken by the father, that they demonstrated a concerning thought pattern by the father about the role of women. she stated that fixed and rigid ideas regarding gender roles and regarding appropriate power dynamics in the house are often a significant feature of a family violence dynamic. she stated that this attitude of the father presented a risk to the children as they moved into adolescence, in particular if the father was involved in parenting the children, the children may feel that they are forced to comply with particular stereotypes or particular behaviours because of that attitude (of the father) which can impact on their development, or alternatively, the children may develop different views and being parented by someone with views that children or girls should be controlled may lead to coercive and manipulative behaviours by the parent with that attitude,   in mid-2019 when the child y was with the father, he had telephoned the mother by accident and the mother could hear his conversation with the child y. the father had admitted in his oral evidence that he told the child y that the mother doesn’t love him anymore and has a new boyfriend, in this context, the court child expert had stated that placing a child in the middle of conflict in such a manner can create a conflict in the child within themselves, and can force them into a position where they feel that they have to choose one parent over another, which is very distressing for a child, (f) in mid-2019 the father, in breach of an advo, had been within 100 metres of the mother’s home. the court refers to the father’s criminal history in exhibit j and to the police report in exhibit k, (g) in mid-2019, the father had become aware that the mother had arranged a technician to attend the former matrimonial home to install surveillance cameras. at this time the father was not permitted to attend the home by reason of an advo. the father stated a neighbour had called him regarding the attendance of a technician at the home. the father agreed that he had called the technician seven times to tell him that he did not have permission to install the surveillance cameras, (h) between about mid-2019 the father published numerous facebook comments insulting and degrading the mother and her family which the mother annexes to her affidavit, in mid-2019 the father was arrested and charged with breach of advo, (i) also in breach of an advo, on in mid-2019 the father telephoned the mother. the father confirmed in his oral evidence that in mid-2019 he had been charged with calling the mother at 10.06 pm on that date. he was convicted of breaching the advo. the father agreed that he had called the mother in mid-2019, (j) in 2016 the father had posted a picture of the parties at a sports match on facebook, and in late 2019 he posted a comment on that post that referred to the mother’s brother, stating “doing a good turn taking a spastic to the football”. the father had referred to the mother’s brother as being an idiot and stupid, and that had shared that view with the maternal grandparents. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence and he stated that he continued to hold this view of the mother’s brother and that he also considered the mother’s parents to be idiots, (k) on about late 2019 the father sent the eldest child a photograph of his fridge, on which there was a family photograph in which the mother’s face had been covered by a picture of a celebrity. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence, (l) on 8 december 2019, during a m contact centre supervised visit with the children, the father had made one or two snide remarks about the mother in front of the children (see exhibit a), (m) the father was convicted of breach of advo in relation to him approaching the child x at her school in mid-2020, resulting in further imprisonment, (n) in mid-2022 the father, whilst in his car, had stopped at traffic barriers along rr street, suburb ss, and was told by the traffic controller that the road was closed and he could not drive along the road until the police opened the road. the father, without permission, had driven forward causing the traffic controller to step out of the way, the father’s car’s tyre had mounted the median strip and the father drove around the barriers, slightly knocking one of them. he drove off at speed. people were walking along the closed road. a short time later the father’s car was stopped by police and the father told them that he had not been told that he could not drive through the road closure barriers. the next day the police telephoned the father and the father gave a different account as to his conduct, telling them that he had bad stomach pains and had diarrhoea and was thereby forced to drive through the barrier. during this telephone call the father became abusive and argumentative with the police. the court refers to the relevant police record in exhibit b, (o) on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   in mid-2019 the father, in breach of an advo, had been within 100 metres of the mother’s home. the court refers to the father’s criminal history in exhibit j and to the police report in exhibit k, (g) in mid-2019, the father had become aware that the mother had arranged a technician to attend the former matrimonial home to install surveillance cameras. at this time the father was not permitted to attend the home by reason of an advo. the father stated a neighbour had called him regarding the attendance of a technician at the home. the father agreed that he had called the technician seven times to tell him that he did not have permission to install the surveillance cameras, (h) between about mid-2019 the father published numerous facebook comments insulting and degrading the mother and her family which the mother annexes to her affidavit, in mid-2019 the father was arrested and charged with breach of advo, (i) also in breach of an advo, on in mid-2019 the father telephoned the mother. the father confirmed in his oral evidence that in mid-2019 he had been charged with calling the mother at 10.06 pm on that date. he was convicted of breaching the advo. the father agreed that he had called the mother in mid-2019, (j) in 2016 the father had posted a picture of the parties at a sports match on facebook, and in late 2019 he posted a comment on that post that referred to the mother’s brother, stating “doing a good turn taking a spastic to the football”. the father had referred to the mother’s brother as being an idiot and stupid, and that had shared that view with the maternal grandparents. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence and he stated that he continued to hold this view of the mother’s brother and that he also considered the mother’s parents to be idiots, (k) on about late 2019 the father sent the eldest child a photograph of his fridge, on which there was a family photograph in which the mother’s face had been covered by a picture of a celebrity. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence, (l) on 8 december 2019, during a m contact centre supervised visit with the children, the father had made one or two snide remarks about the mother in front of the children (see exhibit a), (m) the father was convicted of breach of advo in relation to him approaching the child x at her school in mid-2020, resulting in further imprisonment, (n) in mid-2022 the father, whilst in his car, had stopped at traffic barriers along rr street, suburb ss, and was told by the traffic controller that the road was closed and he could not drive along the road until the police opened the road. the father, without permission, had driven forward causing the traffic controller to step out of the way, the father’s car’s tyre had mounted the median strip and the father drove around the barriers, slightly knocking one of them. he drove off at speed. people were walking along the closed road. a short time later the father’s car was stopped by police and the father told them that he had not been told that he could not drive through the road closure barriers. the next day the police telephoned the father and the father gave a different account as to his conduct, telling them that he had bad stomach pains and had diarrhoea and was thereby forced to drive through the barrier. during this telephone call the father became abusive and argumentative with the police. the court refers to the relevant police record in exhibit b, (o) on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   in mid-2019, the father had become aware that the mother had arranged a technician to attend the former matrimonial home to install surveillance cameras. at this time the father was not permitted to attend the home by reason of an advo. the father stated a neighbour had called him regarding the attendance of a technician at the home. the father agreed that he had called the technician seven times to tell him that he did not have permission to install the surveillance cameras, (h) between about mid-2019 the father published numerous facebook comments insulting and degrading the mother and her family which the mother annexes to her affidavit, in mid-2019 the father was arrested and charged with breach of advo, (i) also in breach of an advo, on in mid-2019 the father telephoned the mother. the father confirmed in his oral evidence that in mid-2019 he had been charged with calling the mother at 10.06 pm on that date. he was convicted of breaching the advo. the father agreed that he had called the mother in mid-2019, (j) in 2016 the father had posted a picture of the parties at a sports match on facebook, and in late 2019 he posted a comment on that post that referred to the mother’s brother, stating “doing a good turn taking a spastic to the football”. the father had referred to the mother’s brother as being an idiot and stupid, and that had shared that view with the maternal grandparents. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence and he stated that he continued to hold this view of the mother’s brother and that he also considered the mother’s parents to be idiots, (k) on about late 2019 the father sent the eldest child a photograph of his fridge, on which there was a family photograph in which the mother’s face had been covered by a picture of a celebrity. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence, (l) on 8 december 2019, during a m contact centre supervised visit with the children, the father had made one or two snide remarks about the mother in front of the children (see exhibit a), (m) the father was convicted of breach of advo in relation to him approaching the child x at her school in mid-2020, resulting in further imprisonment, (n) in mid-2022 the father, whilst in his car, had stopped at traffic barriers along rr street, suburb ss, and was told by the traffic controller that the road was closed and he could not drive along the road until the police opened the road. the father, without permission, had driven forward causing the traffic controller to step out of the way, the father’s car’s tyre had mounted the median strip and the father drove around the barriers, slightly knocking one of them. he drove off at speed. people were walking along the closed road. a short time later the father’s car was stopped by police and the father told them that he had not been told that he could not drive through the road closure barriers. the next day the police telephoned the father and the father gave a different account as to his conduct, telling them that he had bad stomach pains and had diarrhoea and was thereby forced to drive through the barrier. during this telephone call the father became abusive and argumentative with the police. the court refers to the relevant police record in exhibit b, (o) on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   between about mid-2019 the father published numerous facebook comments insulting and degrading the mother and her family which the mother annexes to her affidavit, in mid-2019 the father was arrested and charged with breach of advo, (i) also in breach of an advo, on in mid-2019 the father telephoned the mother. the father confirmed in his oral evidence that in mid-2019 he had been charged with calling the mother at 10.06 pm on that date. he was convicted of breaching the advo. the father agreed that he had called the mother in mid-2019, (j) in 2016 the father had posted a picture of the parties at a sports match on facebook, and in late 2019 he posted a comment on that post that referred to the mother’s brother, stating “doing a good turn taking a spastic to the football”. the father had referred to the mother’s brother as being an idiot and stupid, and that had shared that view with the maternal grandparents. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence and he stated that he continued to hold this view of the mother’s brother and that he also considered the mother’s parents to be idiots, (k) on about late 2019 the father sent the eldest child a photograph of his fridge, on which there was a family photograph in which the mother’s face had been covered by a picture of a celebrity. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence, (l) on 8 december 2019, during a m contact centre supervised visit with the children, the father had made one or two snide remarks about the mother in front of the children (see exhibit a), (m) the father was convicted of breach of advo in relation to him approaching the child x at her school in mid-2020, resulting in further imprisonment, (n) in mid-2022 the father, whilst in his car, had stopped at traffic barriers along rr street, suburb ss, and was told by the traffic controller that the road was closed and he could not drive along the road until the police opened the road. the father, without permission, had driven forward causing the traffic controller to step out of the way, the father’s car’s tyre had mounted the median strip and the father drove around the barriers, slightly knocking one of them. he drove off at speed. people were walking along the closed road. a short time later the father’s car was stopped by police and the father told them that he had not been told that he could not drive through the road closure barriers. the next day the police telephoned the father and the father gave a different account as to his conduct, telling them that he had bad stomach pains and had diarrhoea and was thereby forced to drive through the barrier. during this telephone call the father became abusive and argumentative with the police. the court refers to the relevant police record in exhibit b, (o) on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   also in breach of an advo, on in mid-2019 the father telephoned the mother. the father confirmed in his oral evidence that in mid-2019 he had been charged with calling the mother at 10.06 pm on that date. he was convicted of breaching the advo. the father agreed that he had called the mother in mid-2019, (j) in 2016 the father had posted a picture of the parties at a sports match on facebook, and in late 2019 he posted a comment on that post that referred to the mother’s brother, stating “doing a good turn taking a spastic to the football”. the father had referred to the mother’s brother as being an idiot and stupid, and that had shared that view with the maternal grandparents. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence and he stated that he continued to hold this view of the mother’s brother and that he also considered the mother’s parents to be idiots, (k) on about late 2019 the father sent the eldest child a photograph of his fridge, on which there was a family photograph in which the mother’s face had been covered by a picture of a celebrity. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence, (l) on 8 december 2019, during a m contact centre supervised visit with the children, the father had made one or two snide remarks about the mother in front of the children (see exhibit a), (m) the father was convicted of breach of advo in relation to him approaching the child x at her school in mid-2020, resulting in further imprisonment, (n) in mid-2022 the father, whilst in his car, had stopped at traffic barriers along rr street, suburb ss, and was told by the traffic controller that the road was closed and he could not drive along the road until the police opened the road. the father, without permission, had driven forward causing the traffic controller to step out of the way, the father’s car’s tyre had mounted the median strip and the father drove around the barriers, slightly knocking one of them. he drove off at speed. people were walking along the closed road. a short time later the father’s car was stopped by police and the father told them that he had not been told that he could not drive through the road closure barriers. the next day the police telephoned the father and the father gave a different account as to his conduct, telling them that he had bad stomach pains and had diarrhoea and was thereby forced to drive through the barrier. during this telephone call the father became abusive and argumentative with the police. the court refers to the relevant police record in exhibit b, (o) on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   in 2016 the father had posted a picture of the parties at a sports match on facebook, and in late 2019 he posted a comment on that post that referred to the mother’s brother, stating “doing a good turn taking a spastic to the football”. the father had referred to the mother’s brother as being an idiot and stupid, and that had shared that view with the maternal grandparents. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence and he stated that he continued to hold this view of the mother’s brother and that he also considered the mother’s parents to be idiots, (k) on about late 2019 the father sent the eldest child a photograph of his fridge, on which there was a family photograph in which the mother’s face had been covered by a picture of a celebrity. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence, (l) on 8 december 2019, during a m contact centre supervised visit with the children, the father had made one or two snide remarks about the mother in front of the children (see exhibit a), (m) the father was convicted of breach of advo in relation to him approaching the child x at her school in mid-2020, resulting in further imprisonment, (n) in mid-2022 the father, whilst in his car, had stopped at traffic barriers along rr street, suburb ss, and was told by the traffic controller that the road was closed and he could not drive along the road until the police opened the road. the father, without permission, had driven forward causing the traffic controller to step out of the way, the father’s car’s tyre had mounted the median strip and the father drove around the barriers, slightly knocking one of them. he drove off at speed. people were walking along the closed road. a short time later the father’s car was stopped by police and the father told them that he had not been told that he could not drive through the road closure barriers. the next day the police telephoned the father and the father gave a different account as to his conduct, telling them that he had bad stomach pains and had diarrhoea and was thereby forced to drive through the barrier. during this telephone call the father became abusive and argumentative with the police. the court refers to the relevant police record in exhibit b, (o) on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   on about late 2019 the father sent the eldest child a photograph of his fridge, on which there was a family photograph in which the mother’s face had been covered by a picture of a celebrity. the father admitted this behaviour in his oral evidence, (l) on 8 december 2019, during a m contact centre supervised visit with the children, the father had made one or two snide remarks about the mother in front of the children (see exhibit a), (m) the father was convicted of breach of advo in relation to him approaching the child x at her school in mid-2020, resulting in further imprisonment, (n) in mid-2022 the father, whilst in his car, had stopped at traffic barriers along rr street, suburb ss, and was told by the traffic controller that the road was closed and he could not drive along the road until the police opened the road. the father, without permission, had driven forward causing the traffic controller to step out of the way, the father’s car’s tyre had mounted the median strip and the father drove around the barriers, slightly knocking one of them. he drove off at speed. people were walking along the closed road. a short time later the father’s car was stopped by police and the father told them that he had not been told that he could not drive through the road closure barriers. the next day the police telephoned the father and the father gave a different account as to his conduct, telling them that he had bad stomach pains and had diarrhoea and was thereby forced to drive through the barrier. during this telephone call the father became abusive and argumentative with the police. the court refers to the relevant police record in exhibit b, (o) on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   on 8 december 2019, during a m contact centre supervised visit with the children, the father had made one or two snide remarks about the mother in front of the children (see exhibit a), (m) the father was convicted of breach of advo in relation to him approaching the child x at her school in mid-2020, resulting in further imprisonment, (n) in mid-2022 the father, whilst in his car, had stopped at traffic barriers along rr street, suburb ss, and was told by the traffic controller that the road was closed and he could not drive along the road until the police opened the road. the father, without permission, had driven forward causing the traffic controller to step out of the way, the father’s car’s tyre had mounted the median strip and the father drove around the barriers, slightly knocking one of them. he drove off at speed. people were walking along the closed road. a short time later the father’s car was stopped by police and the father told them that he had not been told that he could not drive through the road closure barriers. the next day the police telephoned the father and the father gave a different account as to his conduct, telling them that he had bad stomach pains and had diarrhoea and was thereby forced to drive through the barrier. during this telephone call the father became abusive and argumentative with the police. the court refers to the relevant police record in exhibit b, (o) on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   the father was convicted of breach of advo in relation to him approaching the child x at her school in mid-2020, resulting in further imprisonment, (n) in mid-2022 the father, whilst in his car, had stopped at traffic barriers along rr street, suburb ss, and was told by the traffic controller that the road was closed and he could not drive along the road until the police opened the road. the father, without permission, had driven forward causing the traffic controller to step out of the way, the father’s car’s tyre had mounted the median strip and the father drove around the barriers, slightly knocking one of them. he drove off at speed. people were walking along the closed road. a short time later the father’s car was stopped by police and the father told them that he had not been told that he could not drive through the road closure barriers. the next day the police telephoned the father and the father gave a different account as to his conduct, telling them that he had bad stomach pains and had diarrhoea and was thereby forced to drive through the barrier. during this telephone call the father became abusive and argumentative with the police. the court refers to the relevant police record in exhibit b, (o) on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   in mid-2022 the father, whilst in his car, had stopped at traffic barriers along rr street, suburb ss, and was told by the traffic controller that the road was closed and he could not drive along the road until the police opened the road. the father, without permission, had driven forward causing the traffic controller to step out of the way, the father’s car’s tyre had mounted the median strip and the father drove around the barriers, slightly knocking one of them. he drove off at speed. people were walking along the closed road. a short time later the father’s car was stopped by police and the father told them that he had not been told that he could not drive through the road closure barriers. the next day the police telephoned the father and the father gave a different account as to his conduct, telling them that he had bad stomach pains and had diarrhoea and was thereby forced to drive through the barrier. during this telephone call the father became abusive and argumentative with the police. the court refers to the relevant police record in exhibit b, (o) on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   on 25 february 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father, after having been advised by the supervisor that no gifts could be provided to the children, without permission, handed a jewellery box containing a necklace to the eldest child under the table. the supervisor verbally intervened and the father, in anger and in a combative manner, and in front of the children, argued with the supervisor in relation to his conduct. also at this visit, the father was observed by the supervisor to use a soft voice into the youngest child’s year asking, “do you like being supervised visits or do you want to be unsupervised?” the father had also stated to the eldest child at this visit, words to the effect of, “don’t worry, we’ll be back together soon, you will be able to see the family and stay with me and come to melbourne.” later, the eldest child had spoken to the supervisor and said, “when my dad got angry with you, i was worried he was going to choke you like he used to choke my mum”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (p) on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   on 11 march 2023, at a hh contact centre supervised visit, the father verbally related an inappropriate joke to the children, with the supervisor observing the father to talk fast and laugh out of context using an exaggerated laugh. the supervisor observed the father to “use inconsistent sarcastic playful conversations”. the father had asked the children if they wore the jewellery he had bought them, and asked them to wear the necklaces so he could see them. the supervisor had later reported that an area of improvement for the father was to “modulate emotional regulation”. the court refers to exhibit c in this context, (q) during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   during the parties’ relationship and post-separation, the father verbally abused and swore at the mother, including the use of derogatory and demeaning words towards her. he has told the mother on one occasion that he would make her life a fucking misery. the father admitted such behaviour to the family consultant for the child inclusive conference on 17 december 2019 and admitted in his oral evidence verbally abusing the mother.   the evidence of the court child expert relating to her interview with the father, (b) exhibit l, being a series of case note reports from nsw department of corrective services relating to interviews between the father and corrective services officers in mid-2020 and late 2020, (c) the father, in the courtroom during the final hearing, whilst the court was briefly adjourned, had verbally remarked to his brother-in-law, but within the hearing of other persons present in court, words to the effect that the mother’s crying in court was fabricated. in this context, the court child expert stated that such behaviour suggests the father does not understand the impacts of his behaviour upon the mother and how those impacts may flow-on to the children, (d) the father’s oral evidence.   exhibit l, being a series of case note reports from nsw department of corrective services relating to interviews between the father and corrective services officers in mid-2020 and late 2020, (c) the father, in the courtroom during the final hearing, whilst the court was briefly adjourned, had verbally remarked to his brother-in-law, but within the hearing of other persons present in court, words to the effect that the mother’s crying in court was fabricated. in this context, the court child expert stated that such behaviour suggests the father does not understand the impacts of his behaviour upon the mother and how those impacts may flow-on to the children, (d) the father’s oral evidence.   the father, in the courtroom during the final hearing, whilst the court was briefly adjourned, had verbally remarked to his brother-in-law, but within the hearing of other persons present in court, words to the effect that the mother’s crying in court was fabricated. in this context, the court child expert stated that such behaviour suggests the father does not understand the impacts of his behaviour upon the mother and how those impacts may flow-on to the children, (d) the father’s oral evidence.   the father’s oral evidence.   the father has perpetrated significant family violence and other adverse behaviour (see the court’s findings above) to which the children have been exposed on occasion, and in relation to which he lacks adequate insight, (b) there is a significant risk, if not a likelihood, that the father will denigrate the mother in the presence of the children if spending time with them, (c) the father suffers from inadequate impulse control and experiences emotional dysregulation (typified by anger), in particular in relation to situations in which he cannot get his own way. in this context, the father has shown an unwillingness to obey court orders, rules, and to comply with behavioural boundaries. there is a significant risk that the father will act in a dysregulated manner, including potential verbally abusive, intimidatory and/or and dangerous behaviour (e.g. the father’s impermissible driving through a traffic barrier in mid-2022 at suburb ss) towards third parties in the presence of the children. of significant concern is that such inadequate impulse control and emotional dysregulation continues despite past psychological treatment and attendance upon a course,   there is a significant risk, if not a likelihood, that the father will denigrate the mother in the presence of the children if spending time with them, (c) the father suffers from inadequate impulse control and experiences emotional dysregulation (typified by anger), in particular in relation to situations in which he cannot get his own way. in this context, the father has shown an unwillingness to obey court orders, rules, and to comply with behavioural boundaries. there is a significant risk that the father will act in a dysregulated manner, including potential verbally abusive, intimidatory and/or and dangerous behaviour (e.g. the father’s impermissible driving through a traffic barrier in mid-2022 at suburb ss) towards third parties in the presence of the children. of significant concern is that such inadequate impulse control and emotional dysregulation continues despite past psychological treatment and attendance upon a course,   the father suffers from inadequate impulse control and experiences emotional dysregulation (typified by anger), in particular in relation to situations in which he cannot get his own way. in this context, the father has shown an unwillingness to obey court orders, rules, and to comply with behavioural boundaries. there is a significant risk that the father will act in a dysregulated manner, including potential verbally abusive, intimidatory and/or and dangerous behaviour (e.g. the father’s impermissible driving through a traffic barrier in mid-2022 at suburb ss) towards third parties in the presence of the children. of significant concern is that such inadequate impulse control and emotional dysregulation continues despite past psychological treatment and attendance upon a course,
the father’s difficulties with impulse control and emotional dysregulation date back to at least about early 2015 (see e.g. the clinical records of r clinic (exhibit h) wherein it is stated that the father had described a situation with the mother in which he exploded,   there is a significant risk that the father will perpetrate significant verbal abuse and/or intimidatory behaviour, with anger, towards the children, as they mature and exhibit potentially challenging behaviours. in this context, the father’s concerning thought pattern about the role of women may well exacerbate this risk, (e) the mother’s mental health would likely be adversely affected with resultant detrimental effects upon her parenting capacity which would negatively affect the children. the court accepts the mother’s evidence relating to her significant fear of the father and anxiety experienced in relation thereto, both past and present. the court would assess that the mother has no significant capacity to co-parent with the father in view of her fear of the father and related anxiety. the father lacks insight in relation to the mother’s fear of him. the court accepts the evidence of dr gg, psychiatrist, in relation to the mother’s mental health.   the mother’s mental health would likely be adversely affected with resultant detrimental effects upon her parenting capacity which would negatively affect the children. the court accepts the mother’s evidence relating to her significant fear of the father and anxiety experienced in relation thereto, both past and present. the court would assess that the mother has no significant capacity to co-parent with the father in view of her fear of the father and related anxiety. the father lacks insight in relation to the mother’s fear of him. the court accepts the evidence of dr gg, psychiatrist, in relation to the mother’s mental health.
it would be important that [mr rinakis] was able to acknowledge that some of his behaviours had been problematic, and understand how they have been problematic, and how they have impacted on the children and [ms rinakis], and also be able to, i guess, identify how to behave differently. part of that behaving differently would be being able to demonstrate that he can respect boundaries, whether they be boundaries of rules that are given by outside institutions or whether they be personal boundaries of, you know, people sort of telling him how – how they need him to behave to keep them safe. so, you know, recognizing when – when somebody says they don’t want to continue a conversation, being able to – to walk away, recognizing that when he is told that it’s – it’s not appropriate to, perhaps, continually tell a child that their mother is mean, that he is able to recognise that “i need to stop that now.” recognising that if somebody says your words are hurtful, “i need to change the way i speak.”
section 60cc(3) additional considerations a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family. k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter. l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.  m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
parental responsibility
summary
costs  unless the court otherwise orders, a party who requires a single expert witness to attend court for cross-examination must pay the reasonable fees and expenses of the single expert witnesses attendance.
deputy associate: dated: 30 june 2023
dated: 30 june 2023