last updated: 4 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gingell & oakes [2023] fedcfamc2f 792
orders
the court orders that:  during the school term, (i) each second weekend from pick-up time at school on friday until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) on monday, (ii) each alternate week, from school pick-up time wednesday until school drop-off time friday (or 4:00pm if a non-school day).   each second weekend from pick-up time at school on friday until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) on monday, (ii) each alternate week, from school pick-up time wednesday until school drop-off time friday (or 4:00pm if a non-school day).  ) each alternate week, from school pick-up time wednesday until school drop-off time friday (or 4:00pm if a non-school day).   the mother do all acts and things and sign all such documents at her sole expense as may be required to discharge the mortgage registered number ... to b bank (australia) ltd (the c street mortgage) secured against the property situate at c street, suburb r (the c street property), refinance the mortgage into her sole name and indemnify the father in relation to the c street mortgage and all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings and encumbrances relating to the c street property of whatsoever nature and kind, (b) the father do all acts and things and sign all such documents at his sole expense as may be required to discharge the mortgage registered number ... to b bank (australia) ltd (the d street mortgage) secured against the property situate at d street, suburb r (the d street property), refinance the d street mortgage into his sole name and indemnify the mother in relation to the d street mortgage and all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings and encumbrances relating to the d street property of whatsoever nature and kind, and   the father do all acts and things and sign all such documents at his sole expense as may be required to discharge the mortgage registered number ... to b bank (australia) ltd (the d street mortgage) secured against the property situate at d street, suburb r (the d street property), refinance the d street mortgage into his sole name and indemnify the mother in relation to the d street mortgage and all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings and encumbrances relating to the d street property of whatsoever nature and kind, and   the mother have the sole right to use and occupy the c street property to the exclusion of the father, (b) the father have the sole right to use and occupy the d street property to the exclusion of the mother, (c) the parties are hereby restrained from doing any acts or things which will have the effect of encumbering or further encumbering the c street and d street properties without the consent in writing of the other party, (d) the mother pay, be solely responsible for and indemnify the father in respect of any principal and interest due or falling due pursuant to the c street mortgage and all other outgoings and costs in respect of the c street property including but not limited to rates, levies, taxes, insurances and utilities as and when they fall due, and (e) the father pay, be solely responsible for and indemnify the mother in respect of any principal and interest due or falling due pursuant to the d street mortgage and all other outgoings and costs in respect of the d street property including but not limited to rates, levies, taxes, insurances and utilities as and when they fall due. (f) the parties hold their respective interests in the c street property and d street property upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the father have the sole right to use and occupy the d street property to the exclusion of the mother, (c) the parties are hereby restrained from doing any acts or things which will have the effect of encumbering or further encumbering the c street and d street properties without the consent in writing of the other party, (d) the mother pay, be solely responsible for and indemnify the father in respect of any principal and interest due or falling due pursuant to the c street mortgage and all other outgoings and costs in respect of the c street property including but not limited to rates, levies, taxes, insurances and utilities as and when they fall due, and (e) the father pay, be solely responsible for and indemnify the mother in respect of any principal and interest due or falling due pursuant to the d street mortgage and all other outgoings and costs in respect of the d street property including but not limited to rates, levies, taxes, insurances and utilities as and when they fall due. (f) the parties hold their respective interests in the c street property and d street property upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the parties are hereby restrained from doing any acts or things which will have the effect of encumbering or further encumbering the c street and d street properties without the consent in writing of the other party, (d) the mother pay, be solely responsible for and indemnify the father in respect of any principal and interest due or falling due pursuant to the c street mortgage and all other outgoings and costs in respect of the c street property including but not limited to rates, levies, taxes, insurances and utilities as and when they fall due, and (e) the father pay, be solely responsible for and indemnify the mother in respect of any principal and interest due or falling due pursuant to the d street mortgage and all other outgoings and costs in respect of the d street property including but not limited to rates, levies, taxes, insurances and utilities as and when they fall due. (f) the parties hold their respective interests in the c street property and d street property upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the mother pay, be solely responsible for and indemnify the father in respect of any principal and interest due or falling due pursuant to the c street mortgage and all other outgoings and costs in respect of the c street property including but not limited to rates, levies, taxes, insurances and utilities as and when they fall due, and (e) the father pay, be solely responsible for and indemnify the mother in respect of any principal and interest due or falling due pursuant to the d street mortgage and all other outgoings and costs in respect of the d street property including but not limited to rates, levies, taxes, insurances and utilities as and when they fall due. (f) the parties hold their respective interests in the c street property and d street property upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the father pay, be solely responsible for and indemnify the mother in respect of any principal and interest due or falling due pursuant to the d street mortgage and all other outgoings and costs in respect of the d street property including but not limited to rates, levies, taxes, insurances and utilities as and when they fall due. (f) the parties hold their respective interests in the c street property and d street property upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the parties hold their respective interests in the c street property and d street property upon trust pursuant to these orders.
default clauses   firstly, to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the c street sale, (b) secondly, to discharge the c street mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the c street property, and (c) thirdly, the balance to the mother.   secondly, to discharge the c street mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the c street property, and (c) thirdly, the balance to the mother.   thirdly, the balance to the mother.   firstly, to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the d street sale, (b) secondly, to discharge the d street mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the d street property, (c) thirdly, so much of the payment which is then outstanding, together with interest at the rate prescribed by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021, to the respondent, and (d) fourthly, the balance to the father.   secondly, to discharge the d street mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the d street property, (c) thirdly, so much of the payment which is then outstanding, together with interest at the rate prescribed by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021, to the respondent, and (d) fourthly, the balance to the father.   thirdly, so much of the payment which is then outstanding, together with interest at the rate prescribed by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021, to the respondent, and (d) fourthly, the balance to the father.   fourthly, the balance to the father.   close all bank accounts held in their joint names, with the balance of those accounts to be divided equally, (b) transfer the registration of the motor vehicle 1 motor vehicle (registration no. ...) to the respondent's sole name at her sole expense, (c) remove the father as a signatory from the bank account of x.   transfer the registration of the motor vehicle 1 motor vehicle (registration no. ...) to the respondent's sole name at her sole expense, (c) remove the father as a signatory from the bank account of x.   remove the father as a signatory from the bank account of x.
the father's assets  the d street property, (b) all bank accounts and any other investment credits in his sole name, (c) his shares in e group, and (d) his superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 1.   all bank accounts and any other investment credits in his sole name, (c) his shares in e group, and (d) his superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 1.   his shares in e group, and (d) his superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 1.   his superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 1.
the mother's assets   the c street property, (b) all bank accounts and any other investment credits in her sole name, (c) motor vehicle 2, registration number ..., (d) her shares in f limited, (e) her shares in g limited, (f) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 2, (g) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 3, and (h) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 4.   all bank accounts and any other investment credits in her sole name, (c) motor vehicle 2, registration number ..., (d) her shares in f limited, (e) her shares in g limited, (f) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 2, (g) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 3, and (h) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 4.   motor vehicle 2, registration number ..., (d) her shares in f limited, (e) her shares in g limited, (f) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 2, (g) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 3, and (h) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 4.   her shares in f limited, (e) her shares in g limited, (f) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 2, (g) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 3, and (h) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 4.   her shares in g limited, (f) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 2, (g) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 3, and (h) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 4.   her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 2, (g) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 3, and (h) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 4.   her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 3, and (h) her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 4.   her superannuation entitlements with superannuation fund 4.
ancillary orders  each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property and financial resources (including chose-in-action and motor vehicles) in the name of or possession of such party as at the date of these orders with the furniture and contents of the c street property deemed to be in the possession of the respondent, (b) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed, (c) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account are to become the property of the party in whose name the account is registered, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders and/or in that party's sole name, (f) each party releases the other from any and all personal debts owing or alleged to be owed from one to the other, and (g) each party be solely liable for and keep the other indemnified against any credit liability for which that party is the primary cardholder.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed, (c) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account are to become the property of the party in whose name the account is registered, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders and/or in that party's sole name, (f) each party releases the other from any and all personal debts owing or alleged to be owed from one to the other, and (g) each party be solely liable for and keep the other indemnified against any credit liability for which that party is the primary cardholder.   monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account are to become the property of the party in whose name the account is registered, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders and/or in that party's sole name, (f) each party releases the other from any and all personal debts owing or alleged to be owed from one to the other, and (g) each party be solely liable for and keep the other indemnified against any credit liability for which that party is the primary cardholder.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders and/or in that party's sole name, (f) each party releases the other from any and all personal debts owing or alleged to be owed from one to the other, and (g) each party be solely liable for and keep the other indemnified against any credit liability for which that party is the primary cardholder.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders and/or in that party's sole name, (f) each party releases the other from any and all personal debts owing or alleged to be owed from one to the other, and (g) each party be solely liable for and keep the other indemnified against any credit liability for which that party is the primary cardholder.   each party releases the other from any and all personal debts owing or alleged to be owed from one to the other, and (g) each party be solely liable for and keep the other indemnified against any credit liability for which that party is the primary cardholder.   each party be solely liable for and keep the other indemnified against any credit liability for which that party is the primary cardholder.
the court orders by consent that:  during the victorian school term holidays, for one half of the school holiday period as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement, (i) with the father to have the first seven nights in even years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties, and (ii) with the mother to have the first seven nights in in odd years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties. (b) during the victorian long summer school holidays, for one half of the school holiday period as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement, (i) with the father to have the first seven nights in even years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties, and (ii) with the mother to have the first seven nights in in odd years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties. (iii) that each parent be at liberty to nominate one block period of a maximum of 2 weeks during january or june/july annually unless otherwise agreed (which must include at least seven nights that the children would already be in their care and must not include a child’s birthday unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties). (iv) during the time under order 19(b)(iii), each parent may travel internationally with the children, provided that 60 days’ notice is provided to the other parent (unless in the case of a family emergency such as death or serious illness in the family). (v) that during the time afforded under order 19(b)(iii), the non-travelling parent’s time be suspended, with no make-up time provided for same. (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   with the father to have the first seven nights in even years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties, and (ii) with the mother to have the first seven nights in in odd years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties.  ) with the mother to have the first seven nights in in odd years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties.   during the victorian long summer school holidays, for one half of the school holiday period as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement, (i) with the father to have the first seven nights in even years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties, and (ii) with the mother to have the first seven nights in in odd years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties. (iii) that each parent be at liberty to nominate one block period of a maximum of 2 weeks during january or june/july annually unless otherwise agreed (which must include at least seven nights that the children would already be in their care and must not include a child’s birthday unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties). (iv) during the time under order 19(b)(iii), each parent may travel internationally with the children, provided that 60 days’ notice is provided to the other parent (unless in the case of a family emergency such as death or serious illness in the family). (v) that during the time afforded under order 19(b)(iii), the non-travelling parent’s time be suspended, with no make-up time provided for same. (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   with the father to have the first seven nights in even years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties, and (ii) with the mother to have the first seven nights in in odd years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties. (iii) that each parent be at liberty to nominate one block period of a maximum of 2 weeks during january or june/july annually unless otherwise agreed (which must include at least seven nights that the children would already be in their care and must not include a child’s birthday unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties). (iv) during the time under order 19(b)(iii), each parent may travel internationally with the children, provided that 60 days’ notice is provided to the other parent (unless in the case of a family emergency such as death or serious illness in the family). (v) that during the time afforded under order 19(b)(iii), the non-travelling parent’s time be suspended, with no make-up time provided for same.  ) with the mother to have the first seven nights in in odd years and alternating between the parties every seven nights thereafter, and the balance of the nights split equally between the parties. (iii) that each parent be at liberty to nominate one block period of a maximum of 2 weeks during january or june/july annually unless otherwise agreed (which must include at least seven nights that the children would already be in their care and must not include a child’s birthday unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties). (iv) during the time under order 19(b)(iii), each parent may travel internationally with the children, provided that 60 days’ notice is provided to the other parent (unless in the case of a family emergency such as death or serious illness in the family). (v) that during the time afforded under order 19(b)(iii), the non-travelling parent’s time be suspended, with no make-up time provided for same.  i) that each parent be at liberty to nominate one block period of a maximum of 2 weeks during january or june/july annually unless otherwise agreed (which must include at least seven nights that the children would already be in their care and must not include a child’s birthday unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties). (iv) during the time under order 19(b)(iii), each parent may travel internationally with the children, provided that 60 days’ notice is provided to the other parent (unless in the case of a family emergency such as death or serious illness in the family). (v) that during the time afforded under order 19(b)(iii), the non-travelling parent’s time be suspended, with no make-up time provided for same.  ) during the time under order 19(b)(iii), each parent may travel internationally with the children, provided that 60 days’ notice is provided to the other parent (unless in the case of a family emergency such as death or serious illness in the family). (v) that during the time afforded under order 19(b)(iii), the non-travelling parent’s time be suspended, with no make-up time provided for same.   that during the time afforded under order 19(b)(iii), the non-travelling parent’s time be suspended, with no make-up time provided for same.   at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
special occasions  for christmas eve, with the mother from 4.00pm on 23 december until 2.30pm on christmas day in odd-numbered years and with the father from 4.00pm on 23 december until 2.30pm on christmas day in even-numbered years, (b) for christmas day, with the mother from 2.30pm on christmas day until 4.00pm on 27 december in even-numbered years and with the father from 2.30pm on christmas day until 4.00pm on 27 december in odd-numbered years, (c) on mother's day, with the mother from 4.00pm the day prior to mother's day until 4.00pm on mother's day, (d) on father's day, with the father from 4.00pm the day prior to father's day until 4.00pm on father's day, (e) on the children's birthdays, with the party who would not otherwise be caring for the children, for time as agreed between the parties, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the children's birthdays until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (f) on the parent's respective birthdays, with the parent who would not otherwise be caring for the children, as agreed between the parents, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   for christmas day, with the mother from 2.30pm on christmas day until 4.00pm on 27 december in even-numbered years and with the father from 2.30pm on christmas day until 4.00pm on 27 december in odd-numbered years, (c) on mother's day, with the mother from 4.00pm the day prior to mother's day until 4.00pm on mother's day, (d) on father's day, with the father from 4.00pm the day prior to father's day until 4.00pm on father's day, (e) on the children's birthdays, with the party who would not otherwise be caring for the children, for time as agreed between the parties, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the children's birthdays until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (f) on the parent's respective birthdays, with the parent who would not otherwise be caring for the children, as agreed between the parents, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on mother's day, with the mother from 4.00pm the day prior to mother's day until 4.00pm on mother's day, (d) on father's day, with the father from 4.00pm the day prior to father's day until 4.00pm on father's day, (e) on the children's birthdays, with the party who would not otherwise be caring for the children, for time as agreed between the parties, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the children's birthdays until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (f) on the parent's respective birthdays, with the parent who would not otherwise be caring for the children, as agreed between the parents, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on father's day, with the father from 4.00pm the day prior to father's day until 4.00pm on father's day, (e) on the children's birthdays, with the party who would not otherwise be caring for the children, for time as agreed between the parties, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the children's birthdays until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (f) on the parent's respective birthdays, with the parent who would not otherwise be caring for the children, as agreed between the parents, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on the children's birthdays, with the party who would not otherwise be caring for the children, for time as agreed between the parties, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the children's birthdays until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (f) on the parent's respective birthdays, with the parent who would not otherwise be caring for the children, as agreed between the parents, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on the parent's respective birthdays, with the parent who would not otherwise be caring for the children, as agreed between the parents, and in default of agreement from 4.00pm on the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) the following day, (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
travel  the time the children are travelling with the party is agreed between the parties in writing or during time the children already in the travelling party's care pursuant to these orders, and (b) the travelling party gives the non-travelling party not less than 14 days written notice of such intention, save for in the event of a family emergency.   the travelling party gives the non-travelling party not less than 14 days written notice of such intention, save for in the event of a family emergency.   a copy of any return flight tickets, (b) a written itinerary confirming the travel/accommodation arrangements for the child/children and the duration of the stay in relation to same, and (c) email and telephone numbers upon which the child/children and/or the other parent can be contacted.   a written itinerary confirming the travel/accommodation arrangements for the child/children and the duration of the stay in relation to same, and (c) email and telephone numbers upon which the child/children and/or the other parent can be contacted.   email and telephone numbers upon which the child/children and/or the other parent can be contacted.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
issues in dispute  should the children’s time with the father during school terms be a 9/5, or 10/4 arrangement?   what is the asset pool?, (3) what are the parties contributions?, (4) what are the relevant s 90sf(3) factors?, and (5) what outcome is just and equitable?   what are the parties contributions?, (4) what are the relevant s 90sf(3) factors?, and (5) what outcome is just and equitable?   what are the relevant s 90sf(3) factors?, and (5) what outcome is just and equitable?   what outcome is just and equitable?
parenting
the competing parenting proposals
risk factors
father’s alcohol and substance use
other allegations of risk
the parties’ communication and the family report
children and parenting legal principles
conclusions with respect to parenting
property
what is the asset pool?
asset
father’s value
mother’s value
value used
d street, suburb r
$783,000
c street, suburb r
$970,000
funds held on trust for sale of j street by k lawyers
$17,504
motor vehicle 1
$20,000
$19,000
mother’s motor vehicle 2
$2,500
$1,000
total
$1,791,504
liabilities
mortgage of d street property
$314,317
$315,992
mortgage of c street property
$389,488
$393,295
personal loan in father’s name
$42,000
$11,344
nab card in mother’s name
$15,000
$760,805
net total non-superannuation pool
$1,030,699
contributions
initial contributions  the mother purchased the c street property in 1999 with an approximate equity at $160,000, a motor vehicle which has since been sold, and a motor vehicle which the mother retains. (2) the father owned shares in two properties in new zealand which he subsequently sold in 2010 and 2019, two motor vehicles, and a vehicle which have since been sold.   the father owned shares in two properties in new zealand which he subsequently sold in 2010 and 2019, two motor vehicles, and a vehicle which have since been sold.
further property purchases  d street property in 2009 for $347,000, and (2) j street, suburb n, (“j street property”) in 2011 or 2012 for $660,000.   j street, suburb n, (“j street property”) in 2011 or 2012 for $660,000.
contributions during the relationship
post-separation contributions
relevant section 90sf(3) factors
legal property principles
35. “it will be recalled that s 79(2) provides that "[t]he court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. section 79(4) prescribes matters that must be taken into account in considering what order (if any) should be made under the section. the requirements of the two sub-sections are not to be conflated. in every case in which a property settlement order under s 79 is sought, it is necessary to satisfy the court that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.” 36. the expression “just and equitable” is a qualitative description of a conclusion reached after examination of a range of potentially competing considerations. it does not admit of exhaustive definition. it is not possible to chart its metes and bounds.” [footnotes omitted]
1. firstly, in order to ascertain whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order, it is necessary to identify the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. the high court emphasised the word ‘existing’. 2. secondly, although s.79 gives the court a broad power to make property settlement orders it may not be exercised in an unprincipled fashion. there must be no assumption that the parties’ interests are or should be different to their existing interests. 3. thirdly, when considering whether making a property settlement order is just and equitable the court must not assume that one or the other party has the right to a property adjustment order. the court must give separate consideration to s.79(2) in addition to the matters referred to in s.79(4).
conclusion – what outcome is just and equitable?
associate: dated: 30 june 2023
dated: 30 june 2023
[1] morgan & valverde [2022] fedcfamc1a 133 and saso & saso [2023] fedcfamc1a 65.[2] see watson & ling [2013] famca 57; (2013) 49 fam lr 303.