last updated: 4 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
dunleavy & reardon [2023] fedcfamc2f 803
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
the father’s application
evidence
the legal principles
the principles recognise the damage which may be caused to children by endless litigation which may, directly or indirectly, expose them to conflict, and the potential abuse of a child by subjecting the child to repeat expert interviews.
...the question for the court must always be guided by what is in the child’s best interest in the circumstances of the particular case.... and accordingly it is contended that the current application cannot be assessed in a vacuum with an assessment only of changes present since the making of orders.... the father contends that the...matters assessed cumulatively demonstrate that the orders do not meet the best interests of the children and require the court to reassess the parenting orders consistent with the objects and principles of the act.
disposition
changes in family structures
...it would be a surprising outcome if parenting orders were liable to be re-litigated every time one parent falls into or out of a new relationship. if that was so, any attempt to imbue orders under part vii of the act with lasting effect would be virtually futile.
the father’s residence
the contended difficulties with the current orders
children’s wishes
would like to spend more time doing fun things with dad.   states ‘don’t feel like dad makes enough time 1 on 1 with him’   doesn’t want to stay on a monday night at dads.... [x] reports it is difficult to communicate with dad sometimes.   is disappointed that his dad isn’t putting effort in.
he doesn’t want to go there while dad is away.... would like to spend more time doing fun things with dad... values time 1:1 with dad. told dad to not yell at me. ... parents arguing is the hardest.
difficult to talk to dad about difficult conversations. [y] states he finds it difficult to talk to dad. don’t want to upset him..... [y] states ‘feels that [f] is more of a priority.’   states he would like more one on one time with dad. “if [f] and [e] can’t do it then we can’t do it” and they are younger. only want to be at dads when dad is there... alone time- break from [f] and [e]. dad doesn’t listen when i ask him to go home.   states ‘don’t feel like dad makes enough time one on one with him.’ together set a goal- project time on wednesday afternoon- carve out regular time.
order 4 of the current orders
the father’s employment
the medical needs of the children
the making of the current orders
conclusion
... he is feeling overwhelmed at the moment with the sharing of information about the current court process and messages and emails between his parents. [x] reports he is having difficulty sleeping and feeling symptoms of panic. [x] states he doesn’t know who to trust and believe in this is very stressful.
costs
item
description
amount (including gst)
2
initiating or opposing an application that includes interim orders (other than procedural orders) up to the completion of the first court date   $2,357 (b) $321   $321
13
daily hearing fee – 2 february 2023
$321
daily hearing fee – 31 may 2023
advocacy loading – 31 may 2023
$161
4
summary hearing as a discrete event
$1,964
15
preparation of written submissions as directed- three hours
$780
10
attendance to take judgement and explain orders
total
$6,546
associate: dated: 30 june 2023
dated: 30 june 2023