last updated: 4 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sims & keller [2023] fedcfamc2f 834
orders
the court orders that:  approaching or removing the children from their school, from any carer, or from extra-curricular activities, (b) coming within 100 metres of any school, extra-curricular activity or place the children may be residing or attending from time to time unless there has been prior written consent from the mother, (c) attending the b venue where the mother works and the children attend for lessons, and (d) contacting the children by social media.   coming within 100 metres of any school, extra-curricular activity or place the children may be residing or attending from time to time unless there has been prior written consent from the mother, (c) attending the b venue where the mother works and the children attend for lessons, and (d) contacting the children by social media.   attending the b venue where the mother works and the children attend for lessons, and (d) contacting the children by social media.   contacting the children by social media.
reasons for judgment
judge betts
overview
final hearing & material relied upon
chronology of events
the relationship
this letter concerns the incidents that took place at my address [in] november. 1, my partner [mr keller] is a loving, caring man who would never harm my kids or myself. i have lived with my partner [mr keller] for about 2 ½ years since leaving my husband of 10 years because of his alcohol abuse. 2, at no time did my partner [mr keller] choke or put his hands on my sons neck. i was upset with [mr keller] because he yelled at [g] and made him cry. we have been having trouble with [g] for some time getting ready for school, he has been throwing tantrums and throwing toys around his room. 3, [mr keller] has taken on the roll [sic] of fathering my two kids, they call him dad and love him very much. they always give each other a hug and kiss before bed each night. [mr keller] and i have also had a child together and she is 2 months old. 4, the mark i took a photo of on [g]’s neck was a result of a physical confrontation he had with his sister [e] the night before, they were argued over a book [sic] and i had to break them up 5, i called the police because [mr keller] and i had a disagreement the day before and i felt he was reluctant to commit to me. i wanted [mr keller] to help me pay off the credit card debt from my previous relationship with my husband and to take over the house we have at [suburb o]. when [mr keller] was reluctant to do this i felt like he never loved me.
at no time did my partner [mr keller] choke or put his hands on my sons neck
there is no way the mother could have known for certain the truth of that.
father retains x & mother files these proceedings
interim hearing & orders
child dispute conference
interim orders amended
further interim orders
father “lashes out” at mother verbally in leadup to trial date
we’ve got the ribbon organised - - -
this being a reference to a [motor vehicle] he had bought for his business –
- - - so that they can see it.
this being a reference to the kids.
mate, don’t be jealous of my success, just because you’re – you know, you’ve made your bed, mate, you know, with your brother‑in‑law and sister and old man, mate, and all turned against me and stabbed me in the back, so don’t be jealous of my success, okay? you know, and, look, it only cost me $100 a week to pay it off. you could do the same thing. i don’t know what the matter is with you, you know. i don’t know why you’re so jealous all the time. every time i, you know – you’re that jealous and selfish and self-centred, you know.
you know, we will soon see in 10 years’ time who’s sitting where and what you’ve done, you know. the kids will be able to see what you’ve done, okay, and it will be able to be explained to them what has really happened. okay. i’ve done everything for you when i was with you, [ms sims]. like you said, we are separated now. i don’t want a bar of you now.
you’ve been with too many fellas. i wouldn’t touch you, mate, with a fucking 40-foot pole, okay. you’ve just been with too many fellas. okay. you’ve spread yourself around too much.
and, you know, you have to be a control freak again, you know, what your fucking – you know, with your, fucking, bipolar and shit and, you know, start screaming out, mate. you act – what you’ve done with all this family law court shit is something a common fucking prostitute would do and that’s all you fucking are, mate, what you do. mate, your legs are open to fellas every fucking weekend. you’re unbelievable, you know. i can’t see how you can look yourself in the fucking mirror with what you do. anyway, listen, i’ve got something to do. i’ve got to be somewhere early saturday morning next week so, you know, you might have to have the kids next saturday night, okay. just to let you know. so you will have to tell the fellas that your legs aren’t open that night, you know. bloody – and as far as bleaking out all over me bloody car frame and carrying the kids out, “you can’t pay your child support”, fucking hell, you’ve screwed me over for 15,000. you stand in court. you’re like a fucking common prostitute, mate, you know. you waste all this money. what about child support? whenever you’ve opened your legs, you’re a fucking joke, mate. a pathetic joke.
anyway, stop ignoring my calls and fucking answer, mate, you know, because i’m getting sick of it with your stubbornness and your fucking flirting around with fellas all the time, mate, and, you know, the fellas are more important than the kids. all your kids are fucking falling apart, mate, you know. give me a ring back.
you know it is my weekend with the kids, [ms sims]. it doesn’t matter, you know, if they stayed with me while you were in isolation. that was for health reasons. what is set in concrete is, what, every weekend, mate, okay, and you can’t be changed at will. that’s it. you can’t just chop and change like you do all the bloody time, you know, and you shouldn’t be leaving the kids on their own, anyway. i know you’re leaving them on their own while you go out and have, you know – have a flirt around with the fellas, but, mate, as far as my kids go, you can’t go leaving them with somebody who’s not a responsible adult. it is just being a bad parent. it’s a bad mother. you can’t, you know, as x’s parent and as y’s parent you don’t have my permission to do it. i don’t see how you get off thinking you’re the absolute boss of them, in absolute control and you do what you fucking like, you know. it’s not on, mate.
yes, [ms sims], don’t bother coming to my house at 5.30, because i’m going to –
it doesn’t make sense the part that follows, but it goes on to say:
i will drop the kids off 6.15. i don’t want you bring any weirdo to my house or anything or any of your boyfriends, you know, like, so – if you don’t mind. okay.
and i don’t understand why you’re doing this just before the court case and stuff, mate, because, you know, it was only, like, two weeks ago you’re trying to get me to come pick you up at [suburb h], sitting right next to me at the gathering we had at the beer house and nothing has happened between now and that. so all you’re doing is doing the usual thing, causing trouble, stirring up shit, got your legs open and up in the air with all the fellas, mate. so we know about you. we know all about you, right. we know all about you and you’re trying to pull this safety thing to get sympathy through the court, mate. i’m going overseas at the end of the year for three months. i won’t even be here. so you’re going to be stuck with the kids then, anyway, so – so, look, pull your act together, mate. see you later.
yes, [ms sims]. i’ve come to drop the kids off. some stranger appeared from [e]’s room. i don’t know what sort of weirdo house you’re running there, but – and reckons you’re not home. reckons his dad is staying there now, so i would say it is some weirdo you are fucking from [town q] or something, you know. yes, mate, honestly, mate, i’m that worried about my kids in your care, because you know the amount of guys you’re with all the time. i guess the other one doesn’t know about all the other guys, either, does he? honestly, i know all about you, [ms sims]. i know everything about what’s going on, so don’t think i don’t, because i do, but, anyway, you’ve got that boy appearing from [e]’s room. look, honestly, i’m always speechless at what to say to you, it’s that weird what’s going on there. anyway.
final hearing is not reached
problems continue
however, if you are insistent in calling the children this will need to occur at 7 pm and not at the stated 4.30 pm and 5 pm.
those times being a reference to the previous interim orders:
as you are well aware, our client is employed and is not able to facilitate the calls any earlier than 7 pm. we are instructed you are continually harassing our client at work and this needs to completely stop.
...if you are insistent in calling the children –
demonstrates acquiescence and the power imbalance, even with the benefit of the mother having a solicitor on the record.
i expect that paragraph 2 and 4 of the orders of 30 april will be upheld and will be pursuing this.
you can’t even pass on [x]’s medical needs. the kids are very sick. they have obviously caught all this stuff through your boyfriend who caught it off all the prostitutes he visits before coming to see you.
which was again a disgraceful, derogatory sexual taunt by the father of the mother, which i note that she did not respond to.
i pay a lot of tax, [ms sims], and i’m a real man. far better than the sleazy things you’ve been hanging out with. you’re the one that’s in no position to lecture me. you’re just like your mother.
this being a reference to the deceased maternal grandmother.
the law & the statutory pathway
best interests findings
there has also been an issue raised with [x] saying derogatory things to both of her older brothers when she returned from the father’s home.
i deny that i was violent or controlling of [ms sims] during the relationship.
openly said in interview that he had concerns about the mother behaving like the maternal grandmother, indicating sexual promiscuity.
- letter to gp from [mr s] psychiatrist 03/12/2021 “[g] was exposed to emotional abuse from his mother’s partner over a period of 6 years where he describes being degraded, called names and being bullied. [g] tried to stick up for himself which is why he seemed to wear the brunt of it, rather than his siblings. or major concern to [g] was that the partner had threatened to kill his biological father. in the past he has had nightmares about this, but the ptsd type symptoms about the abuse seem to have settled.” - department of education records pertaining to [g]: “student with additional needs [t school] 2019/2020 – “ [g] has a difficult relationship with his step father manifesting in anxiety, resilience and emotional struggles at school”. “ [g] is a high achieving student who could definitely have gats potential with the correct support. pressures from home can be detrimental to his wellbeing at school”. while these children are not the subject children, it is likely that their trauma will continue to be activated, and they will not be able to achieve reparation, in circumstances where they fear the safety of the subject children with the father.   underlining)
- misused the children in the dispute, by withholding one or both of them, - fabricated or exaggerated issues pertaining to the mother’s mental health to police or dcj in an attempt to undermine or discredit her, - exposed the children to derogatory comments or criticisms of the mother in an attempt to undermine their security and relationship with her, and/or - exposed the children to derogatory comments or encouraged them to use offensive names to their older siblings in an attempt to jeopardise the sibling relationship. if the court were to ascertain that the father has engaged in these behaviours to undermine the children’s attachment to the mother, the impact on the children would have already been significantly detrimental to their developmental needs. any of these behaviours also indicate that the father is unable to prioritise the children’s needs, and concerningly, use the children as a form or abuse and/or for self-gain/power. further, the father’s capacity for empathy and reflective, attuned parenting is of concern. if the court were to find that the behaviour of the father towards [g] (and to a lesser extent [f]) are accurate, it would suggest that the father lacks empathy and insight into the impact of his behaviour on the development and emotional wellbeing of children in his care. it is of concern that the father did not appear to have the capacity to reflect on the children’s experience or to assume any responsibility for the impact of his behaviours. this would provide serious concern when future-forecasting potential parenting behaviours as [x] and [y] move through different social, emotional and behavioural developmental changes. it is clear that the family report writer was particularly concerned about the father’s behaviours and attitudes.
- manifestation of significant mental health difficulties including anxiety, depression and trauma, - poor self-esteem, increased aggression, anti-social behaviour, self-harm, lower social competence and mood problems, and - developmental milestones not being achieved, school difficulties, peer conflict and loneliness. it is of concern that the two older children in this matter have a lived experience of a number of these issues and the potential for the subject children to experience these concerns will be increased if they are not protected from family violence dynamics.   is perceptive of the conflict between the parents. [x] reported that the mother and father are “not nice to each other at all”. she attributed the cause of the conflict to the father’s treatment of her older brothers and the mother. she reported that the father “says mum is a bitch”. [x] used this in the interview to illustrate “how mean” the father was to her. [x] reported she was unaware what the mother thinks or says about the father.
weighing up the competing proposals
i cannot make the icl’s proposed order as a final order
“almost-within-reach possibility that the treatment referred to by the court child expert with a genuine attempt to recognise the difficulties that he has inflicted and a genuine attempt to do something about it may save the situation. the orders that the icl has framed have every incentive for the father to undertake those courses and in a bona fide way to complete the courses and present the certificates, and they are by no means an easy undertaking. we are referring to a total of six weeks [k course] and 18 weeks with a 10-week wait [m course]. so there will be considerable time for him to cogitate about what has happened, cogitate about where it is going and cogitate about what he wants to achieve. until those courses are satisfactorily completed then there is no time with the children, not even a phone call, on my instructions. and in that regard, i should note, the family report writer did say in relation to the [m course] that the course coordinators can provide reports to the court.”
“to continue the risk of giving evidence from the bar table, your honour, the certificate that issues at the end of the course only issues to somebody who has engaged with an adequately completed the course.”
“whilst i appreciate what the icl has attempted to do in putting the father through his paces, it is a “tick and flick”. there is nothing before this court to suggest that the father is even near the crossroads of change. he’s nowhere near it. he has been adamant to the cce in his material and even up to the point of him hearing those phone calls, it is clear he has no issues with not changing. so the court, with respect, is making orders for which on the father’s case there is just no evidence before the court.”
“a certificate would not be given unless the course administrator found that there had been fulsome participation and genuine effort put into participating. certainly the father would be unlikely to receive a certificate if he went there and did not really listen or participate.”
“i appreciate that participation doesn’t necessarily equate with an ultimate change of behaviour.”
should i make an interim order?
conclusion & orders
associate: dated: 6 july 2023
dated: 6 july 2023