last updated: 6 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
addington & pierce [2023] fedcfamc2f 718
orders
the court orders:  they will consult each other about issues requiring parental decisions, (b) they will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision, and (c) in particular, but not limited to, the parties will: (i) consult about medical treatment for the child before any appointment is made, and (ii) consult about any school in which the child is to be enrolled.   they will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision, and (c) in particular, but not limited to, the parties will: (i) consult about medical treatment for the child before any appointment is made, and (ii) consult about any school in which the child is to be enrolled.   in particular, but not limited to, the parties will: (i) consult about medical treatment for the child before any appointment is made, and (ii) consult about any school in which the child is to be enrolled.   consult about medical treatment for the child before any appointment is made, and (ii) consult about any school in which the child is to be enrolled.  ) consult about any school in which the child is to be enrolled.   each alternate weekend, commencing friday 30 july 2023 from 3.00pm friday until 3.00pm sunday, (or any date aligning with the weekends x, the child’s brother, would normally not be staying with the father), (b) each alternate wednesday, commencing 5 july 2023 from 3.00pm wednesday until 8.30am thursday.   each alternate wednesday, commencing 5 july 2023 from 3.00pm wednesday until 8.30am thursday.
school holiday time  in odd numbered years: (i) for the first week and each alternate week thereafter with the father, (ii) for the second week and each alternate week thereafter with the mother, (b) in even numbered years: (i) for the first week and each alternate week thereafter with the mother, (ii) for the second week and each alternate week thereafter with the father, (c) the first week shall commence at 5.00pm on the first friday after the child has concluded school that term, (d) each week shall commence at 5.00pm on friday and conclude at 5.00pm the following friday, (e) that unless otherwise stated herein, the parent whom the children is going to stay with collect the chid from the other parents residence at changeovers, and (f) 2023 is to be regarded as an ‘odd’ year, 2024 as an ‘even’ year and so on.   for the first week and each alternate week thereafter with the father, (ii) for the second week and each alternate week thereafter with the mother,  ) for the second week and each alternate week thereafter with the mother,   in even numbered years: (i) for the first week and each alternate week thereafter with the mother, (ii) for the second week and each alternate week thereafter with the father, (c) the first week shall commence at 5.00pm on the first friday after the child has concluded school that term, (d) each week shall commence at 5.00pm on friday and conclude at 5.00pm the following friday, (e) that unless otherwise stated herein, the parent whom the children is going to stay with collect the chid from the other parents residence at changeovers, and (f) 2023 is to be regarded as an ‘odd’ year, 2024 as an ‘even’ year and so on.   for the first week and each alternate week thereafter with the mother, (ii) for the second week and each alternate week thereafter with the father,  ) for the second week and each alternate week thereafter with the father,   the first week shall commence at 5.00pm on the first friday after the child has concluded school that term, (d) each week shall commence at 5.00pm on friday and conclude at 5.00pm the following friday, (e) that unless otherwise stated herein, the parent whom the children is going to stay with collect the chid from the other parents residence at changeovers, and (f) 2023 is to be regarded as an ‘odd’ year, 2024 as an ‘even’ year and so on.   each week shall commence at 5.00pm on friday and conclude at 5.00pm the following friday, (e) that unless otherwise stated herein, the parent whom the children is going to stay with collect the chid from the other parents residence at changeovers, and (f) 2023 is to be regarded as an ‘odd’ year, 2024 as an ‘even’ year and so on.   that unless otherwise stated herein, the parent whom the children is going to stay with collect the chid from the other parents residence at changeovers, and (f) 2023 is to be regarded as an ‘odd’ year, 2024 as an ‘even’ year and so on.   2023 is to be regarded as an ‘odd’ year, 2024 as an ‘even’ year and so on.
special times with each parent  ‘from’ means the conclusion of the child’s school day including any after school activities and if not a school day, then 4.00pm unless stated otherwise, (b) ‘until’ means the commencement of the child’s school day including any before school activities and if not a school day then 9.00am unless stated otherwise, (c) in the event that the child is not attending school on any of the changeover days then the parent spending time with the child is to collect the child from the other parent’s address at the commencement of their time with the child, and (d) that in the event the child’s routine time with either parent as per order 6 would otherwise apply then time referred to in order 6 shall be forfeited by that parent so that the child may spend time with the parents in accordance with order 10 to order 20 herein. for the avoidance of doubt, ‘routine time’ is subject to ‘special time’.   ‘until’ means the commencement of the child’s school day including any before school activities and if not a school day then 9.00am unless stated otherwise, (c) in the event that the child is not attending school on any of the changeover days then the parent spending time with the child is to collect the child from the other parent’s address at the commencement of their time with the child, and (d) that in the event the child’s routine time with either parent as per order 6 would otherwise apply then time referred to in order 6 shall be forfeited by that parent so that the child may spend time with the parents in accordance with order 10 to order 20 herein. for the avoidance of doubt, ‘routine time’ is subject to ‘special time’.   in the event that the child is not attending school on any of the changeover days then the parent spending time with the child is to collect the child from the other parent’s address at the commencement of their time with the child, and (d) that in the event the child’s routine time with either parent as per order 6 would otherwise apply then time referred to in order 6 shall be forfeited by that parent so that the child may spend time with the parents in accordance with order 10 to order 20 herein. for the avoidance of doubt, ‘routine time’ is subject to ‘special time’.   that in the event the child’s routine time with either parent as per order 6 would otherwise apply then time referred to in order 6 shall be forfeited by that parent so that the child may spend time with the parents in accordance with order 10 to order 20 herein. for the avoidance of doubt, ‘routine time’ is subject to ‘special time’.
easter  in 2023 and each even numbered year thereafter, the child is to spend time with the father from 9.00am good friday until 9.00am easter sunday and with the child to spend time with the mother from 9.00am easter sunday overnight until the next day, and (b) in 2024 and each odd numbered year thereafter, the child is to spend time with the mother from 9.00am good friday until 9.00am easter sunday and with the child to spend time with the father from 9.00am easter sunday overnight until the next day,   in 2024 and each odd numbered year thereafter, the child is to spend time with the mother from 9.00am good friday until 9.00am easter sunday and with the child to spend time with the father from 9.00am easter sunday overnight until the next day,
mother’s day
mother’s birthday  on a weekend day, from 9.00am that day, overnight until 9.00am the next day, or (b) on a week day, from that day until 9.00am the next day.   on a week day, from that day until 9.00am the next day.
father’s day
father’s birthday   on a weekend day, from 9.00am that day, overnight until 9.00am the next day, or (b) on a week day, from the birthday day until 9.00am the next day.   on a week day, from the birthday day until 9.00am the next day.
child’s birthday   in 2023 and each even numbered year thereafter, the child is to spend time with the father from her birthday eve until her birthday day (1.00pm on her birthday if it is not a school day) and with the mother from her birthday day, overnight, until 9.00am the next day, and (b) in 2024 and each odd numbered year thereafter, the child is to spend time with the mother from her birthday eve until her birthday day (1.00pm on her birthday if it is not a school day) and with the father from her birthday day, overnight, until 9.00am the next day.   in 2024 and each odd numbered year thereafter, the child is to spend time with the mother from her birthday eve until her birthday day (1.00pm on her birthday if it is not a school day) and with the father from her birthday day, overnight, until 9.00am the next day.
halloween
christmas day  in 2023 and each even numbered year thereafter, the child to spend time with the father from 4.00pm christmas eve overnight until 4.00pm christmas day, and spend time with the father from 4.00pm christmas day until 4.00pm boxing day, and (b) in 2024 and each odd numbered year thereafter, the child is to spend time with the mother from 4.00pm christmas eve until 4.00pm christmas day, and spend time with the mother from 4.00pm christmas day until 4.00pm boxing day.   in 2024 and each odd numbered year thereafter, the child is to spend time with the mother from 4.00pm christmas eve until 4.00pm christmas day, and spend time with the mother from 4.00pm christmas day until 4.00pm boxing day.
new years eve  in odd numbered years: (i) with the father, (b) in even numbered years: (i) with the mother, (c) that unless otherwise stated herein, the parent whom the children is going to stay with collect the child from the other parents residence at changeovers, (d) 2023 is to be regarded as an ‘odd’ year, 2024 as an ‘even’ year and so on.   with the father,   in even numbered years: (i) with the mother, (c) that unless otherwise stated herein, the parent whom the children is going to stay with collect the child from the other parents residence at changeovers, (d) 2023 is to be regarded as an ‘odd’ year, 2024 as an ‘even’ year and so on.   with the mother,   that unless otherwise stated herein, the parent whom the children is going to stay with collect the child from the other parents residence at changeovers, (d) 2023 is to be regarded as an ‘odd’ year, 2024 as an ‘even’ year and so on.   2023 is to be regarded as an ‘odd’ year, 2024 as an ‘even’ year and so on.
x’s birthday  on a week day, from the conclusion of school that day, until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) the next day, or (b) on a weekend day, from 9.00am until 5.00pm.   on a weekend day, from 9.00am until 5.00pm.
special events
communication between parent and child
communication between the parents  any serious medical problems/emergencies or serious illnesses suffered by the child, (b) the treating doctor/ hospital and relevant contact details, (c) any medication that has been prescribed for the child, (d) any follow up appointments with any specialist following the serious illness or injury, (e) any change to the child’s prescribed medication, (f) parents will reply to emails, sms etc as soon as possible or within 24 hours, and (g) parents will make every effort to cooperate, communicate and get along.   the treating doctor/ hospital and relevant contact details, (c) any medication that has been prescribed for the child, (d) any follow up appointments with any specialist following the serious illness or injury, (e) any change to the child’s prescribed medication, (f) parents will reply to emails, sms etc as soon as possible or within 24 hours, and (g) parents will make every effort to cooperate, communicate and get along.   any medication that has been prescribed for the child, (d) any follow up appointments with any specialist following the serious illness or injury, (e) any change to the child’s prescribed medication, (f) parents will reply to emails, sms etc as soon as possible or within 24 hours, and (g) parents will make every effort to cooperate, communicate and get along.   any follow up appointments with any specialist following the serious illness or injury, (e) any change to the child’s prescribed medication, (f) parents will reply to emails, sms etc as soon as possible or within 24 hours, and (g) parents will make every effort to cooperate, communicate and get along.   any change to the child’s prescribed medication, (f) parents will reply to emails, sms etc as soon as possible or within 24 hours, and (g) parents will make every effort to cooperate, communicate and get along.   parents will reply to emails, sms etc as soon as possible or within 24 hours, and (g) parents will make every effort to cooperate, communicate and get along.   parents will make every effort to cooperate, communicate and get along.
passports and overseas travel  production of an australian passport for the child, (b) renewal for an australian passport for the child, and (c) replacement of an australian passport for the child.   renewal for an australian passport for the child, and (c) replacement of an australian passport for the child.   replacement of an australian passport for the child.   the parent wishing to travel provides written notice of the intention to travel to the other parent, (b) such notice to be provided not less than 60 days prior to the intended date of departure, (c) all notices contain a detailed itinerary in relation to the planned travel including flight times and a copy of a return flight confirmation and contact details, including address details and telephone contact details, for the child during the travel, (d) that any travel will not be taken during any school term except where expressly agreed to by the parents (which should not be unreasonably withheld) or where the travel is for the child’s educational and/or sporting benefit, general advancement or wellbeing, and (e) that the travelling parent is to ensure that the child has been provided with any immunisations prior to the travel, with such immunisations to be recommended and administered by the child’s treating doctor.   such notice to be provided not less than 60 days prior to the intended date of departure, (c) all notices contain a detailed itinerary in relation to the planned travel including flight times and a copy of a return flight confirmation and contact details, including address details and telephone contact details, for the child during the travel, (d) that any travel will not be taken during any school term except where expressly agreed to by the parents (which should not be unreasonably withheld) or where the travel is for the child’s educational and/or sporting benefit, general advancement or wellbeing, and (e) that the travelling parent is to ensure that the child has been provided with any immunisations prior to the travel, with such immunisations to be recommended and administered by the child’s treating doctor.   all notices contain a detailed itinerary in relation to the planned travel including flight times and a copy of a return flight confirmation and contact details, including address details and telephone contact details, for the child during the travel, (d) that any travel will not be taken during any school term except where expressly agreed to by the parents (which should not be unreasonably withheld) or where the travel is for the child’s educational and/or sporting benefit, general advancement or wellbeing, and (e) that the travelling parent is to ensure that the child has been provided with any immunisations prior to the travel, with such immunisations to be recommended and administered by the child’s treating doctor.   that any travel will not be taken during any school term except where expressly agreed to by the parents (which should not be unreasonably withheld) or where the travel is for the child’s educational and/or sporting benefit, general advancement or wellbeing, and (e) that the travelling parent is to ensure that the child has been provided with any immunisations prior to the travel, with such immunisations to be recommended and administered by the child’s treating doctor.   that the travelling parent is to ensure that the child has been provided with any immunisations prior to the travel, with such immunisations to be recommended and administered by the child’s treating doctor.
specific issues
dispute resolution  the parents are in dispute about these orders, or (b) agreement needs to be reached regarding the child’s upbringing, health, welfare, education and development, or (c) these orders require amendment or variation and the like, and (d) the parents cannot resolve such matters between themselves then the current arrangements will be maintained and the parents agree that at first instance they will attend family dispute resolution such as mediation, legal aid conference or like service.   agreement needs to be reached regarding the child’s upbringing, health, welfare, education and development, or (c) these orders require amendment or variation and the like, and (d) the parents cannot resolve such matters between themselves then the current arrangements will be maintained and the parents agree that at first instance they will attend family dispute resolution such as mediation, legal aid conference or like service.   these orders require amendment or variation and the like, and (d) the parents cannot resolve such matters between themselves then the current arrangements will be maintained and the parents agree that at first instance they will attend family dispute resolution such as mediation, legal aid conference or like service.   the parents cannot resolve such matters between themselves then the current arrangements will be maintained and the parents agree that at first instance they will attend family dispute resolution such as mediation, legal aid conference or like service.
it is noted:
reasons for judgment
judge coates:
the law
background  was absent 64% of grade one. that is, [x] was required to attend school 176 days but she only attended 63 days of school. of those 176 school days: [x] was in [ms pierce]’s care for 125 days. in an entire school year, [ms pierce] took [x] to school 14 days, and she was absent 111 days. [x] was in my care for 51 days. i took [x] to school 49 days and she was absent 2 days as she was genuinely unwell.
as at 17 october 2022, [x] had missed 62% of grade two. that is, [x] was required to attend school 118 days but she has only attended 45 days of school. of those 118 school days: [x] was in [ms pierce]’s care for 82 days. [ms pierce] has taken [x] to school (successfully to complete a day’s schooling) on just 14 days and has been absent 68 days. [x] was in my care for 36 days. i took [x] to school 31 days and she was absent 5 days.   has a very complex profile of abilities and difficulties that includes high levels of anxiety, sensory sensitivity, social difficulties and the need for support and understanding from her teacher, peers and the school administration.
i am very concerned with regard to [x]’s level of anxiety and recommend an assessment and therapy from a clinical psychologist using cognitive behaviour therapy to reduce [x]’s anxiety levels. i recognise there can be difficulties in accessing the expertise in this area bit i strongly recommend psychological treatment for her anxiety. i also recommend that her occupational therapist writes a report on [x]’s sensory profile for her class teacher so the teacher can accommodate her sensory sensitivity in the classroom.
i wouldn’t say loves spending time with him... [x] has said to me that she would like to see her dad every second weekend for a day. she does not want to have sleepovers. she has told me that she feels he spends too much time at work or with [x] and she feels very lonely at his house, which is why she has made friends with [an object] and she telephones me while she’s at his house. i would like her to have more – i would like her to have a better relationship with her father than that and i would like her to have more time with her father than that. however, the motivation behind my request with regard to the decrease of hours with her father was simply that it might be more stable that [x] was with me during the week and then with her father on the weekend and i – i thought that maybe that stability might assist [x] with regard to routine.
“it will be challenging”. you say it won’t be traumatic. what do you mean by “challenging”?---i mean she will be upset by that, but i don’t expect she’s going to be crying in bed, unable to function. i don’t expect that she will be inconsolable when she comes to our house. and that is because you have had her for up to seven days at a time, and you say you haven’t experienced her in an inconsolable state, crying in bed?---that’s right. do you – and because of that, you say a complete change of residence will not result in such inconsolability?---that’s right. do you believe that she has anxieties that the mother may die?---yes. does that worry you?---yes. i think that’s too much responsibility for a little girl to have and be thinking about. she should be worried about her friends and colouring in and those – you know, that’s far beyond what is normal for a small person to be worrying bout. do you think that is an extraordinary position for the child to be in?---yes, but when i think functionally, she still comes to our house – you know, regular changeovers, and is happy to come. she’s happy when she spends time at our house. i acknowledge that she has those worries, but it’s – she’s not bereft at the door, you know, checking with me, “is mum dead yet? do we need to go to hospital?” like, she – is – appear in her mind as thoughts and things that she does worry about, which i think are unusual and a symptom of anxiety, but with support, she is able to sort of manage them, and – you know, particularly over the holidays and even weekends when we spend together. she comes. she says she will miss mum on the first day, and by saturday afternoon, sunday, like – you know, and even over school holidays she will go days without asking about her mum or wanting to call, things like that.
i don’t think i would say devastated. i mean, we’re talking about a change in the amount of time she spends with the mother compared to her father. i think that she would have reaction and that probably would be quite an emotional reaction, but we’re talking about her going to a figure that doesn’t offer her emotional support and structure as well. so i wouldn’t use the word “devastated”, but i agree that there would be an adjustment for her.
i don’t think it’s as simple as just getting her to school. i think that the issue, really, in terms of her emotional development, is that, up until this point in time, she has been stilted in her social development and her educational participation, that the only friends that she really has are the friends that she has formed in the time that she goes to school from her father’s care, that she appears to have a very enjoyable and happy experience when she is at school – makes good friends, gets on well, goes to class, and that’s in the absence of either parent – that she talks happily about that, that the routine at her father’s place is not an ordeal – it seems to me. and – and i’ve been over this with the parties a number of times: that, in her mother’s home, the process of getting her to – to school is an emotional ordeal for her – and – and for the mother, i think. and it’s something that they haven’t been able to change or resolve over a significant length of time. whereas there doesn’t seem, that i could find, to be any emotional consequences for her in the care of her father. and the routine at her father’s home, in my – in my assessment, is more or less conflict-free. and she has some independent there too. she’s a child that – and she’s going to be nine. so adolescence isn’t far around the corner, and there needs to be some way for this child to differentiate herself from her parents so she can form relations with school, friends and education that’s going to assist her going forward. for me, that’s a significant issue. i’m not saying that the other issues about her asd and her medical appointments and those sorts of areas aren’t of importance, but she does have access to a lot of those resources both at school and through her mother, and that’s – i don’t think there has been any lack of involvement in that sense, but there are parts of her life which have not changed, and if it was possible for her to cross that bridge, it would be, in my view, ground breaking change for her to form good relationships and feel that she has some independence.
well, in one sense, she – she’s in a well-known pattern between both of you. so i think the initial – any initial change that might occur for her would be more difficult. and there would be some difficulties with adjustment, i would imagine. and there is a risk that it – it won’t work. there is a risk that she – once she gets to your place, she just does the same as what she does at her mother’s place. i think the risk of that is minimal, but it – it – it’s still a risk. so it’s not – it wouldn’t be an easy transition for anyone, particularly for [x] [sic], but there are factors there that support her and she knows what they are. so, in that sense, i would be relatively confident she could do so. the other thing is this is not a suggestion as a permanent arrangement. i mean, i think that if the problem can be resolved, and she can form those links and start attending regularly, then the – the status of care could change so that she has a more equitable arrangement between the two of you. but i think this hurdle for her needs to be addressed as soon as possible, because it has been going on for too long.
i accept that i made an error and i said to [x] [sic] dad and i both love you very much and dad would like to convince the court to spend more time with you, and i would like to convince the court that i would like to spend more time with because we both want you all the time. but unfortunately, we’re going to have to work out how we can spend time with you, and i used that word “convince” and i said that. i – that’s what i said to her, and i acknowledge that it was an error and i should not have said that.
basically, my main concern is that she is not engaging with the school or – in terms of making social connections in a normal fashion, which will help her to – in the end, will help her to see herself as part of a social group separate to her parents, to have some reality testing about herself in a social situation and in school, and begin to think of herself as independent of her parents in a way that’s not developmentally – not development – in a way that doesn’t – that lets her understand what the possibilities are for her and how she can become a member of a social group and see herself as someone separate. that’s part of the challenges in terms of developing identity. i think, in terms of her reliance on the parental relationship – i don’t think she really sees much conflict between the two of you. i certainly didn’t get any sense from her that she perceives your relationship as highly conflicted. and i think if – but – if that was the case, that would be an extra risk – risk factor for her. i don’t see that of itself as being much of an issue or consequence. i think there have been times that the two of you have attempted to work together and collaborate and times which you haven’t. and her – her expression of her attachment verbally is equitable. she – and she interacts with you both in an equitable fashion. she seems to have the same level of affection, at least from what i’ve seen, for each of you. so there are some protective factors there for her, but there are the risk factors that i was – i’ve spoken about earlier.
i think that the issue, really, in terms of her emotional development, is that, up until this point in time, she has been stilted in her social development and her educational participation, that the only friends that she really has are the friends that she has formed in the time that she goes to school from her father’s care, that she appears to have a very enjoyable and happy experience when she is at school – makes good friends, gets on well, goes to class, and that’s in the absence of either parent – that she talks happily about that, that the routine at her father’s place is not an ordeal – it seems to me. and – and i’ve been over this with the parties a number of times: that, in her mother’s home, the process of getting her to – to school is an emotional ordeal for her – and – and for the mother, i think. and it’s something that they haven’t been able to change or resolve over a significant length of time. whereas there doesn’t seem, that i could find, to be any emotional consequences for her in the care of her father. and the routine at her father’s home, in my – in my assessment, is more or less conflict-free. and she has some independent there too. she’s a child that – and she’s going to be nine. so adolescence isn’t far around the corner, and there needs to be some way for this child to differentiate herself from her parents so she can form relations with school, friends and education that’s going to assist her going forward. for me, that’s a significant issue. i’m not saying that the other issues about her asd and her medical appointments and those sorts of areas aren’t of importance, but she does have access to a lot of those resources both at school and through her mother, and that’s – i don’t think there has been any lack of involvement in that sense, but there are parts of her life which have not changed, and if it was possible for her to cross that bridge, it would be, in my view, ground breaking change for her to form good relationships and feel that she has some independence.
associate: dated: 4 july 2023
dated: 4 july 2023