last updated: 8 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
marella & marella (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 821
orders
on a final basis in relation to property, the court orders by consent that:
the court further orders that:   to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale, including but not limited to costs of the agent and conveyancer, (b) to pay the usual rates adjustments, (c) to pay the amount required to repay the commonwealth bank loan secured by the mortgage and the parties then do all things required to discharge the mortgages, and (d) to pay to mr ae and ms ab of the balance of the loan pursuant to the loan agreement executed and dated 31 july 2015, (e) payment to the applicant of 50% of the residue of the settlement sum, and (f) payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   to pay the usual rates adjustments, (c) to pay the amount required to repay the commonwealth bank loan secured by the mortgage and the parties then do all things required to discharge the mortgages, and (d) to pay to mr ae and ms ab of the balance of the loan pursuant to the loan agreement executed and dated 31 july 2015, (e) payment to the applicant of 50% of the residue of the settlement sum, and (f) payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   to pay the amount required to repay the commonwealth bank loan secured by the mortgage and the parties then do all things required to discharge the mortgages, and (d) to pay to mr ae and ms ab of the balance of the loan pursuant to the loan agreement executed and dated 31 july 2015, (e) payment to the applicant of 50% of the residue of the settlement sum, and (f) payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   to pay to mr ae and ms ab of the balance of the loan pursuant to the loan agreement executed and dated 31 july 2015, (e) payment to the applicant of 50% of the residue of the settlement sum, and (f) payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   payment to the applicant of 50% of the residue of the settlement sum, and (f) payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   the applicant and the respondent be entitled to be the sole legal and beneficial owners of all items of property including money, motor vehicles, insurances, equities, superannuation entitlements and personal effects currently in the possession or control of each of them respectively, and (b) the applicant will retain sole liability for and will indemnify and continue to indemnify the respondent with respect to any loan, lease, or credit card liability held or registered in his sole name or jointly with a third party, and (c) the respondent will retain sole liability for and will indemnify and continue to indemnify the applicant with respect to any loan, lease, or credit card liability held or registered in his sole name or jointly with a third party.   the applicant will retain sole liability for and will indemnify and continue to indemnify the respondent with respect to any loan, lease, or credit card liability held or registered in his sole name or jointly with a third party, and (c) the respondent will retain sole liability for and will indemnify and continue to indemnify the applicant with respect to any loan, lease, or credit card liability held or registered in his sole name or jointly with a third party.   the respondent will retain sole liability for and will indemnify and continue to indemnify the applicant with respect to any loan, lease, or credit card liability held or registered in his sole name or jointly with a third party.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction   the relationship between the parties was of approximately 10 years (between 2008 and 2018). they were married in 2012. they are aged 33 and 31 years respectively. subject to what is set out later, they are both in reasonable health. again for reasons set out below, neither party is in paid employment, (b) there is one child of that relationship, x. despite orders of the court for a process by which the father and x would begin to spend time together again, the actions (and notably inaction) by the wife and mother has regularly thwarted that time between father and son. the mother has been warned repeatedly of the risks of non-compliance, which could result in x going to live with the father, (c) both parents have different health issues. the father has long had some mental health issues, arising from when he was working, which ultimately led to a diagnosis of ptsd (among other things). he receives a disability pension, and some insurance payments. he remains under significant medical care. the wife has repeatedly asserted that she suffers from a medical condition, which has resulted in her receiving a disability pension. however, at trial, her contentions regarding a disability pension were largely disproved. she receives various government benefits as a single mother, which are set out in submissions below, (d) the child of the relationship, x, who is now in basic good health, had, and to some degree still has, significant health issues. he attends ongoing medical appointments regarding the monitoring of his ailments, (e) the principal asset in the property pool is the former marital residence. its value can hardly be disputed, together with its liabilities, as set out in the husband’s summary of the property pool (and submissions) set out below. that said, it proved to be excruciating, bordering on the impossible, to secure a valuation of the property. such attempts were regularly thwarted by the wife, regularly through contrived misadventures, and equally regularly through the wife’s extravagant claims of the purported risk the husband posed or continues to pose, to her, to x, and almost anyone and everyone else. on the evidence before the court, and having now had the benefit of both parties giving evidence – twice – i have no doubt that the father loves his son devoutly, and would not risk harming him in any way. in my view, not least in the light of the extensive medical evidence provided by the husband, whatever difficulties were once evident during the relationship (which are well documented and commented on by dr h in his earlier report, which was in evidence in the parenting matter), the husband poses no risk to anyone. he has lived in city z for some time but returns regularly to city c to spend time with the paternal family, who also remain, in my view, unreasonably deprived of the company of x, which has been the case now for many years, (f) in general but often shifting terms, the wife complained about the father not paying her child support. the mother now has a young second child, the father of whom is a mr as. for no proper or reasonable reason, the mother refused to disclose the name of this child (without knowing the basis for the child’s name, whose surname and middle name are those of his father). moreover, there is not the slightest evidence that the applicant father here has the slightest interest in the mother’s second son, other than presumably as x’s brother. as well, although city c is a city of modest size, given the general nature of country towns where, by various means, people tend to know general information about a wide range of others in the community, especially when the second son at least starts day-care and certainly school, his name will become readily known. finally, at the court’s direction, the wife wrote the child’s name on a piece of paper and provided it to the court. (g) she confirmed that she seeks, and is paid, no child support from mr as. it was pointed out to her the illogically and injustice of her position of requiring child support from one father but not the other. somewhat blithely, sometimes bordering on the coquettish, she again feigned either ignorance, disbelief, or both, (h) concerningly, mr as provided no evidence. neighbours of the wife, who were not required for cross examination, provided affidavit evidence of regularly seeing the prominently-named work vehicle (a vehicle emblazoned with his work logo and contact details) of mr as at the mother’s residence. she confirmed that he spent somewhat regular time with their son, and sometimes stayed overnight. it is undisputed that a range of his furniture adorned the wife’s house, including a very large bed in the mother’s bedroom. pursuant to the principles articulated by the high court in jones v dunkel, i am urged to draw the relevant [adverse] inference to the effect that the evidence not called would not materially assist the case of the party in question, which i do, based on the unchallenged evidence of the wife’s neighbours, and the lack of evidence from mr as, that (at least) the wife and mr as remain in a relationship.[2] further, it is more likely than not that he provides financial, and other, benefits to the wife, (i) a further and ongoing difficulty for the court and for the husband was the wife’s changing position regarding what orders she sought. at one stage, partly in keeping with the limited material filed on her behalf, the wife’s counsel confirmed that the mother sought (in percentage terms) a “70/30” split in her favour. yet in her oral evidence, the wife said that her preferred position was that the husband receive nothing and that, consequently, she would receive the net assets of the couple, (j) the wife’s position was further complicated because she said that, if the husband was to receive some payment from the property pool, with the assistance of her father, she would pay out the father and retain the former marital residence. the complications arose/arise this way. as noted already, the mother lives on government benefits of one sort or another. the court knows nothing of what, if anything, mr as provides to the wife either for the household generally, and/or simply for the care and support of their son. the wife said that her father would assist her. unfortunately, (i) the maternal grandfather filed no evidence, other than an unsworn, short affidavit, that was filed at 8:46 pm on the evening prior to the trial commencing. ultimately, after argument, it was ruled to be inadmissible on multiple grounds,[3] and (ii) the grandfather was not otherwise called to give any evidence in support of the wife’s claims and contentions. further, the wife’s payments towards the mortgage since the parties’ separation, but specifically from january 2019 and september 2022, were very modest, and totalled some $10,600.62. she proposes, as does the maternal grandfather, that he would (or has already) liquidate all of his superannuation to enable the wife to pay out the husband, and for the maternal grandfather to live off what remains. how he would do both (pay out the husband and have sufficient funds on which to live) was never explained, (k) for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   there is one child of that relationship, x. despite orders of the court for a process by which the father and x would begin to spend time together again, the actions (and notably inaction) by the wife and mother has regularly thwarted that time between father and son. the mother has been warned repeatedly of the risks of non-compliance, which could result in x going to live with the father, (c) both parents have different health issues. the father has long had some mental health issues, arising from when he was working, which ultimately led to a diagnosis of ptsd (among other things). he receives a disability pension, and some insurance payments. he remains under significant medical care. the wife has repeatedly asserted that she suffers from a medical condition, which has resulted in her receiving a disability pension. however, at trial, her contentions regarding a disability pension were largely disproved. she receives various government benefits as a single mother, which are set out in submissions below, (d) the child of the relationship, x, who is now in basic good health, had, and to some degree still has, significant health issues. he attends ongoing medical appointments regarding the monitoring of his ailments, (e) the principal asset in the property pool is the former marital residence. its value can hardly be disputed, together with its liabilities, as set out in the husband’s summary of the property pool (and submissions) set out below. that said, it proved to be excruciating, bordering on the impossible, to secure a valuation of the property. such attempts were regularly thwarted by the wife, regularly through contrived misadventures, and equally regularly through the wife’s extravagant claims of the purported risk the husband posed or continues to pose, to her, to x, and almost anyone and everyone else. on the evidence before the court, and having now had the benefit of both parties giving evidence – twice – i have no doubt that the father loves his son devoutly, and would not risk harming him in any way. in my view, not least in the light of the extensive medical evidence provided by the husband, whatever difficulties were once evident during the relationship (which are well documented and commented on by dr h in his earlier report, which was in evidence in the parenting matter), the husband poses no risk to anyone. he has lived in city z for some time but returns regularly to city c to spend time with the paternal family, who also remain, in my view, unreasonably deprived of the company of x, which has been the case now for many years, (f) in general but often shifting terms, the wife complained about the father not paying her child support. the mother now has a young second child, the father of whom is a mr as. for no proper or reasonable reason, the mother refused to disclose the name of this child (without knowing the basis for the child’s name, whose surname and middle name are those of his father). moreover, there is not the slightest evidence that the applicant father here has the slightest interest in the mother’s second son, other than presumably as x’s brother. as well, although city c is a city of modest size, given the general nature of country towns where, by various means, people tend to know general information about a wide range of others in the community, especially when the second son at least starts day-care and certainly school, his name will become readily known. finally, at the court’s direction, the wife wrote the child’s name on a piece of paper and provided it to the court. (g) she confirmed that she seeks, and is paid, no child support from mr as. it was pointed out to her the illogically and injustice of her position of requiring child support from one father but not the other. somewhat blithely, sometimes bordering on the coquettish, she again feigned either ignorance, disbelief, or both, (h) concerningly, mr as provided no evidence. neighbours of the wife, who were not required for cross examination, provided affidavit evidence of regularly seeing the prominently-named work vehicle (a vehicle emblazoned with his work logo and contact details) of mr as at the mother’s residence. she confirmed that he spent somewhat regular time with their son, and sometimes stayed overnight. it is undisputed that a range of his furniture adorned the wife’s house, including a very large bed in the mother’s bedroom. pursuant to the principles articulated by the high court in jones v dunkel, i am urged to draw the relevant [adverse] inference to the effect that the evidence not called would not materially assist the case of the party in question, which i do, based on the unchallenged evidence of the wife’s neighbours, and the lack of evidence from mr as, that (at least) the wife and mr as remain in a relationship.[2] further, it is more likely than not that he provides financial, and other, benefits to the wife, (i) a further and ongoing difficulty for the court and for the husband was the wife’s changing position regarding what orders she sought. at one stage, partly in keeping with the limited material filed on her behalf, the wife’s counsel confirmed that the mother sought (in percentage terms) a “70/30” split in her favour. yet in her oral evidence, the wife said that her preferred position was that the husband receive nothing and that, consequently, she would receive the net assets of the couple, (j) the wife’s position was further complicated because she said that, if the husband was to receive some payment from the property pool, with the assistance of her father, she would pay out the father and retain the former marital residence. the complications arose/arise this way. as noted already, the mother lives on government benefits of one sort or another. the court knows nothing of what, if anything, mr as provides to the wife either for the household generally, and/or simply for the care and support of their son. the wife said that her father would assist her. unfortunately, (i) the maternal grandfather filed no evidence, other than an unsworn, short affidavit, that was filed at 8:46 pm on the evening prior to the trial commencing. ultimately, after argument, it was ruled to be inadmissible on multiple grounds,[3] and (ii) the grandfather was not otherwise called to give any evidence in support of the wife’s claims and contentions. further, the wife’s payments towards the mortgage since the parties’ separation, but specifically from january 2019 and september 2022, were very modest, and totalled some $10,600.62. she proposes, as does the maternal grandfather, that he would (or has already) liquidate all of his superannuation to enable the wife to pay out the husband, and for the maternal grandfather to live off what remains. how he would do both (pay out the husband and have sufficient funds on which to live) was never explained, (k) for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   both parents have different health issues. the father has long had some mental health issues, arising from when he was working, which ultimately led to a diagnosis of ptsd (among other things). he receives a disability pension, and some insurance payments. he remains under significant medical care. the wife has repeatedly asserted that she suffers from a medical condition, which has resulted in her receiving a disability pension. however, at trial, her contentions regarding a disability pension were largely disproved. she receives various government benefits as a single mother, which are set out in submissions below, (d) the child of the relationship, x, who is now in basic good health, had, and to some degree still has, significant health issues. he attends ongoing medical appointments regarding the monitoring of his ailments, (e) the principal asset in the property pool is the former marital residence. its value can hardly be disputed, together with its liabilities, as set out in the husband’s summary of the property pool (and submissions) set out below. that said, it proved to be excruciating, bordering on the impossible, to secure a valuation of the property. such attempts were regularly thwarted by the wife, regularly through contrived misadventures, and equally regularly through the wife’s extravagant claims of the purported risk the husband posed or continues to pose, to her, to x, and almost anyone and everyone else. on the evidence before the court, and having now had the benefit of both parties giving evidence – twice – i have no doubt that the father loves his son devoutly, and would not risk harming him in any way. in my view, not least in the light of the extensive medical evidence provided by the husband, whatever difficulties were once evident during the relationship (which are well documented and commented on by dr h in his earlier report, which was in evidence in the parenting matter), the husband poses no risk to anyone. he has lived in city z for some time but returns regularly to city c to spend time with the paternal family, who also remain, in my view, unreasonably deprived of the company of x, which has been the case now for many years, (f) in general but often shifting terms, the wife complained about the father not paying her child support. the mother now has a young second child, the father of whom is a mr as. for no proper or reasonable reason, the mother refused to disclose the name of this child (without knowing the basis for the child’s name, whose surname and middle name are those of his father). moreover, there is not the slightest evidence that the applicant father here has the slightest interest in the mother’s second son, other than presumably as x’s brother. as well, although city c is a city of modest size, given the general nature of country towns where, by various means, people tend to know general information about a wide range of others in the community, especially when the second son at least starts day-care and certainly school, his name will become readily known. finally, at the court’s direction, the wife wrote the child’s name on a piece of paper and provided it to the court. (g) she confirmed that she seeks, and is paid, no child support from mr as. it was pointed out to her the illogically and injustice of her position of requiring child support from one father but not the other. somewhat blithely, sometimes bordering on the coquettish, she again feigned either ignorance, disbelief, or both, (h) concerningly, mr as provided no evidence. neighbours of the wife, who were not required for cross examination, provided affidavit evidence of regularly seeing the prominently-named work vehicle (a vehicle emblazoned with his work logo and contact details) of mr as at the mother’s residence. she confirmed that he spent somewhat regular time with their son, and sometimes stayed overnight. it is undisputed that a range of his furniture adorned the wife’s house, including a very large bed in the mother’s bedroom. pursuant to the principles articulated by the high court in jones v dunkel, i am urged to draw the relevant [adverse] inference to the effect that the evidence not called would not materially assist the case of the party in question, which i do, based on the unchallenged evidence of the wife’s neighbours, and the lack of evidence from mr as, that (at least) the wife and mr as remain in a relationship.[2] further, it is more likely than not that he provides financial, and other, benefits to the wife, (i) a further and ongoing difficulty for the court and for the husband was the wife’s changing position regarding what orders she sought. at one stage, partly in keeping with the limited material filed on her behalf, the wife’s counsel confirmed that the mother sought (in percentage terms) a “70/30” split in her favour. yet in her oral evidence, the wife said that her preferred position was that the husband receive nothing and that, consequently, she would receive the net assets of the couple, (j) the wife’s position was further complicated because she said that, if the husband was to receive some payment from the property pool, with the assistance of her father, she would pay out the father and retain the former marital residence. the complications arose/arise this way. as noted already, the mother lives on government benefits of one sort or another. the court knows nothing of what, if anything, mr as provides to the wife either for the household generally, and/or simply for the care and support of their son. the wife said that her father would assist her. unfortunately, (i) the maternal grandfather filed no evidence, other than an unsworn, short affidavit, that was filed at 8:46 pm on the evening prior to the trial commencing. ultimately, after argument, it was ruled to be inadmissible on multiple grounds,[3] and (ii) the grandfather was not otherwise called to give any evidence in support of the wife’s claims and contentions. further, the wife’s payments towards the mortgage since the parties’ separation, but specifically from january 2019 and september 2022, were very modest, and totalled some $10,600.62. she proposes, as does the maternal grandfather, that he would (or has already) liquidate all of his superannuation to enable the wife to pay out the husband, and for the maternal grandfather to live off what remains. how he would do both (pay out the husband and have sufficient funds on which to live) was never explained, (k) for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   the child of the relationship, x, who is now in basic good health, had, and to some degree still has, significant health issues. he attends ongoing medical appointments regarding the monitoring of his ailments, (e) the principal asset in the property pool is the former marital residence. its value can hardly be disputed, together with its liabilities, as set out in the husband’s summary of the property pool (and submissions) set out below. that said, it proved to be excruciating, bordering on the impossible, to secure a valuation of the property. such attempts were regularly thwarted by the wife, regularly through contrived misadventures, and equally regularly through the wife’s extravagant claims of the purported risk the husband posed or continues to pose, to her, to x, and almost anyone and everyone else. on the evidence before the court, and having now had the benefit of both parties giving evidence – twice – i have no doubt that the father loves his son devoutly, and would not risk harming him in any way. in my view, not least in the light of the extensive medical evidence provided by the husband, whatever difficulties were once evident during the relationship (which are well documented and commented on by dr h in his earlier report, which was in evidence in the parenting matter), the husband poses no risk to anyone. he has lived in city z for some time but returns regularly to city c to spend time with the paternal family, who also remain, in my view, unreasonably deprived of the company of x, which has been the case now for many years, (f) in general but often shifting terms, the wife complained about the father not paying her child support. the mother now has a young second child, the father of whom is a mr as. for no proper or reasonable reason, the mother refused to disclose the name of this child (without knowing the basis for the child’s name, whose surname and middle name are those of his father). moreover, there is not the slightest evidence that the applicant father here has the slightest interest in the mother’s second son, other than presumably as x’s brother. as well, although city c is a city of modest size, given the general nature of country towns where, by various means, people tend to know general information about a wide range of others in the community, especially when the second son at least starts day-care and certainly school, his name will become readily known. finally, at the court’s direction, the wife wrote the child’s name on a piece of paper and provided it to the court. (g) she confirmed that she seeks, and is paid, no child support from mr as. it was pointed out to her the illogically and injustice of her position of requiring child support from one father but not the other. somewhat blithely, sometimes bordering on the coquettish, she again feigned either ignorance, disbelief, or both, (h) concerningly, mr as provided no evidence. neighbours of the wife, who were not required for cross examination, provided affidavit evidence of regularly seeing the prominently-named work vehicle (a vehicle emblazoned with his work logo and contact details) of mr as at the mother’s residence. she confirmed that he spent somewhat regular time with their son, and sometimes stayed overnight. it is undisputed that a range of his furniture adorned the wife’s house, including a very large bed in the mother’s bedroom. pursuant to the principles articulated by the high court in jones v dunkel, i am urged to draw the relevant [adverse] inference to the effect that the evidence not called would not materially assist the case of the party in question, which i do, based on the unchallenged evidence of the wife’s neighbours, and the lack of evidence from mr as, that (at least) the wife and mr as remain in a relationship.[2] further, it is more likely than not that he provides financial, and other, benefits to the wife, (i) a further and ongoing difficulty for the court and for the husband was the wife’s changing position regarding what orders she sought. at one stage, partly in keeping with the limited material filed on her behalf, the wife’s counsel confirmed that the mother sought (in percentage terms) a “70/30” split in her favour. yet in her oral evidence, the wife said that her preferred position was that the husband receive nothing and that, consequently, she would receive the net assets of the couple, (j) the wife’s position was further complicated because she said that, if the husband was to receive some payment from the property pool, with the assistance of her father, she would pay out the father and retain the former marital residence. the complications arose/arise this way. as noted already, the mother lives on government benefits of one sort or another. the court knows nothing of what, if anything, mr as provides to the wife either for the household generally, and/or simply for the care and support of their son. the wife said that her father would assist her. unfortunately, (i) the maternal grandfather filed no evidence, other than an unsworn, short affidavit, that was filed at 8:46 pm on the evening prior to the trial commencing. ultimately, after argument, it was ruled to be inadmissible on multiple grounds,[3] and (ii) the grandfather was not otherwise called to give any evidence in support of the wife’s claims and contentions. further, the wife’s payments towards the mortgage since the parties’ separation, but specifically from january 2019 and september 2022, were very modest, and totalled some $10,600.62. she proposes, as does the maternal grandfather, that he would (or has already) liquidate all of his superannuation to enable the wife to pay out the husband, and for the maternal grandfather to live off what remains. how he would do both (pay out the husband and have sufficient funds on which to live) was never explained, (k) for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   the principal asset in the property pool is the former marital residence. its value can hardly be disputed, together with its liabilities, as set out in the husband’s summary of the property pool (and submissions) set out below. that said, it proved to be excruciating, bordering on the impossible, to secure a valuation of the property. such attempts were regularly thwarted by the wife, regularly through contrived misadventures, and equally regularly through the wife’s extravagant claims of the purported risk the husband posed or continues to pose, to her, to x, and almost anyone and everyone else. on the evidence before the court, and having now had the benefit of both parties giving evidence – twice – i have no doubt that the father loves his son devoutly, and would not risk harming him in any way. in my view, not least in the light of the extensive medical evidence provided by the husband, whatever difficulties were once evident during the relationship (which are well documented and commented on by dr h in his earlier report, which was in evidence in the parenting matter), the husband poses no risk to anyone. he has lived in city z for some time but returns regularly to city c to spend time with the paternal family, who also remain, in my view, unreasonably deprived of the company of x, which has been the case now for many years, (f) in general but often shifting terms, the wife complained about the father not paying her child support. the mother now has a young second child, the father of whom is a mr as. for no proper or reasonable reason, the mother refused to disclose the name of this child (without knowing the basis for the child’s name, whose surname and middle name are those of his father). moreover, there is not the slightest evidence that the applicant father here has the slightest interest in the mother’s second son, other than presumably as x’s brother. as well, although city c is a city of modest size, given the general nature of country towns where, by various means, people tend to know general information about a wide range of others in the community, especially when the second son at least starts day-care and certainly school, his name will become readily known. finally, at the court’s direction, the wife wrote the child’s name on a piece of paper and provided it to the court. (g) she confirmed that she seeks, and is paid, no child support from mr as. it was pointed out to her the illogically and injustice of her position of requiring child support from one father but not the other. somewhat blithely, sometimes bordering on the coquettish, she again feigned either ignorance, disbelief, or both, (h) concerningly, mr as provided no evidence. neighbours of the wife, who were not required for cross examination, provided affidavit evidence of regularly seeing the prominently-named work vehicle (a vehicle emblazoned with his work logo and contact details) of mr as at the mother’s residence. she confirmed that he spent somewhat regular time with their son, and sometimes stayed overnight. it is undisputed that a range of his furniture adorned the wife’s house, including a very large bed in the mother’s bedroom. pursuant to the principles articulated by the high court in jones v dunkel, i am urged to draw the relevant [adverse] inference to the effect that the evidence not called would not materially assist the case of the party in question, which i do, based on the unchallenged evidence of the wife’s neighbours, and the lack of evidence from mr as, that (at least) the wife and mr as remain in a relationship.[2] further, it is more likely than not that he provides financial, and other, benefits to the wife, (i) a further and ongoing difficulty for the court and for the husband was the wife’s changing position regarding what orders she sought. at one stage, partly in keeping with the limited material filed on her behalf, the wife’s counsel confirmed that the mother sought (in percentage terms) a “70/30” split in her favour. yet in her oral evidence, the wife said that her preferred position was that the husband receive nothing and that, consequently, she would receive the net assets of the couple, (j) the wife’s position was further complicated because she said that, if the husband was to receive some payment from the property pool, with the assistance of her father, she would pay out the father and retain the former marital residence. the complications arose/arise this way. as noted already, the mother lives on government benefits of one sort or another. the court knows nothing of what, if anything, mr as provides to the wife either for the household generally, and/or simply for the care and support of their son. the wife said that her father would assist her. unfortunately, (i) the maternal grandfather filed no evidence, other than an unsworn, short affidavit, that was filed at 8:46 pm on the evening prior to the trial commencing. ultimately, after argument, it was ruled to be inadmissible on multiple grounds,[3] and (ii) the grandfather was not otherwise called to give any evidence in support of the wife’s claims and contentions. further, the wife’s payments towards the mortgage since the parties’ separation, but specifically from january 2019 and september 2022, were very modest, and totalled some $10,600.62. she proposes, as does the maternal grandfather, that he would (or has already) liquidate all of his superannuation to enable the wife to pay out the husband, and for the maternal grandfather to live off what remains. how he would do both (pay out the husband and have sufficient funds on which to live) was never explained, (k) for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   in general but often shifting terms, the wife complained about the father not paying her child support. the mother now has a young second child, the father of whom is a mr as. for no proper or reasonable reason, the mother refused to disclose the name of this child (without knowing the basis for the child’s name, whose surname and middle name are those of his father). moreover, there is not the slightest evidence that the applicant father here has the slightest interest in the mother’s second son, other than presumably as x’s brother. as well, although city c is a city of modest size, given the general nature of country towns where, by various means, people tend to know general information about a wide range of others in the community, especially when the second son at least starts day-care and certainly school, his name will become readily known. finally, at the court’s direction, the wife wrote the child’s name on a piece of paper and provided it to the court. (g) she confirmed that she seeks, and is paid, no child support from mr as. it was pointed out to her the illogically and injustice of her position of requiring child support from one father but not the other. somewhat blithely, sometimes bordering on the coquettish, she again feigned either ignorance, disbelief, or both, (h) concerningly, mr as provided no evidence. neighbours of the wife, who were not required for cross examination, provided affidavit evidence of regularly seeing the prominently-named work vehicle (a vehicle emblazoned with his work logo and contact details) of mr as at the mother’s residence. she confirmed that he spent somewhat regular time with their son, and sometimes stayed overnight. it is undisputed that a range of his furniture adorned the wife’s house, including a very large bed in the mother’s bedroom. pursuant to the principles articulated by the high court in jones v dunkel, i am urged to draw the relevant [adverse] inference to the effect that the evidence not called would not materially assist the case of the party in question, which i do, based on the unchallenged evidence of the wife’s neighbours, and the lack of evidence from mr as, that (at least) the wife and mr as remain in a relationship.[2] further, it is more likely than not that he provides financial, and other, benefits to the wife, (i) a further and ongoing difficulty for the court and for the husband was the wife’s changing position regarding what orders she sought. at one stage, partly in keeping with the limited material filed on her behalf, the wife’s counsel confirmed that the mother sought (in percentage terms) a “70/30” split in her favour. yet in her oral evidence, the wife said that her preferred position was that the husband receive nothing and that, consequently, she would receive the net assets of the couple, (j) the wife’s position was further complicated because she said that, if the husband was to receive some payment from the property pool, with the assistance of her father, she would pay out the father and retain the former marital residence. the complications arose/arise this way. as noted already, the mother lives on government benefits of one sort or another. the court knows nothing of what, if anything, mr as provides to the wife either for the household generally, and/or simply for the care and support of their son. the wife said that her father would assist her. unfortunately, (i) the maternal grandfather filed no evidence, other than an unsworn, short affidavit, that was filed at 8:46 pm on the evening prior to the trial commencing. ultimately, after argument, it was ruled to be inadmissible on multiple grounds,[3] and (ii) the grandfather was not otherwise called to give any evidence in support of the wife’s claims and contentions. further, the wife’s payments towards the mortgage since the parties’ separation, but specifically from january 2019 and september 2022, were very modest, and totalled some $10,600.62. she proposes, as does the maternal grandfather, that he would (or has already) liquidate all of his superannuation to enable the wife to pay out the husband, and for the maternal grandfather to live off what remains. how he would do both (pay out the husband and have sufficient funds on which to live) was never explained, (k) for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   she confirmed that she seeks, and is paid, no child support from mr as. it was pointed out to her the illogically and injustice of her position of requiring child support from one father but not the other. somewhat blithely, sometimes bordering on the coquettish, she again feigned either ignorance, disbelief, or both, (h) concerningly, mr as provided no evidence. neighbours of the wife, who were not required for cross examination, provided affidavit evidence of regularly seeing the prominently-named work vehicle (a vehicle emblazoned with his work logo and contact details) of mr as at the mother’s residence. she confirmed that he spent somewhat regular time with their son, and sometimes stayed overnight. it is undisputed that a range of his furniture adorned the wife’s house, including a very large bed in the mother’s bedroom. pursuant to the principles articulated by the high court in jones v dunkel, i am urged to draw the relevant [adverse] inference to the effect that the evidence not called would not materially assist the case of the party in question, which i do, based on the unchallenged evidence of the wife’s neighbours, and the lack of evidence from mr as, that (at least) the wife and mr as remain in a relationship.[2] further, it is more likely than not that he provides financial, and other, benefits to the wife, (i) a further and ongoing difficulty for the court and for the husband was the wife’s changing position regarding what orders she sought. at one stage, partly in keeping with the limited material filed on her behalf, the wife’s counsel confirmed that the mother sought (in percentage terms) a “70/30” split in her favour. yet in her oral evidence, the wife said that her preferred position was that the husband receive nothing and that, consequently, she would receive the net assets of the couple, (j) the wife’s position was further complicated because she said that, if the husband was to receive some payment from the property pool, with the assistance of her father, she would pay out the father and retain the former marital residence. the complications arose/arise this way. as noted already, the mother lives on government benefits of one sort or another. the court knows nothing of what, if anything, mr as provides to the wife either for the household generally, and/or simply for the care and support of their son. the wife said that her father would assist her. unfortunately, (i) the maternal grandfather filed no evidence, other than an unsworn, short affidavit, that was filed at 8:46 pm on the evening prior to the trial commencing. ultimately, after argument, it was ruled to be inadmissible on multiple grounds,[3] and (ii) the grandfather was not otherwise called to give any evidence in support of the wife’s claims and contentions. further, the wife’s payments towards the mortgage since the parties’ separation, but specifically from january 2019 and september 2022, were very modest, and totalled some $10,600.62. she proposes, as does the maternal grandfather, that he would (or has already) liquidate all of his superannuation to enable the wife to pay out the husband, and for the maternal grandfather to live off what remains. how he would do both (pay out the husband and have sufficient funds on which to live) was never explained, (k) for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   concerningly, mr as provided no evidence. neighbours of the wife, who were not required for cross examination, provided affidavit evidence of regularly seeing the prominently-named work vehicle (a vehicle emblazoned with his work logo and contact details) of mr as at the mother’s residence. she confirmed that he spent somewhat regular time with their son, and sometimes stayed overnight. it is undisputed that a range of his furniture adorned the wife’s house, including a very large bed in the mother’s bedroom. pursuant to the principles articulated by the high court in jones v dunkel, i am urged to draw the relevant [adverse] inference to the effect that the evidence not called would not materially assist the case of the party in question, which i do, based on the unchallenged evidence of the wife’s neighbours, and the lack of evidence from mr as, that (at least) the wife and mr as remain in a relationship.[2] further, it is more likely than not that he provides financial, and other, benefits to the wife, (i) a further and ongoing difficulty for the court and for the husband was the wife’s changing position regarding what orders she sought. at one stage, partly in keeping with the limited material filed on her behalf, the wife’s counsel confirmed that the mother sought (in percentage terms) a “70/30” split in her favour. yet in her oral evidence, the wife said that her preferred position was that the husband receive nothing and that, consequently, she would receive the net assets of the couple, (j) the wife’s position was further complicated because she said that, if the husband was to receive some payment from the property pool, with the assistance of her father, she would pay out the father and retain the former marital residence. the complications arose/arise this way. as noted already, the mother lives on government benefits of one sort or another. the court knows nothing of what, if anything, mr as provides to the wife either for the household generally, and/or simply for the care and support of their son. the wife said that her father would assist her. unfortunately, (i) the maternal grandfather filed no evidence, other than an unsworn, short affidavit, that was filed at 8:46 pm on the evening prior to the trial commencing. ultimately, after argument, it was ruled to be inadmissible on multiple grounds,[3] and (ii) the grandfather was not otherwise called to give any evidence in support of the wife’s claims and contentions. further, the wife’s payments towards the mortgage since the parties’ separation, but specifically from january 2019 and september 2022, were very modest, and totalled some $10,600.62. she proposes, as does the maternal grandfather, that he would (or has already) liquidate all of his superannuation to enable the wife to pay out the husband, and for the maternal grandfather to live off what remains. how he would do both (pay out the husband and have sufficient funds on which to live) was never explained, (k) for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   a further and ongoing difficulty for the court and for the husband was the wife’s changing position regarding what orders she sought. at one stage, partly in keeping with the limited material filed on her behalf, the wife’s counsel confirmed that the mother sought (in percentage terms) a “70/30” split in her favour. yet in her oral evidence, the wife said that her preferred position was that the husband receive nothing and that, consequently, she would receive the net assets of the couple, (j) the wife’s position was further complicated because she said that, if the husband was to receive some payment from the property pool, with the assistance of her father, she would pay out the father and retain the former marital residence. the complications arose/arise this way. as noted already, the mother lives on government benefits of one sort or another. the court knows nothing of what, if anything, mr as provides to the wife either for the household generally, and/or simply for the care and support of their son. the wife said that her father would assist her. unfortunately, (i) the maternal grandfather filed no evidence, other than an unsworn, short affidavit, that was filed at 8:46 pm on the evening prior to the trial commencing. ultimately, after argument, it was ruled to be inadmissible on multiple grounds,[3] and (ii) the grandfather was not otherwise called to give any evidence in support of the wife’s claims and contentions. further, the wife’s payments towards the mortgage since the parties’ separation, but specifically from january 2019 and september 2022, were very modest, and totalled some $10,600.62. she proposes, as does the maternal grandfather, that he would (or has already) liquidate all of his superannuation to enable the wife to pay out the husband, and for the maternal grandfather to live off what remains. how he would do both (pay out the husband and have sufficient funds on which to live) was never explained, (k) for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   the wife’s position was further complicated because she said that, if the husband was to receive some payment from the property pool, with the assistance of her father, she would pay out the father and retain the former marital residence. the complications arose/arise this way. as noted already, the mother lives on government benefits of one sort or another. the court knows nothing of what, if anything, mr as provides to the wife either for the household generally, and/or simply for the care and support of their son. the wife said that her father would assist her. unfortunately, (i) the maternal grandfather filed no evidence, other than an unsworn, short affidavit, that was filed at 8:46 pm on the evening prior to the trial commencing. ultimately, after argument, it was ruled to be inadmissible on multiple grounds,[3] and (ii) the grandfather was not otherwise called to give any evidence in support of the wife’s claims and contentions. further, the wife’s payments towards the mortgage since the parties’ separation, but specifically from january 2019 and september 2022, were very modest, and totalled some $10,600.62. she proposes, as does the maternal grandfather, that he would (or has already) liquidate all of his superannuation to enable the wife to pay out the husband, and for the maternal grandfather to live off what remains. how he would do both (pay out the husband and have sufficient funds on which to live) was never explained, (k) for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   for a brief moment early in the trial, the wife sought to run a so-called kennon argument arising from what she described as [alleged] family violence during the relationship. after some discussion with the wife’s counsel, this claim, which had never been raised in the evidence, was not pursued. it was, in my view, a plainly desperate and unsupportable argument, (l) in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.   in short, in my view, like much of the wife’s evidence, it was lacking in specifics and independent evidentiary support, and regularly bordered on the fanciful.
applicant’s orders sought
it is ordered: that within 10 days of the date of orders, the respondent wife is to do all things necessary to facilitate the recovery and collection by the applicant husband of all of his personal items, including but not limited to his [hobby collection], from the property located at number [aq street, city c], nsw and the nsw police are hereby authorised and directed with such assistance as they require and if necessary, by force, to enforce this order for the recovery of the applicant husband's personal items from anywhere within and on the property located at [aq street, city c], nsw. that within 28 days of the date of these orders, the parties are to do all things and sign all documents as are necessary to cause the property located at [aq street, city c], in the state of new south wales, being the whole of the land folio number ... ("the matrimonial property") for sale on the open market (“the sale”). that if within a period of 28 days, from the date of these orders, the applicant and respondent are unable to reach agreement as to the manner, conditions or amount for which the matrimonial property is to be sold, the applicant and respondent are to do all such things as are necessary to effect the sale of the property by private treaty at the market value determined in accordance with order 5 at the earliest possible date. that the parties are to appoint a real estate agent as agreed, and failing agreement that agent be [ar real estate, city c] (“the agent”). that the parties are to appoint a real estate agent as agreed, and failing agreement that agent be [ar real estate, city c] (“the agent”). that the market value of the matrimonial property is to be as agreed between the parties or failing such agreement the parties are to engage the president of the new south wales division of the australian property institute or said president's nominee to determine the market value and the cost of such determination is to be paid for equally by the parties (“the market value”). that if the matrimonial property is not sold within 3 months from the date that it is listed for sale, or if the property is sold and the sale does not subsequently proceed to completion, the applicant and the respondent are to do all such things to offer the matrimonial property immediately for sale at a public auction by the agent, with the reserve price being 95% of the market value. that the applicant and the respondent will execute all documents requested by the agent as auctioneers for sale of the matrimonial property by auction, upon being requested to do so by the agent. that the applicant and the respondent will execute a contract for sale. that the applicant and the respondent will cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the auction of the matrimonial property, including making the keys available for an inspection of the matrimonial property at times requested by the agent and ensuring that the matrimonial property is in a clean and neat condition at the time of inspection by the prospective purchasers. that if the matrimonial property is not sold at the auction, within 21 days after the date of the auction, the applicant and the respondent, will do all things and sign all documents as are necessary to sell the matrimonial property at the best price then obtainable on the open market. that upon the sale of the matrimonial property, the applicant and respondent shall do all things and sign all documents as are necessary to cause the proceeds of the sale of the matrimonial property to be distributed in the following order and priority: to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale, including but not limited to costs of the agent and conveyancer, to pay the usual rates adjustment, to pay the amount required to repay the commonwealth bank loan secured by the mortgage and the parties then do all things required to discharge the mortgages, and to pay to [mr ae] and [ms ab] of the balance of the loan pursuant to the loan agreement executed and dated 31 july 2015, payment to the applicant of 60% of the residue of the settlement sum, and payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent. that any and all upfront costs associated with the sale of the matrimonial property, including but not limited to conveyancing and agency marketing costs, are to be equally borne by the parties. that in the event that the matrimonial property is to be sold in accordance with orders 2 to 10, and the parties cannot agree on the terms and conditions of the sale, the parties have liberty to apply to the court as to the terms and conditions of the sale on 7 days’ notice to the other with respect to the terms and conditions of the sale. that the applicant and the respondent be restrained from further encumbering the matrimonial property, except to the extent necessary to comply with these orders. that except as otherwise provided in these orders: the applicant and the respondent be entitled to be the sole legal and beneficial owners of all items of property including money, motor vehicles, insurances, equities, superannuation entitlements and personal effects currently in the possession or control of each of them respectively, and the applicant will retain sole liability for and will indemnify and continue to indemnify the respondent with respect to any loan, lease, or credit card liability held or registered in his sole name or jointly with a third party, and the respondent will retain sole liability for and will indemnify and continue to indemnify the applicant with respect to any loan, lease, or credit card liability held or registered in his sole name or jointly with a third party. that should either party fail to do all acts and things necessary to forthwith sell the matrimonial property in accordance with either the above orders, then the registrar of this court, be appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act to execute such deed, instrument or document either in the applicant husband's or respondent wife's name, to give effect to these orders, and to do all acts and things necessary to give validity to the operation of the deed, instrument or document. that in the event that the registrar of this court be appointed in accordance with order 16 above, then the party in breach of compliance with these orders shall be liable for the additional costs occasioned by the default and shall pay such costs to the other party's solicitor on an indemnity basis forthwith on settlement of the sale of the matrimonial property, should said property be sold prior to any final orders being made by the court. notations pursuant to section 81 of the family law act 1975 these orders are in full and final settlement of all financial (property and spousal maintenance) matters between the applicant and the respondent. the provisions of section 77a of the family law act 1975 are not applicable in these proceedings. that the parties hereby acknowledge that pending completion of these orders they hold their respective interest in the property dealt with in these orders on trust pursuant to these orders.
respondent’s orders sought
chronology
the wife’s evidence
the husband’s evidence
evidence of paternal grandfather
written submissions on behalf of the applicant
the difficulties with the respondent wife’s documents and her evidence the property proceedings were attended with many of the same difficulties encountered in the parenting proceedings: the wife was reluctant to or simply failed to provide relevant and necessary information. she failed to comply with filing deadlines and rules of the court in relation to the same. notably, the wife was legally represented throughout the proceedings. the wife’s affidavit failed to provide relevant information about current assets and liabilities. she chose not to respond to much of the applicant husband’s evidence, leaving the court and the husband in the dark as to what her evidence about such things would ultimately be. that was especially problematic in circumstances where disclosure was not up to date and no case outline with a balance sheet had been filed by the wife (though one did ultimately appear, which will be addressed in due course). no proper evidence was filed by relevant and necessary supporting witnesses. the wife did not file an updated financial statement and relied on her statement from 29 september 2022. the husband therefore filed his case outline without the benefit of knowing what the wife’s current assets were, or what she asserted in relation to other balance sheet items, or important elements of her evidence. ultimately this evidence needed to be obtained by way of cross-examination. a case outline for the wife was then filed at 10:05am, literally during the proceedings. that case outline contains 3 entries in the balance sheet. it did not represent all the assets and liabilities of the parties – which is extraordinary given the wife had by this stage had the benefit of the balance sheet prepared on behalf of the husband and could presumably have copied the parts that were agreed – leaving the impression that any or all of the excluded items may have been in dispute. her case outline indicated that the wife was seeking a 70/30 split in her favour. what the pool is that she says is to be split is not clear from the document. it was also unclear what proportion of the percentage was based on contributions and what was based on future needs since the persons preparing the case outline on behalf of the wife curiously elected not to complete the section on contributions. counsel for the wife confirmed in preliminary addresses that the wife was indeed seeking a 70/30 split. unhelpfully the wife later resiled from this position in cross examination and indicated that she just expected to be able to retain the former matrimonial home, make no payment to the husband, and that they otherwise retain what was in their name as “that would be preferred” by her. the wife refused to provide the name of her new child in her affidavit or in open court. quite what danger could possibly have attended the revelation of this information in circumstances where the court and the husband know both where the child resides and who the father of the child is, was entirely unclear, but in any event at his honour’s request a note was handed up to his honour inscribed with the name of the child. in part as a result of these deficits in the wife’s evidence and trial documents, his honour determined that despite being the respondent in the proceedings she would be required to give evidence first. counsel for the wife then informed the court and the husband for the first time that she now intended to press a kennon claim that had not been foreshadowed. this was ultimately abandoned after the difficulties with the position, lack of procedural fairness and the complete lack of any relevant evidence was pointed out to counsel for the wife by his honour. the wife’s affidavit provided no real indication of how she intended at a practical level to facilitate the orders she was seeking to retain the former matrimonial home. she stated in her affidavit (filed 29.3.23) at paragraph [50] “i have assistance from my father who is going to help me with the balance of the mortgage of the home.” this was the extent of her evidence in chief on the issue. while the issue of any payment to the husband remains a live one in these proceedings, it is an agreed fact that the mortgage is in joint names and in the sum of approximately $311,000, so at the very least the wife would need to be able to refinance this amount into her name, or into joint names with someone else, or borrow that amount from someone else. she did not provide the evidence necessary for the court to find that any of these options are possible in her material or in her oral evidence. it is also an agreed fact in the proceedings that the wife is not employed, and her income is by way of government benefits. by the time the proceedings commenced at 10:00am on 6 april, a formally deficient and unhelpfully vague affidavit had been filed on behalf of the wife’s father at 8:46pm the night before the trial. objection was taken to this affidavit. it was ultimately ruled that the affidavit was to be excluded. given that her father’s evidence was crucial to her ability to obtain orders that she retain the property, it is assumed that proper diligence and care would have attended to ensuring that this evidence was properly before the court. this did not occur. the wife’s oral evidence on this issue was ultimately essentially the same as what she set out in her affidavit which can be summarised as an acknowledgement that she would need assistance as a bank was unlikely to lend her the money alone, and that she expected her father to provide this assistance. it was well-known to everyone involved that a significant issue in the proceedings was the wife’s relationship with [mr as], who is the father of the wife’s second child (an infant), and what financial support or resources, if any, he may provide the wife, and whether he was living in the former matrimonial home and under what circumstances. it was raised in a directions listing. it was raised by his honour’s associate in email correspondence with the parties prior to the hearing. it was raised in the husband’s affidavit. the husband filed affidavits by two witnesses whose evidence went specifically to this issue. the wife chose not to file an affidavit by [mr as] or subpoena him to give evidence. her evidence in relation to [mr as] is at paragraphs [57]-[61] of her affidavit which state: “i am not in a relationship with [mr as][sic], we are friends. [mr as] and i share my youngest child together. there are times that [mr as] visits my home so that he can visit his child. i also borrowed [mr as]’s [motor vehicle] when my vehicle was damaged, my neighbors may have also seen the vehicle during this time. [mr as] has gifted me some items from his [work] which are at my home.” in cross examination the wife was shown facebook posts by [mr as] that depict himself and the wife that date back to january 2020 (tender bundle no.4 and no.5). in oral evidence the wife intimated that she remained in a sexual relationship with [mr as] (“no comment”) and confirmed that they have a child together and that he spends time with the child, sometimes staying overnight at the wife’s home. the husband seeks that the court draw the inference available given [mr as]’s evidence was identified by the court as being of significant relevance, and his failure to give evidence was not satisfactorily explained, that it would not have assisted the wife. the husband relied on the affidavits of [ms av] and [ms aw]. these witnesses give evidence in relation to their personal observations of [mr as]’s regular and long-standing presence and activity at the former matrimonial home and in conjunction with [ms marella] in the local community. no objection was taken to these affidavits by the wife, and these witnesses were not required for cross-examination. the legal representatives for the wife did not comply with the rules requiring notice to be given that a witness was required, nor did they do the husband and his lawyers the courtesy of providing this information even if it was late. despite this, the husband still ensured that both witnesses travelled from out of town to appear. their evidence therefore goes in in its entirety. the wife was cross examined in an attempt to ascertain her position in relation to the current assets and liabilities of the parties. calls were made for statements or screenshots that showed the current balances of her various bank accounts. although documents were produced none of them provided current balances. they were statements that went up to december 2022. it was reluctantly agreed that production could occur after the conclusion of the proceedings given that written submissions would occur. as will be discussed below, it did not. the wife agrees that there is a $30,000 loan owing to the husband’s parents pursuant to a formal loan agreement. the husband’s parents have a caveat over the former matrimonial home. the wife agrees that this should be repaid. her proposal for how this is to occur appears to be that the husband be responsible for repayment of half of the amount and that she will ask her father to pay her half. it is no clear where she says the husband should obtain the money. one hopes it will not be asserted that he needs to borrow or obtain money from his parents to pay back the loan to his parents. the wife accepts that both she and the husband owe amounts to legal aid for fees associated with an icl’s involvement in the parenting matter. legal aid also have a caveat over the former matrimonial home. the funds will need to be paid if the caveat is to be lifted. the wife’s proposal for dealing with this appears to be that the husband be responsible for payment of his amount and that she will ask her father to pay the amount that she owes so that the caveat legal aid nsw has placed on the property can be lifted. the wife complains at paragraph [27] of her affidavit of funds that she says the husband withdrew from the “mortgage” between early 2017 and late 2018 (this is stated in general terms as the wife does not provide the dates of the transactions, just the date ranges of the statements). it is an agreed fact that the parties separated in november 2018. the transactions were during the relationship, not post separation, and the vast majority of the sum was for the purchase of a [motor vehicle 1] for the parties’ joint use during the relationship that the wife’s own evidence is that she knew about [37]. the wife appears to assert that there should be an addback for the proceeds of sale of the [motor vehicle 1] that the husband sold post separation. his evidence is that he used the funds to assist in meeting his living expenses. given the limited means of the husband, and that the uncontroverted evidence is that he still needs to borrow money from time to time from his parents to meet bills and expenses, there is no basis to doubt that this was so. the wife gives evidence that she gifted a vehicle to her mother and received nothing for it. it is open to the court to find that neither is added back given the sums involved and the fact that both have had the benefit of a matrimonial asset unilaterally disposed of. the wife’s own evidence at paragraph [24] is that in over 4 years she has only paid down approximately $10,000 on the mortgage and that she acknowledges that she has not been paying the full amount due [49]. for the whole of this time she has had the exclusive use of the property. that would work out to her paying less than $50/week to reside in the property that is jointly owned. the wife should not be given any adjustment for post separation contributions for this. the wife appears to assert future needs on the basis of a) an inability to work due to a disability and her childcare responsibilities, b) her greater proportion of care of the parties’ child [x], and c) the husband’s failure to pay child support. the wife’s evidence as to her income is at paragraph [42] which says, “my only source of income is a disability pension in the amount of $677 per week from centrelink.” and at [66] “i am on a disability pension due to suffering from [a medical condition].” neither of these statements are true. the documents put to the wife showing her centrelink benefits (both historical and a recent statement produced pursuant to a call – see tender bundle no.3 and no.8) show that the wife does not receive a disability pension. she receives a parenting payment, a carer allowance, family tax benefits and some energy and pharmaceutical allowances. this is important as a disability pension implies that someone at least has assessed that a person is not able to work due to a disability or injury. even if a party has not proven that satisfactorily, the inference is available to the court on the basis that the pension is being paid that the assertion about an inability to work at that time is at least prima facie correct. no such inference is available in circumstances where in both the parenting and the property proceedings the wife has asserted she in receipt of such a pension when this is not the case. the wife’s oral evidence is that she did not know that this was the case. leaving aside the inherent unbelievability of such an assertion, even if it were true, all it means is that no one has assessed that the wife cannot work due to a disability or injury, and the wife provides absolutely no evidence to support that this is the case, other than to say that she is a diabetic. she provides no evidence of her current state of health, of the impact that it has on her day-to-day functioning (on her own evidence she raises two children, maintains a household and a social life) or any assessment by any qualified person of how her ability to work may be impacted. the court cannot find nor even infer that the wife has no capacity to return to work in the future. she is a qualified [tradesperson]. there are other types of work that it is reasonable to suppose that she could do if she wanted to. her position appears to be that she is not presently working due to her need to care for another man’s child who, by her own choice, she does not receive financial support from, and that she cannot work for health reasons she provides no evidence for, means that there should be an adjustment form her former husband. that is a nonsense. the husband does not work either. he is in receipt of a disability pension and his historical and present mental health issues are well-evidenced in these proceedings. for reasons that are opaque questions were raised as to whether the husband is actually paying rent (to his landlord [ms ax]). the bank statements provided pursuant to a call at tender bundle no.6 demonstrate that he is. it is the case that the wife presently has greater care of the parties’ 7-year-old son, [x], pursuant to current orders of the court. the father has been seeking increased time with [x] for 4 years and has been frustrated at every turn by the wife’s refusal to comply with court orders. it is the case that the husband does not presently pay child support. the wife’s own evidence is that she sought and obtained an exemption from the child support agency. it is not clear what child support he would be assessed to pay in any event given his income is from a pension and an insurance payment regarding his mental health injury. the wife’s evidence is that [mr as] pays no child support for his child. the wife seeks none from him and does not intend to do so in the future. she is critical of the husband in these proceedings for not paying child support at her request but is content for [mr as] not to do so. an inference is available that one of the reasons for this might be that he is providing financial assistance in other ways or that they are in a relationship, so child support arrangements do not arise. in circumstances where the wife’s evidence as to future needs is so poor and demonstrably inaccurate, where the only relevant future needs factor is that she has greater care of the parties’ son, where her evidence is that her father is willing to foot the bill for the mortgage, the payment to legal aid, and the payment to the paternal grandparents, and the significant gap in the evidence in relation to the role [mr as] plays in the wife’s life and circumstances, then it is submitted that there should be no specific adjustment for future needs. however, given that the orders that the husband seeks are that the proceeds of sale of the property are split equally and that they each otherwise retain what they have, then it is possible on the balance sheet that given the wife has greater savings and more superannuation that she will be receiving more than 50% of the pool and that an adjustment to her is therefore made in any event. the wife has not paid to the husband her half share of the fees that were paid to [dr h] in the parenting proceedings. she acknowledged that she was required to do so. the parties agreed that since there were funds in an account as a result of [j company] that were in the husband’s control of a roughly similar amount that he would retain these, and this would discharge the wife’s obligation to make this payment to him. orders can be made by consent to this effect. the wife’s evidence is that she does not have the husband’s [hobby] collection that he asserts was in the safe at the former matrimonial home. while the husband was willing to concede the value of those [items] as an asset of his in circumstances where he was intending to have them returned to him, if they are not there, and cannot be returned to him then they are no longer in the pool and the sum of $0 must be allocated to them in the balance sheet. the husband seeks that a number of personal items be returned to him. a list is in evidence. the wife’s evidence appears to be that he can have the items on the list if they are there. given the evasive and vague nature of the evidence there is no clarity around what items may ultimately be returned to the husband, but he nevertheless seeks orders for their return. as a coda, some documents were provided, ostensibly pursuant to the calls for current bank balances for the wife, however these too only went to december 2022. this means that the best evidence available is the wife’s oral evidence of the current balances of her accounts being about$4,000. the screenshot from mygov or the ato showing the wife’s list of superannuation entitlements was never produced pursuant to the call. the best evidence available is the statement from [super fund 1] as at 30 june 2022 produced by the wife pursuant to the call during the proceedings (tender bundle no.7). the husband’s evidence the husband relies on the submissions contained in his case outline filed 4 april 2023 in relation to the nature of his contributions. none of these assertions were challenged under cross-examination. apart from asserting that she too made some non-financial contributions to the properties they owned, upon which nothing turns, none of the assertions made by the husband in relation to contributions appears to be disputed by the wife. summary to the best of the applicant’s ability to compile it from the evidence, the balance sheet in the matter is as follows:
written submissions on behalf of the respondent
outline of principle  ] section 79 demands a consideration, separately, of all of its requirements without conflation. provided a trial judge has done so, and the reasons demonstrate that this has been done, no error is demonstrated by a failure to follow a particular order in doing so. further, the breadth and depth of the consideration of the s.79(2) issue, and the extent of an adequate exposition of it in the reasons, will vary from case to case. in that respect, the plurality in bevan said, at [82], that the separate s.79(2) issue will, “...in many cases ... [be] ... effectively answered in the affirmative by the way the parties present their cases.” [20] each of those conclusions conforms entirely with what was said about those issues by the high court in stanford v stanford (2012) 247 clr 108. [21] first, it is “...not possible to chart [the] metes and bounds” of the relevant discretion. just as importantly, it was recognised specifically that the characteristics of individual marriage unions, in so far as they acquire, hold and deal with property, differ. in “many cases”, the union is underpinned by “...stated and unstated assumptions between the parties to a marriage that the arrangement of property interests, whatever they are, is sufficient for the purposes of the husband and wife during the continuance of their marriage” (stanford, at [41]). and, in “many cases”, (but, not all) the “...just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied...” by the fact of separation: “[i]t will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order ... because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife” (stanford at [42]).
“...what is ‘plainly wrong’ will vary in the eyes of different beholders” and also the fact that the “...functions and purposes of the court ... [involve] ... difficult and evaluative decisions...” such that “...any two decision-makers may, with complete integrity and upon the same material, often come to differing conclusions”. (cdj at [186(2)], per kirby j).  ] ... as we have already said, there is no requirement to attribute different percentages to different periods in the relationship. indeed the full court has cautioned against it: see dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, (2012) 50 fam lr 244, lovine & connor and anor [2012] famcafc 168, (2012) flc 93-515 and bolger & headon [2014] famcafc 27 where the full court said at [28], “[d]oing so ... is not consistent with a holistic assessment of the parties’ contributions which is what s.79(4) requires.” it is only if error can be demonstrated in the overall result that the appeal would succeed.  8] ... the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by s.79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.  ] any and all such contributions, whether or not they sound in, or are directly linked to, the property available for distribution, should be considered and assessed together with the nature, form and extent of all other contributions of all types contemplated otherwise by s 79(4). [19] that is true of assets or income generated within the relationship and it is equally true of assets or income coming from outside of the relationship (for example, as here, in the form of inheritances). in the same way, s 79(4) specifically requires the court to take into account contributions made to the welfare of the family (and substantively and “...not in any merely token way...”, see, mallett v mallett [1984] hca 21, (1984) 156 clr 605 at 636 per wilson j) notwithstanding that those contributions may not be, or cannot be seen to be, directly linked to the available property at trial, or any increase or decrease in the value of the property. [20] put another way, consistent with authority, the s 79 discretion involves as a necessary requirement that “... trial judges weigh and assess the contributions of all kinds and from all sources made by each of the parties throughout the period of their cohabitation and then translate such an assessment into a percentage of the overall property of the parties or provide for a transfer of property in specie in accordance with that assessment.” (in the marriage of aleksovski [1996] famcafc 111, (1996) 20 fam lr 894 at 903). in aleksovski, kay j outlined the well-known “gold bar” analogy and said “[w]hat is important is to somehow give a reasonable value to all of the elements that go to making up the entirety of the marriage relationship” (at 83,443). [21] those same principles can be expressed as saying that the requirements of the section are met by approaching the assessment of contributions holistically and by analysing the nature, form, characteristics and origin of the property currently comprising that to which s 79 applies, and, in turn, analysing the nature, form and extent of the contributions (of all types) contemplated by s 79. that task is also undertaken by reference to the nature and form of the particular marriage partnership manifested by the particular circumstances of this particular marriage. is it, for example, a relationship, as deane j put it in mallett at 640-641 “...where the parties have adopted the attitude that their marriage constituted a practical union of both lives and property...” or is it, for example, a union where parties lived very separate domestic and financial lives? [22] the analysis just referred to might, obviously enough, also involve an examination of when contributions were made and the use made of contributions. but that is quite different to attributing to, or searching for, a necessary causal connection between contributions and the available property as a requirement for a particular contribution having significance in the overall assessment of what is just and equitable.  ] we wish also to refer to the approach of the federal magistrate in attributing percentages to differing periods within the relationship, or types of contribution made. there is in our view little to be gained, and much to be said against, approaching the task of assessing contributions by attaching percentages to components of it. (the same, it might be said, applies to attributing a percentage to each of the relevant s 75(2) factors). [24] there can be little doubt that the classification of contributions by reference to terms such as “initial contributions”, “contributions during the relationship”, and “post-separation contributions”, can be helpful as a convenient means of giving coherent expression to the evidence in a s 79 case and to giving coherence to the nature, form and extent of the parties’ respective contributions. however, the task of assessing contributions is holistic and but part of a yet further holistic determination of what orders, if any, represent justice and equity in the particular circumstances of this particular relationship. so much is clear from the terms of s 79 itself and, in particular, s 79(2). the essential task is to assess the nature, form and extent of the contributions of all types made by each of the parties within the context of an analysis of their particular relationship. [25] doing so is also consistent with the demands of authority that the ultimate assessment of contributions should be made without “...giving over-zealous attention to the ascertainment of the parties’ contributions...” (norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513 at 524) and the well-established recognition in the authorities (acknowledged specifically by her honour in this case) that the process required of the court by s 79 is the exercise of a wide discretion, not the performance of a mathematical or accounting exercise. [26] the necessarily imprecise “wide discretion” inherent in what is required by the section is made no more precise or coherent by attributing percentage figures to arbitrary time frames or categorisations of contributions within the relationship. indeed, we consider that doing so is contrary to the holistic analysis required by the section and, in the usual course of events, should be avoided.
the consideration of the relevant matters referred to in s.75(2) of the act, pursuant to s.79(4), like the assessment of contributions, is holistic. also, like the assessment of contributions, it is not an accounting exercise.
consideration and disposition
associate: dated: 5 july 2023
dated: 5 july 2023
[1] the parenting judgment is marella & marella [2022] fedcfamc2f1564. [2] jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298.[3] it would take the matter far afield if one was to go into the relatively brief evidence regarding the contentions by the wife’s counsel that the maternal grandfather signed his affidavit at the offices of the wife’s solicitor but for reasons unexplained, his affidavit was not witnessed by the lawyer. further not explained was the fact that the trial had been set many months ahead of the hearing date. how and why the maternal grandfather’s affidavit was not prepared well beforehand, rather than the day or night before the trial, was likewise never explained. in other circumstances, a number of questions would likely be asked, formally and otherwise, of the lawyer involved.[4] see the extended discussion at transcript (6th april 2023) at pp.9ff. hereafter all such references will simply be “t” followed by the page number.[5] among many places, see the discussion at t 11, 26, and 30.[6] see t 45 & 46.[7] t 50.[8] t 62 ff.[9] see t 76.[10] t 76 ff.[11] t 78.[12] see t 78 – 79.[13] chapman v chapman [2014] famcafc 91; (2015) 51 fam lr 176.[14] ajo & gro (2005) 33 fam lr 439.[15] fields v smith [2015] famcafc 57; (2015) flc 93-638; (2016) 53 fam lr 1.[16] dickons v dickons [2012] famcafc 154; (2014) 50 fam lr 244.