last updated: 8 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hardin & avila [2023] fedcfamc2f 740
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
parental responsibility  notify the father of any proposed decision in relation to the long-term care of y and z in writing before a final decision is made, except in the case of an emergency, (b) take into consideration any views expressed by the father in respect of such proposed decision provided, and (c) notify the father of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable.   take into consideration any views expressed by the father in respect of such proposed decision provided, and (c) notify the father of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable.   notify the father of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable.
live with orders
the father’s time with y and z for first four (4) months   the mother’s home, (b) the mother’s parents’ home, (c) the grounds of any school that y or z may attend from time to time, and (d) any after school activity or extracurricular activities that y and z may participate in from time to time.   the mother’s parents’ home, (c) the grounds of any school that y or z may attend from time to time, and (d) any after school activity or extracurricular activities that y and z may participate in from time to time.   the grounds of any school that y or z may attend from time to time, and (d) any after school activity or extracurricular activities that y and z may participate in from time to time.   any after school activity or extracurricular activities that y and z may participate in from time to time.
the father’s time with y and z after the four (4) month moratorium  during school terms from the conclusion of school (or 3.30 pm if a non-school day) on friday until 5.00 pm on sunday each alternate weekend commencing the second friday of each term. (b) during school holidays, for the first half of each school holiday period which commences in an odd numbered year and the second half of each school holiday period which commences in an even numbered year. (c) during the weekend that father’s day falls from 5.00 pm on the saturday preceding father’s day until 5.00 pm on father’s day. (d) in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from 2.00 pm on christmas day until 2.00 pm on boxing day. (e) in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, from 12 noon on christmas eve until 2.00 pm on christmas day. (f) for the purpose of these orders the following applies: (i) school holiday periods are defined to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of the relevant school term gazetted for new south wales and to conclude at the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term gazetted for new south wales. (ii) unless specified to the contrary in these orders, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the mid-point day between the first and last day of the defined school holiday period. (iii) in the event that there are two (2) consecutive mid-point days, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the first of those two mid-point days.   during school holidays, for the first half of each school holiday period which commences in an odd numbered year and the second half of each school holiday period which commences in an even numbered year. (c) during the weekend that father’s day falls from 5.00 pm on the saturday preceding father’s day until 5.00 pm on father’s day. (d) in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from 2.00 pm on christmas day until 2.00 pm on boxing day. (e) in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, from 12 noon on christmas eve until 2.00 pm on christmas day. (f) for the purpose of these orders the following applies: (i) school holiday periods are defined to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of the relevant school term gazetted for new south wales and to conclude at the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term gazetted for new south wales. (ii) unless specified to the contrary in these orders, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the mid-point day between the first and last day of the defined school holiday period. (iii) in the event that there are two (2) consecutive mid-point days, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the first of those two mid-point days.   during the weekend that father’s day falls from 5.00 pm on the saturday preceding father’s day until 5.00 pm on father’s day. (d) in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from 2.00 pm on christmas day until 2.00 pm on boxing day. (e) in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, from 12 noon on christmas eve until 2.00 pm on christmas day. (f) for the purpose of these orders the following applies: (i) school holiday periods are defined to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of the relevant school term gazetted for new south wales and to conclude at the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term gazetted for new south wales. (ii) unless specified to the contrary in these orders, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the mid-point day between the first and last day of the defined school holiday period. (iii) in the event that there are two (2) consecutive mid-point days, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the first of those two mid-point days.   in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from 2.00 pm on christmas day until 2.00 pm on boxing day. (e) in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, from 12 noon on christmas eve until 2.00 pm on christmas day. (f) for the purpose of these orders the following applies: (i) school holiday periods are defined to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of the relevant school term gazetted for new south wales and to conclude at the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term gazetted for new south wales. (ii) unless specified to the contrary in these orders, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the mid-point day between the first and last day of the defined school holiday period. (iii) in the event that there are two (2) consecutive mid-point days, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the first of those two mid-point days.   in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, from 12 noon on christmas eve until 2.00 pm on christmas day. (f) for the purpose of these orders the following applies: (i) school holiday periods are defined to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of the relevant school term gazetted for new south wales and to conclude at the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term gazetted for new south wales. (ii) unless specified to the contrary in these orders, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the mid-point day between the first and last day of the defined school holiday period. (iii) in the event that there are two (2) consecutive mid-point days, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the first of those two mid-point days.   for the purpose of these orders the following applies: (i) school holiday periods are defined to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of the relevant school term gazetted for new south wales and to conclude at the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term gazetted for new south wales. (ii) unless specified to the contrary in these orders, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the mid-point day between the first and last day of the defined school holiday period. (iii) in the event that there are two (2) consecutive mid-point days, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the first of those two mid-point days.   school holiday periods are defined to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of the relevant school term gazetted for new south wales and to conclude at the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term gazetted for new south wales. (ii) unless specified to the contrary in these orders, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the mid-point day between the first and last day of the defined school holiday period. (iii) in the event that there are two (2) consecutive mid-point days, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the first of those two mid-point days.  ) unless specified to the contrary in these orders, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the mid-point day between the first and last day of the defined school holiday period. (iii) in the event that there are two (2) consecutive mid-point days, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the first of those two mid-point days.  i) in the event that there are two (2) consecutive mid-point days, changeover is to occur at 12 noon on the first of those two mid-point days.
education and schooling
communication
health and medical care  mr d, the father’s treating psychologist. (b) dr e, the father’s treating psychiatrist.   dr e, the father’s treating psychiatrist.   mr f, x’s therapist. (b) dr g, x’s treating endocrinologist. (c) dr h, x’s treating paediatrician. (d) ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (e) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (f) ms l, z’s treating psychologist.   dr g, x’s treating endocrinologist. (c) dr h, x’s treating paediatrician. (d) ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (e) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (f) ms l, z’s treating psychologist.   dr h, x’s treating paediatrician. (d) ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (e) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (f) ms l, z’s treating psychologist.   ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (e) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (f) ms l, z’s treating psychologist.   dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (f) ms l, z’s treating psychologist.   ms l, z’s treating psychologist.
restraints and injunctions
implementation of these orders  mr f, x’s therapist. (b) dr g, x’s treating endocrinologist. (c) dr h, x’s treating paediatrician. (d) dr m, x’s general practitioner (“gp”). (e) dr n, y’s gp. (f) ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (g) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (h) ms l, z’s treating psychologist. (i) dr o, z’s gp. (j) intake officer of the c centre. (k) dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.   dr g, x’s treating endocrinologist. (c) dr h, x’s treating paediatrician. (d) dr m, x’s general practitioner (“gp”). (e) dr n, y’s gp. (f) ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (g) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (h) ms l, z’s treating psychologist. (i) dr o, z’s gp. (j) intake officer of the c centre. (k) dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.   dr h, x’s treating paediatrician. (d) dr m, x’s general practitioner (“gp”). (e) dr n, y’s gp. (f) ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (g) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (h) ms l, z’s treating psychologist. (i) dr o, z’s gp. (j) intake officer of the c centre. (k) dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.   dr m, x’s general practitioner (“gp”). (e) dr n, y’s gp. (f) ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (g) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (h) ms l, z’s treating psychologist. (i) dr o, z’s gp. (j) intake officer of the c centre. (k) dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.   dr n, y’s gp. (f) ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (g) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (h) ms l, z’s treating psychologist. (i) dr o, z’s gp. (j) intake officer of the c centre. (k) dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.   ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (g) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (h) ms l, z’s treating psychologist. (i) dr o, z’s gp. (j) intake officer of the c centre. (k) dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.   dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (h) ms l, z’s treating psychologist. (i) dr o, z’s gp. (j) intake officer of the c centre. (k) dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.   ms l, z’s treating psychologist. (i) dr o, z’s gp. (j) intake officer of the c centre. (k) dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.   dr o, z’s gp. (j) intake officer of the c centre. (k) dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.   intake officer of the c centre. (k) dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.   dr p, a psychiatrist who may treat x.
passports  x’s passport will be released to the father and held by him at all times until x turns 18 (other than for any period in which x is travelling internationally). (b) y and z’s passports will be released to the mother and held by her at all times (other than for any period in which either child or children are travelling internationally).   y and z’s passports will be released to the mother and held by her at all times (other than for any period in which either child or children are travelling internationally).
independent children’s lawyer’s costs
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
introduction
evidence
the parties  the mother was living in a two bedroom apartment in suburb w. (b) she worked full-time as a professional. (c) the mother has re-partnered with mr r. they did not live together but have plans to do so in the future. (d) the father lived with the children in a two bedroom rental apartment above a business he operates in suburb v. (e) the father has not re-partnered.   she worked full-time as a professional. (c) the mother has re-partnered with mr r. they did not live together but have plans to do so in the future. (d) the father lived with the children in a two bedroom rental apartment above a business he operates in suburb v. (e) the father has not re-partnered.   the mother has re-partnered with mr r. they did not live together but have plans to do so in the future. (d) the father lived with the children in a two bedroom rental apartment above a business he operates in suburb v. (e) the father has not re-partnered.   the father lived with the children in a two bedroom rental apartment above a business he operates in suburb v. (e) the father has not re-partnered.   the father has not re-partnered.
proposals  the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x. (b) the mother have sole parental responsibility for y and z, provided she seek the father’s views about any decision she proposes. (c) y and z live with the mother, subject to the mother securing a residence so that y and z have separate bedrooms. (d) for a period of four months from the date final orders are made, y and z spend no time with the father and the father be restrained from communicating directly with them or being within 100 metres of the mother’s home, the maternal grandparent’s home and y and z’s school or extracurricular activities. (e) after four months, y and z spend time with the father on a graduated basis culminating in alternate weekends from after school on friday to 5.00 pm on sunday. (f) the father’s time with y be suspended if it coincides with y’s attendance at c centre.   the mother have sole parental responsibility for y and z, provided she seek the father’s views about any decision she proposes. (c) y and z live with the mother, subject to the mother securing a residence so that y and z have separate bedrooms. (d) for a period of four months from the date final orders are made, y and z spend no time with the father and the father be restrained from communicating directly with them or being within 100 metres of the mother’s home, the maternal grandparent’s home and y and z’s school or extracurricular activities. (e) after four months, y and z spend time with the father on a graduated basis culminating in alternate weekends from after school on friday to 5.00 pm on sunday. (f) the father’s time with y be suspended if it coincides with y’s attendance at c centre.   y and z live with the mother, subject to the mother securing a residence so that y and z have separate bedrooms. (d) for a period of four months from the date final orders are made, y and z spend no time with the father and the father be restrained from communicating directly with them or being within 100 metres of the mother’s home, the maternal grandparent’s home and y and z’s school or extracurricular activities. (e) after four months, y and z spend time with the father on a graduated basis culminating in alternate weekends from after school on friday to 5.00 pm on sunday. (f) the father’s time with y be suspended if it coincides with y’s attendance at c centre.   for a period of four months from the date final orders are made, y and z spend no time with the father and the father be restrained from communicating directly with them or being within 100 metres of the mother’s home, the maternal grandparent’s home and y and z’s school or extracurricular activities. (e) after four months, y and z spend time with the father on a graduated basis culminating in alternate weekends from after school on friday to 5.00 pm on sunday. (f) the father’s time with y be suspended if it coincides with y’s attendance at c centre.   after four months, y and z spend time with the father on a graduated basis culminating in alternate weekends from after school on friday to 5.00 pm on sunday. (f) the father’s time with y be suspended if it coincides with y’s attendance at c centre.   the father’s time with y be suspended if it coincides with y’s attendance at c centre.
matters of contention   whether the parties should share parental responsibility for x (as the father proposes) or should the mother exercise sole parental responsibility for all medical decisions, including mental health services, in relation to x’s gender dysphoria treatment (as the mother proposes). (b) whether the parents should share parental responsibility for y and z (as the father proposes), or whether the mother should exercise sole parental responsibility for y and z, in consultation with the father (as the mother and icl propose). (c) with whom y and z should live. the father sought orders that y live with him and that z should spend equal time with the parties. the mother, on the other hand, sought an order that y and z live with her. (d) the time y and z should spend with the parent with whom they are not living. the mother sought an order that y and z spend no time with the father for a six month period. the father said y should be permitted to decide how much time she spends with the mother. the details of and rationale for their competing proposals are considered later in the judgment. (e) whether further ancillary orders should be made to support the implementation of these orders. for example, whether any additional restraints on the parties should be made.   whether the parents should share parental responsibility for y and z (as the father proposes), or whether the mother should exercise sole parental responsibility for y and z, in consultation with the father (as the mother and icl propose). (c) with whom y and z should live. the father sought orders that y live with him and that z should spend equal time with the parties. the mother, on the other hand, sought an order that y and z live with her. (d) the time y and z should spend with the parent with whom they are not living. the mother sought an order that y and z spend no time with the father for a six month period. the father said y should be permitted to decide how much time she spends with the mother. the details of and rationale for their competing proposals are considered later in the judgment. (e) whether further ancillary orders should be made to support the implementation of these orders. for example, whether any additional restraints on the parties should be made.   with whom y and z should live. the father sought orders that y live with him and that z should spend equal time with the parties. the mother, on the other hand, sought an order that y and z live with her. (d) the time y and z should spend with the parent with whom they are not living. the mother sought an order that y and z spend no time with the father for a six month period. the father said y should be permitted to decide how much time she spends with the mother. the details of and rationale for their competing proposals are considered later in the judgment. (e) whether further ancillary orders should be made to support the implementation of these orders. for example, whether any additional restraints on the parties should be made.   the time y and z should spend with the parent with whom they are not living. the mother sought an order that y and z spend no time with the father for a six month period. the father said y should be permitted to decide how much time she spends with the mother. the details of and rationale for their competing proposals are considered later in the judgment. (e) whether further ancillary orders should be made to support the implementation of these orders. for example, whether any additional restraints on the parties should be made.   whether further ancillary orders should be made to support the implementation of these orders. for example, whether any additional restraints on the parties should be made.   x live with the mother and the father in accordance with his wishes. (b) each party inform the other of any change to their residential address and telephone number. (c) the father will continue to see his psychiatrist and psychologist, and follow all treatment recommendations. (d) both parties will ensure the children attend upon their individual specialist, psychiatrist and psychologist (“the children’s medical treaters”), and follow all treatment recommendations. (e) both parties will obtain a referral for y to c centre. (f) both parties will obtain a referral from x’s general practitioner (“gp”) to psychiatrist, dr p. (g) the parties will notify each other if a medical emergency arises for any of the children whilst in their respective care. (h) a range of restraints and injunctions to ensure that the children are not further exposed to matters arising from the parental conflict. (i) for the children to be delivered to the court children’s service on the day of judgment delivery, and for an appointed family consultant to explain the final orders to the children and record any relevant observations. (j) for the icl to provide a copy of the final orders to the children’s medical treaters and schools.   each party inform the other of any change to their residential address and telephone number. (c) the father will continue to see his psychiatrist and psychologist, and follow all treatment recommendations. (d) both parties will ensure the children attend upon their individual specialist, psychiatrist and psychologist (“the children’s medical treaters”), and follow all treatment recommendations. (e) both parties will obtain a referral for y to c centre. (f) both parties will obtain a referral from x’s general practitioner (“gp”) to psychiatrist, dr p. (g) the parties will notify each other if a medical emergency arises for any of the children whilst in their respective care. (h) a range of restraints and injunctions to ensure that the children are not further exposed to matters arising from the parental conflict. (i) for the children to be delivered to the court children’s service on the day of judgment delivery, and for an appointed family consultant to explain the final orders to the children and record any relevant observations. (j) for the icl to provide a copy of the final orders to the children’s medical treaters and schools.   the father will continue to see his psychiatrist and psychologist, and follow all treatment recommendations. (d) both parties will ensure the children attend upon their individual specialist, psychiatrist and psychologist (“the children’s medical treaters”), and follow all treatment recommendations. (e) both parties will obtain a referral for y to c centre. (f) both parties will obtain a referral from x’s general practitioner (“gp”) to psychiatrist, dr p. (g) the parties will notify each other if a medical emergency arises for any of the children whilst in their respective care. (h) a range of restraints and injunctions to ensure that the children are not further exposed to matters arising from the parental conflict. (i) for the children to be delivered to the court children’s service on the day of judgment delivery, and for an appointed family consultant to explain the final orders to the children and record any relevant observations. (j) for the icl to provide a copy of the final orders to the children’s medical treaters and schools.   both parties will ensure the children attend upon their individual specialist, psychiatrist and psychologist (“the children’s medical treaters”), and follow all treatment recommendations. (e) both parties will obtain a referral for y to c centre. (f) both parties will obtain a referral from x’s general practitioner (“gp”) to psychiatrist, dr p. (g) the parties will notify each other if a medical emergency arises for any of the children whilst in their respective care. (h) a range of restraints and injunctions to ensure that the children are not further exposed to matters arising from the parental conflict. (i) for the children to be delivered to the court children’s service on the day of judgment delivery, and for an appointed family consultant to explain the final orders to the children and record any relevant observations. (j) for the icl to provide a copy of the final orders to the children’s medical treaters and schools.   both parties will obtain a referral for y to c centre. (f) both parties will obtain a referral from x’s general practitioner (“gp”) to psychiatrist, dr p. (g) the parties will notify each other if a medical emergency arises for any of the children whilst in their respective care. (h) a range of restraints and injunctions to ensure that the children are not further exposed to matters arising from the parental conflict. (i) for the children to be delivered to the court children’s service on the day of judgment delivery, and for an appointed family consultant to explain the final orders to the children and record any relevant observations. (j) for the icl to provide a copy of the final orders to the children’s medical treaters and schools.   both parties will obtain a referral from x’s general practitioner (“gp”) to psychiatrist, dr p. (g) the parties will notify each other if a medical emergency arises for any of the children whilst in their respective care. (h) a range of restraints and injunctions to ensure that the children are not further exposed to matters arising from the parental conflict. (i) for the children to be delivered to the court children’s service on the day of judgment delivery, and for an appointed family consultant to explain the final orders to the children and record any relevant observations. (j) for the icl to provide a copy of the final orders to the children’s medical treaters and schools.   the parties will notify each other if a medical emergency arises for any of the children whilst in their respective care. (h) a range of restraints and injunctions to ensure that the children are not further exposed to matters arising from the parental conflict. (i) for the children to be delivered to the court children’s service on the day of judgment delivery, and for an appointed family consultant to explain the final orders to the children and record any relevant observations. (j) for the icl to provide a copy of the final orders to the children’s medical treaters and schools.   a range of restraints and injunctions to ensure that the children are not further exposed to matters arising from the parental conflict. (i) for the children to be delivered to the court children’s service on the day of judgment delivery, and for an appointed family consultant to explain the final orders to the children and record any relevant observations. (j) for the icl to provide a copy of the final orders to the children’s medical treaters and schools.   for the children to be delivered to the court children’s service on the day of judgment delivery, and for an appointed family consultant to explain the final orders to the children and record any relevant observations. (j) for the icl to provide a copy of the final orders to the children’s medical treaters and schools.   for the icl to provide a copy of the final orders to the children’s medical treaters and schools.
relevant background and procedural history
his mood was volatile, he was negative and depressed, he had significant sleep disturbance, his tolerance for different opinions further diminished, his memory was poor, and he struggled with daily routine and structure. he acknowledged suicidal ideation to me and experienced frequent interpersonal conflicts. (mother’s affidavit filed 13 march 2023, paragraph 112)   letter from dr cc to dr bb dated september 2019: dr cc summarised the mental health concerns for x and y, noting that both children looked flat and exhausted. he had commenced medication for y to be reviewed in six weeks’ time. (b) letter from dr cc to the dr bb dated 31 october 2019: dr cc reported that, despite some improvement on anti-depressant medication, y’s emotional regulation had decreased and she experienced episodes of crying and self-harm. these episodes were so dramatic that they left y debilitated and unable to attend school for over a week. dr cc recommended ceasing medication and commencing y on a trial of another anti-depressant. (c) letter from dr cc to dr bb dated 25 november 2019: dr cc reported that y’s mood had improved significantly and recommended that y remain off medication. he noted that he did not have plans to see y again, but was happy to re-engage if y required further pharmacological intervention.   letter from dr cc to the dr bb dated 31 october 2019: dr cc reported that, despite some improvement on anti-depressant medication, y’s emotional regulation had decreased and she experienced episodes of crying and self-harm. these episodes were so dramatic that they left y debilitated and unable to attend school for over a week. dr cc recommended ceasing medication and commencing y on a trial of another anti-depressant. (c) letter from dr cc to dr bb dated 25 november 2019: dr cc reported that y’s mood had improved significantly and recommended that y remain off medication. he noted that he did not have plans to see y again, but was happy to re-engage if y required further pharmacological intervention.   letter from dr cc to dr bb dated 25 november 2019: dr cc reported that y’s mood had improved significantly and recommended that y remain off medication. he noted that he did not have plans to see y again, but was happy to re-engage if y required further pharmacological intervention.
the single expert  mr d, the father’s treating psychologist. (b) ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (c) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (d) ms hh, the clinical and forensic psychologist who provided family therapy to the family. (e) dr e, the father’s treating psychiatrist. (f) ms ss, the mother’s treating psychologist.   ms j, y’s treating psychologist. (c) dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (d) ms hh, the clinical and forensic psychologist who provided family therapy to the family. (e) dr e, the father’s treating psychiatrist. (f) ms ss, the mother’s treating psychologist.   dr k, y’s treating psychiatrist. (d) ms hh, the clinical and forensic psychologist who provided family therapy to the family. (e) dr e, the father’s treating psychiatrist. (f) ms ss, the mother’s treating psychologist.   ms hh, the clinical and forensic psychologist who provided family therapy to the family. (e) dr e, the father’s treating psychiatrist. (f) ms ss, the mother’s treating psychologist.   dr e, the father’s treating psychiatrist. (f) ms ss, the mother’s treating psychologist.   ms ss, the mother’s treating psychologist.   per the original)   the mother gave evidence that she had been seeing x more regularly, mainly to assist with his schoolwork. (b) the mother’s relationship with y continued to be strained. (c) z continued to spend equal time with each parent with some issues. (d) y no longer attended kk school and had begun attending t school. however, y did not start at t school until 20 february 2023, three weeks after the school term began. this was due to issues with her enrolment and the father’s residential address. (e) y’s school attendance continued to be an issue, and evidence was given that she had five absent days from the period between 20 february 2023 and end of march 2023. (f) x’s school attendance continued to be an issue, however the father gave evidence that he felt that his attendance had improved. (g) the mother continued to live in an apartment in suburb w and the father continued to live above his business. (h) the father gave evidence that his current accommodation was unstable due to rental arrears and he appeared to have few means of financially supporting himself and the children.   the mother’s relationship with y continued to be strained. (c) z continued to spend equal time with each parent with some issues. (d) y no longer attended kk school and had begun attending t school. however, y did not start at t school until 20 february 2023, three weeks after the school term began. this was due to issues with her enrolment and the father’s residential address. (e) y’s school attendance continued to be an issue, and evidence was given that she had five absent days from the period between 20 february 2023 and end of march 2023. (f) x’s school attendance continued to be an issue, however the father gave evidence that he felt that his attendance had improved. (g) the mother continued to live in an apartment in suburb w and the father continued to live above his business. (h) the father gave evidence that his current accommodation was unstable due to rental arrears and he appeared to have few means of financially supporting himself and the children.   z continued to spend equal time with each parent with some issues. (d) y no longer attended kk school and had begun attending t school. however, y did not start at t school until 20 february 2023, three weeks after the school term began. this was due to issues with her enrolment and the father’s residential address. (e) y’s school attendance continued to be an issue, and evidence was given that she had five absent days from the period between 20 february 2023 and end of march 2023. (f) x’s school attendance continued to be an issue, however the father gave evidence that he felt that his attendance had improved. (g) the mother continued to live in an apartment in suburb w and the father continued to live above his business. (h) the father gave evidence that his current accommodation was unstable due to rental arrears and he appeared to have few means of financially supporting himself and the children.   y no longer attended kk school and had begun attending t school. however, y did not start at t school until 20 february 2023, three weeks after the school term began. this was due to issues with her enrolment and the father’s residential address. (e) y’s school attendance continued to be an issue, and evidence was given that she had five absent days from the period between 20 february 2023 and end of march 2023. (f) x’s school attendance continued to be an issue, however the father gave evidence that he felt that his attendance had improved. (g) the mother continued to live in an apartment in suburb w and the father continued to live above his business. (h) the father gave evidence that his current accommodation was unstable due to rental arrears and he appeared to have few means of financially supporting himself and the children.   y’s school attendance continued to be an issue, and evidence was given that she had five absent days from the period between 20 february 2023 and end of march 2023. (f) x’s school attendance continued to be an issue, however the father gave evidence that he felt that his attendance had improved. (g) the mother continued to live in an apartment in suburb w and the father continued to live above his business. (h) the father gave evidence that his current accommodation was unstable due to rental arrears and he appeared to have few means of financially supporting himself and the children.   x’s school attendance continued to be an issue, however the father gave evidence that he felt that his attendance had improved. (g) the mother continued to live in an apartment in suburb w and the father continued to live above his business. (h) the father gave evidence that his current accommodation was unstable due to rental arrears and he appeared to have few means of financially supporting himself and the children.   the mother continued to live in an apartment in suburb w and the father continued to live above his business. (h) the father gave evidence that his current accommodation was unstable due to rental arrears and he appeared to have few means of financially supporting himself and the children.   the father gave evidence that his current accommodation was unstable due to rental arrears and he appeared to have few means of financially supporting himself and the children.   the father has continued to vilify the mother to the children and that this affected the children’s evolving sense of self. this was particularly concerning in relation to y as she may develop a personality disorder given the nature of her experience. (b) the father continued to parent the children in a concerning way and shared with them his “paranoid world view”. this led them to believe that they were at risk of being harmed and neglected by the mother and the maternal extended family (as evidenced by the notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed by the father on 6 september 2021). (c) the current dynamic of the older children, x and y, spending little time with their mother reflected that they were strongly aligned, enmeshed and dependent upon their father. the longer that went on at this critical stage of their development, the more likely it would become ingrained as an integral part of their personality structure. (d) the suggestion that a therapist would be able to undo the potent dynamics of enmeshment, parental estrangement and evolving alienation in this fractured family was simply unrealistic.   the father continued to parent the children in a concerning way and shared with them his “paranoid world view”. this led them to believe that they were at risk of being harmed and neglected by the mother and the maternal extended family (as evidenced by the notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed by the father on 6 september 2021). (c) the current dynamic of the older children, x and y, spending little time with their mother reflected that they were strongly aligned, enmeshed and dependent upon their father. the longer that went on at this critical stage of their development, the more likely it would become ingrained as an integral part of their personality structure. (d) the suggestion that a therapist would be able to undo the potent dynamics of enmeshment, parental estrangement and evolving alienation in this fractured family was simply unrealistic.   the current dynamic of the older children, x and y, spending little time with their mother reflected that they were strongly aligned, enmeshed and dependent upon their father. the longer that went on at this critical stage of their development, the more likely it would become ingrained as an integral part of their personality structure. (d) the suggestion that a therapist would be able to undo the potent dynamics of enmeshment, parental estrangement and evolving alienation in this fractured family was simply unrealistic.   the suggestion that a therapist would be able to undo the potent dynamics of enmeshment, parental estrangement and evolving alienation in this fractured family was simply unrealistic.
every effort should be made to encourage her to maintain regular contact with her mother and maternal extended family. that said, her wish to primarily reside with her father should be respected given her age.   the father’s sustained negative narrative regarding the mother, as highlighted by the father’s ongoing notifications to dcj, including his most recent report made in february 2023. (b) the father’s perspective on the mother had not moved and, in light of the evidence, was unlikely to change. consequently, the current family dynamics would only continue, further amplifying the children’s identification with the father and polarisation from the mother. (c) the father’s proposal for equal shared parental responsibility of the children was not realistic in the circumstances, as was his belief that family therapy would be a viable option to undo the potent dynamics of the current family dynamic. (d) the father was struggling financially to maintain adequate accommodation and living security for the children. (e) the father was demonstrating an inability to provide basic care and stability for the children, in particular evidenced by the father’s ongoing struggle to ensure the children attended school. (f) the suggestion to refer y to c was a suitable proposal and it is a public health service well suited to address her mental health.   the father’s perspective on the mother had not moved and, in light of the evidence, was unlikely to change. consequently, the current family dynamics would only continue, further amplifying the children’s identification with the father and polarisation from the mother. (c) the father’s proposal for equal shared parental responsibility of the children was not realistic in the circumstances, as was his belief that family therapy would be a viable option to undo the potent dynamics of the current family dynamic. (d) the father was struggling financially to maintain adequate accommodation and living security for the children. (e) the father was demonstrating an inability to provide basic care and stability for the children, in particular evidenced by the father’s ongoing struggle to ensure the children attended school. (f) the suggestion to refer y to c was a suitable proposal and it is a public health service well suited to address her mental health.   the father’s proposal for equal shared parental responsibility of the children was not realistic in the circumstances, as was his belief that family therapy would be a viable option to undo the potent dynamics of the current family dynamic. (d) the father was struggling financially to maintain adequate accommodation and living security for the children. (e) the father was demonstrating an inability to provide basic care and stability for the children, in particular evidenced by the father’s ongoing struggle to ensure the children attended school. (f) the suggestion to refer y to c was a suitable proposal and it is a public health service well suited to address her mental health.   the father was struggling financially to maintain adequate accommodation and living security for the children. (e) the father was demonstrating an inability to provide basic care and stability for the children, in particular evidenced by the father’s ongoing struggle to ensure the children attended school. (f) the suggestion to refer y to c was a suitable proposal and it is a public health service well suited to address her mental health.   the father was demonstrating an inability to provide basic care and stability for the children, in particular evidenced by the father’s ongoing struggle to ensure the children attended school. (f) the suggestion to refer y to c was a suitable proposal and it is a public health service well suited to address her mental health.   the suggestion to refer y to c was a suitable proposal and it is a public health service well suited to address her mental health.
the applicable legal principles
the children
x
y  was strongly aligned with her father and older brother. she felt nurtured and supported in this environment. she expressed concern for her father and brother’s well‑being. she was well aware of their emotional vulnerabilities. [y] also felt protective of her younger brother. the report writer did not share [y]’s view that she was at risk in her mother’s care.
z
the children’s parents and other people in their lives
the capacity of the parents to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs  in june 2021, he requested the urgent release of funds held in trust to pay rental arrears in excess of $19,000. (b) he has previously been issued with a notice of eviction. (c) the father admitted that one of the reasons for y missing the first three weeks of school in 2023 was that he was in rental arrears and had to go through a process of proving his residential address to the school. he said that he “closed his business down to prove his residence”. this explanation was confusing and, if nothing else, points towards some chaotic aspects of the father’s life. (d) he conceded that his rent was currently in arrears, that his landlord continued to demand more rent, and that he was at risk of eviction. (e) while he was of the view that his business had good future prospects, the income he currently received from it was not sufficient to meet his and the children’s needs. at the time of the hearing, he was investigating ways of supplementing his income and alternative rental properties. under re-examination, the father said he would consult with a financial advisor but had not had the time to do so.   he has previously been issued with a notice of eviction. (c) the father admitted that one of the reasons for y missing the first three weeks of school in 2023 was that he was in rental arrears and had to go through a process of proving his residential address to the school. he said that he “closed his business down to prove his residence”. this explanation was confusing and, if nothing else, points towards some chaotic aspects of the father’s life. (d) he conceded that his rent was currently in arrears, that his landlord continued to demand more rent, and that he was at risk of eviction. (e) while he was of the view that his business had good future prospects, the income he currently received from it was not sufficient to meet his and the children’s needs. at the time of the hearing, he was investigating ways of supplementing his income and alternative rental properties. under re-examination, the father said he would consult with a financial advisor but had not had the time to do so.   the father admitted that one of the reasons for y missing the first three weeks of school in 2023 was that he was in rental arrears and had to go through a process of proving his residential address to the school. he said that he “closed his business down to prove his residence”. this explanation was confusing and, if nothing else, points towards some chaotic aspects of the father’s life. (d) he conceded that his rent was currently in arrears, that his landlord continued to demand more rent, and that he was at risk of eviction. (e) while he was of the view that his business had good future prospects, the income he currently received from it was not sufficient to meet his and the children’s needs. at the time of the hearing, he was investigating ways of supplementing his income and alternative rental properties. under re-examination, the father said he would consult with a financial advisor but had not had the time to do so.   he conceded that his rent was currently in arrears, that his landlord continued to demand more rent, and that he was at risk of eviction. (e) while he was of the view that his business had good future prospects, the income he currently received from it was not sufficient to meet his and the children’s needs. at the time of the hearing, he was investigating ways of supplementing his income and alternative rental properties. under re-examination, the father said he would consult with a financial advisor but had not had the time to do so.   while he was of the view that his business had good future prospects, the income he currently received from it was not sufficient to meet his and the children’s needs. at the time of the hearing, he was investigating ways of supplementing his income and alternative rental properties. under re-examination, the father said he would consult with a financial advisor but had not had the time to do so.   from 31 january 2020 to 6 march 2023, x had a total of 200 days of partial absences from school (for non-school reasons) and 190 whole absences (for non-school reasons). i noted that 35 of the days of absence arose whilst in the mother’s care (eight for being late, eight for appointments, and 10 days where x was sick or awaiting a covid-19 test result). (b) in the first term of 2022, y had whole absences and partial absences due to lateness. (c) from 5 october 2021 to 6 march 2023, x had a total of 100 partial absences and whole absences in the father’s care. (d) from 29 january 2020 to 4 november 2021, y had 40 absences and was late 58 times in the father’s care. (e) from 28 january 2022 to 5 december 2022, out of 190 days, y was absent 50 times and late 80 times in the father’s care. (f) from 20 february 2023 to 6 march 2023, y was late eight times over 11 days.   in the first term of 2022, y had whole absences and partial absences due to lateness. (c) from 5 october 2021 to 6 march 2023, x had a total of 100 partial absences and whole absences in the father’s care. (d) from 29 january 2020 to 4 november 2021, y had 40 absences and was late 58 times in the father’s care. (e) from 28 january 2022 to 5 december 2022, out of 190 days, y was absent 50 times and late 80 times in the father’s care. (f) from 20 february 2023 to 6 march 2023, y was late eight times over 11 days.   from 5 october 2021 to 6 march 2023, x had a total of 100 partial absences and whole absences in the father’s care. (d) from 29 january 2020 to 4 november 2021, y had 40 absences and was late 58 times in the father’s care. (e) from 28 january 2022 to 5 december 2022, out of 190 days, y was absent 50 times and late 80 times in the father’s care. (f) from 20 february 2023 to 6 march 2023, y was late eight times over 11 days.   from 29 january 2020 to 4 november 2021, y had 40 absences and was late 58 times in the father’s care. (e) from 28 january 2022 to 5 december 2022, out of 190 days, y was absent 50 times and late 80 times in the father’s care. (f) from 20 february 2023 to 6 march 2023, y was late eight times over 11 days.   from 28 january 2022 to 5 december 2022, out of 190 days, y was absent 50 times and late 80 times in the father’s care. (f) from 20 february 2023 to 6 march 2023, y was late eight times over 11 days.   from 20 february 2023 to 6 march 2023, y was late eight times over 11 days.   z reported sleeping in their school uniform to assist the father to get them to school on time. (b) the father introduced a fine system with the children where they would fine him if he was late getting them to school or shouted at them.   the father introduced a fine system with the children where they would fine him if he was late getting them to school or shouted at them.   was often late for school and for their appointments. there was a lack of consistency and lack of daily routine. she identified [mr avila] to struggle in his parenting capacity. he generally struggled to keep on top of everything. this occurred in the context of enmeshment, co-dependency and overprotectiveness. ([dr s]’s report, paragraph 285)
conclusions   the mother has not secured appropriate accommodation to house the children on a full‑time basis but i am satisfied that she will do so if orders were made necessitating it. (b) due to the open nature of the sleeping quarters and the access to the business downstairs, the father and the children have little private space, and what private space they do occupy is cluttered with their belongings. (c) the school attendance of the children is unacceptably low. (d) as a result of their living environment with the father and the ongoing conflict between the parties, the children were rundown and this manifests itself in physical illness. it can have an impact on their school attendance. (e) in the father’s household the children stayed up late and lived with little structure or rules. this also has an impact on their school attendance. (f) the children enjoyed the living arrangements they shared with the father. x and y expressed a preference for remaining in the father’s care, as opposed to the more structured and consistent living environment the mother offered. (g) the father has been behind in rent for a significant period of time and faced eviction. (h) the mother is the parent better placed to provide stable and consistent care for the children when compared to the father. (i) the father has at times been unable to properly and appropriately manage the children’s day to day care and needs due to his demonstrated inability to manage his own mental health. this is evidenced in the way the father has approached the mental health concerns of the children and their poor school attendance while in his care.   due to the open nature of the sleeping quarters and the access to the business downstairs, the father and the children have little private space, and what private space they do occupy is cluttered with their belongings. (c) the school attendance of the children is unacceptably low. (d) as a result of their living environment with the father and the ongoing conflict between the parties, the children were rundown and this manifests itself in physical illness. it can have an impact on their school attendance. (e) in the father’s household the children stayed up late and lived with little structure or rules. this also has an impact on their school attendance. (f) the children enjoyed the living arrangements they shared with the father. x and y expressed a preference for remaining in the father’s care, as opposed to the more structured and consistent living environment the mother offered. (g) the father has been behind in rent for a significant period of time and faced eviction. (h) the mother is the parent better placed to provide stable and consistent care for the children when compared to the father. (i) the father has at times been unable to properly and appropriately manage the children’s day to day care and needs due to his demonstrated inability to manage his own mental health. this is evidenced in the way the father has approached the mental health concerns of the children and their poor school attendance while in his care.   the school attendance of the children is unacceptably low. (d) as a result of their living environment with the father and the ongoing conflict between the parties, the children were rundown and this manifests itself in physical illness. it can have an impact on their school attendance. (e) in the father’s household the children stayed up late and lived with little structure or rules. this also has an impact on their school attendance. (f) the children enjoyed the living arrangements they shared with the father. x and y expressed a preference for remaining in the father’s care, as opposed to the more structured and consistent living environment the mother offered. (g) the father has been behind in rent for a significant period of time and faced eviction. (h) the mother is the parent better placed to provide stable and consistent care for the children when compared to the father. (i) the father has at times been unable to properly and appropriately manage the children’s day to day care and needs due to his demonstrated inability to manage his own mental health. this is evidenced in the way the father has approached the mental health concerns of the children and their poor school attendance while in his care.   as a result of their living environment with the father and the ongoing conflict between the parties, the children were rundown and this manifests itself in physical illness. it can have an impact on their school attendance. (e) in the father’s household the children stayed up late and lived with little structure or rules. this also has an impact on their school attendance. (f) the children enjoyed the living arrangements they shared with the father. x and y expressed a preference for remaining in the father’s care, as opposed to the more structured and consistent living environment the mother offered. (g) the father has been behind in rent for a significant period of time and faced eviction. (h) the mother is the parent better placed to provide stable and consistent care for the children when compared to the father. (i) the father has at times been unable to properly and appropriately manage the children’s day to day care and needs due to his demonstrated inability to manage his own mental health. this is evidenced in the way the father has approached the mental health concerns of the children and their poor school attendance while in his care.   in the father’s household the children stayed up late and lived with little structure or rules. this also has an impact on their school attendance. (f) the children enjoyed the living arrangements they shared with the father. x and y expressed a preference for remaining in the father’s care, as opposed to the more structured and consistent living environment the mother offered. (g) the father has been behind in rent for a significant period of time and faced eviction. (h) the mother is the parent better placed to provide stable and consistent care for the children when compared to the father. (i) the father has at times been unable to properly and appropriately manage the children’s day to day care and needs due to his demonstrated inability to manage his own mental health. this is evidenced in the way the father has approached the mental health concerns of the children and their poor school attendance while in his care.   the children enjoyed the living arrangements they shared with the father. x and y expressed a preference for remaining in the father’s care, as opposed to the more structured and consistent living environment the mother offered. (g) the father has been behind in rent for a significant period of time and faced eviction. (h) the mother is the parent better placed to provide stable and consistent care for the children when compared to the father. (i) the father has at times been unable to properly and appropriately manage the children’s day to day care and needs due to his demonstrated inability to manage his own mental health. this is evidenced in the way the father has approached the mental health concerns of the children and their poor school attendance while in his care.   the father has been behind in rent for a significant period of time and faced eviction. (h) the mother is the parent better placed to provide stable and consistent care for the children when compared to the father. (i) the father has at times been unable to properly and appropriately manage the children’s day to day care and needs due to his demonstrated inability to manage his own mental health. this is evidenced in the way the father has approached the mental health concerns of the children and their poor school attendance while in his care.   the mother is the parent better placed to provide stable and consistent care for the children when compared to the father. (i) the father has at times been unable to properly and appropriately manage the children’s day to day care and needs due to his demonstrated inability to manage his own mental health. this is evidenced in the way the father has approached the mental health concerns of the children and their poor school attendance while in his care.   the father has at times been unable to properly and appropriately manage the children’s day to day care and needs due to his demonstrated inability to manage his own mental health. this is evidenced in the way the father has approached the mental health concerns of the children and their poor school attendance while in his care.
the extent to which the parents have participated in making major long-term decisions, spend time with and communicate with the children   when they first separated, they agreed to a week about arrangement for the children. (b) they both supported x’s gender dysphoria and gender identity, including ensuring support and medical treatment for his transition. (c) at the final hearing, the parties agreed to respect x’s wishes in relation to which parent he lives and spends time with. (d) the parties both play an active role in the psychiatric and psychological treatment of their children.   they both supported x’s gender dysphoria and gender identity, including ensuring support and medical treatment for his transition. (c) at the final hearing, the parties agreed to respect x’s wishes in relation to which parent he lives and spends time with. (d) the parties both play an active role in the psychiatric and psychological treatment of their children.   at the final hearing, the parties agreed to respect x’s wishes in relation to which parent he lives and spends time with. (d) the parties both play an active role in the psychiatric and psychological treatment of their children.   the parties both play an active role in the psychiatric and psychological treatment of their children.   y’s continuing enrolment at kk school and late enrolment at t school. (b) the mother’s trip to country ll with z and the maternal family. (c) z’s enrolment in a sports team.   the mother’s trip to country ll with z and the maternal family. (c) z’s enrolment in a sports team.   z’s enrolment in a sports team.   a lack of consultation around medical appointments, especially specialists including x’s medical treatment for his gender dysphoria. (b) z’s enrolment in a region r sports team. (c) y’s school enrolment processes including to oo school, her withdrawal from kk school and subsequent enrolment at t school.   z’s enrolment in a region r sports team. (c) y’s school enrolment processes including to oo school, her withdrawal from kk school and subsequent enrolment at t school.   y’s school enrolment processes including to oo school, her withdrawal from kk school and subsequent enrolment at t school.
conclusions
the nature of the relationship of each child with each parent and with significant other persons
relationship with each parent
... the children had been constantly destabilised by their mother. he expressed his opposition to their contact with the maternal extended family as their actions had been ‘extremely dangerous’. ([dr s]’s report, paragraph 196)   had received suboptimal care. his care should ideally be transferred from the paediatrician to an experienced adolescent psychiatrist. [dr p], [suburb w], could be a suitable choice given his extensive experience in the management of gender dysphoria, transitioning, mood disorders and adhd. [y] [sic] requires regular follow up with her treating psychiatrist. she was currently receiving suboptimal treatment as she had not attended for review of her medication dose. (as per the original)
the father’s approach to the children’s care was problematic. he was evidently loving, but there was a lack of balance between care and control. he was self-referential when considering the children’s experience. an enmeshed and co-dependent relationship with the children was identified. this was consistent with the observations of [y]’s [sic] treating psychologist. both her psychologist and psychiatrist observed that he had failed to consistently attend follow up appointments. as a result, [y] [sic] remained on suboptimal treatment for her ocd. her psychologist identified that his disorganisation and lack of routine had contributed to the children failing to consistently attend school. his overprotectiveness had exacerbated the children’s emotional and behavioural vulnerabilities, rather than contain their dysfunction. when provided with feedback during the assessment, he became highly defensive. (as per the original)
relationship with the maternal family
but all along i suspected it was a problem because [dr bb] would write the script. you need to take into account [dr bb] doesn’t believe that i have adhd, anxiety, depression, or that i’m trans. he was still thinking i was a girl. these people should not have been prescribing my medication. i was put on a drastically lower dose by my gp. (as per the original)
when asked about [z]’s view regarding the planned holiday with his maternal extended family to [country ll], [mr avila] explained that [z] had initially been excited and was really upset with his father for refusing to allow him [sic] to go. [z] had responded, “you’re not listening to me.” [mr avila] had explained that it was inappropriate for his [sic] mother to arrange the holiday without his permission. for days, [z] had questioned whether he [sic] was going to allow them to go or not. finally, [z] had agreed that he [sic] did not want to go because of the way it had been arranged. further, [z] was fearful of a family friend who had bullied him [sic] who was also going on the trip. [ms hardin] had reportedly dismissed this as “just a game”. (as per the original)
the loss of the maternal extended family in the children’s lives will be detrimental to their future, as they will lose important figures with the potential to guide and support them into the future. this will also serve to amplify their paranoid worldview, that key figures cannot be trusted.
relationship with mr r, the mother’s current partner  has a strong and loving relationship with all three children, (b) takes a rigid and negative view of the mother, (c) appeared unable to prioritise the children’s needs ahead of his own negative feelings for the mother, and (d) through his actions and behaviour, has caused an enmeshed and co-dependent relationship with the children to develop.   takes a rigid and negative view of the mother, (c) appeared unable to prioritise the children’s needs ahead of his own negative feelings for the mother, and (d) through his actions and behaviour, has caused an enmeshed and co-dependent relationship with the children to develop.   appeared unable to prioritise the children’s needs ahead of his own negative feelings for the mother, and (d) through his actions and behaviour, has caused an enmeshed and co-dependent relationship with the children to develop.   through his actions and behaviour, has caused an enmeshed and co-dependent relationship with the children to develop.
the lifestyle and background of the children and the parents (including gender identification)
... in managing [x]’s treatment [mr avila] will be unable to navigate processes, follow instructions correctly, identify the pertinent questions to ask, and approach the matter as a parent rather than as a friend or peer. (mother’s affidavit filed 13 march 2023, paragraph 43)
the attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each parent  the ultimate withdrawal of y from kk school and enrolment at t school. (b) the cessation of the relationship between y and her cousin gg in september 2021. (c) the dispute during the april 2022 incident about the mother spending time with the children, including the maternal grandfather’s attendance at suburb v to collect the children and police involvement. (d) some occasions in april and may 2022 when z resisted spending time with the mother. (e) the father’s refusal to allow z to travel on a holiday to country ll with the mother in 2022.   the cessation of the relationship between y and her cousin gg in september 2021. (c) the dispute during the april 2022 incident about the mother spending time with the children, including the maternal grandfather’s attendance at suburb v to collect the children and police involvement. (d) some occasions in april and may 2022 when z resisted spending time with the mother. (e) the father’s refusal to allow z to travel on a holiday to country ll with the mother in 2022.   the dispute during the april 2022 incident about the mother spending time with the children, including the maternal grandfather’s attendance at suburb v to collect the children and police involvement. (d) some occasions in april and may 2022 when z resisted spending time with the mother. (e) the father’s refusal to allow z to travel on a holiday to country ll with the mother in 2022.   some occasions in april and may 2022 when z resisted spending time with the mother. (e) the father’s refusal to allow z to travel on a holiday to country ll with the mother in 2022.   the father’s refusal to allow z to travel on a holiday to country ll with the mother in 2022.
when this allegation was explored, [mr avila] continued in the emotive fashion, ‘she makes every interaction with them a tool for manipulation. my brain is exploding. i have 40 pages of this. she threatened to contact the police about them. she said to [z], “if you don’t come with me now, dad will get in trouble with the authorities for breaking the rules” after she had called the police. [z] thought that both of us wanted him dragged off to juvie.” (as per the original)
at the time of this incident, [mr avila] had spoken to [z] about his [sic] refusal to go with his mother, ‘i told him [sic] that if he [sic] did not want to go, he [sic] absolutely had to come and talk to her himself. he [sic] couldn’t just not just go.’ the report writer noted that this was different from ensuring that [z] went with his [sic] mother. (as per the original)
the father had encouraged [x] and [y] to view their mother as pathological and uncaring given her more pragmatic approach to their care. this promoted their idealisation of him and was seen to be damaging to their psychological development.
... he did not trust or respect the mother’s approach to parenting given his lived experience. he had repeatedly supported the children in their complaints about her controlling and disrespectful communication and parenting style. thus, although he asserted that he had consistently supported their relationship with her, he had failed to ensure the maintenance of contact.
her mother would say hurtful things about [the father]. when [y] brought this up, she would deny this but she said [x] had witnessed this. [y] complained that her mother had ‘gaslighted’ her. she would hear her mother talking about her dad with her friends in the next room. she would refer to him wearing a dress and a topknot. [y] explained that her father often wore dresses. this had become iconic in the [business]. her mother viewed it as silly and unorthodox. [y] also did not like that her mother discussed things that should not be discussed such as child support. when [y] had talked about getting pocket money from dad, her mum responded that she paid him money because his business ran at a loss. this made [y] freak out about their financial position. (as per the original)   the father has and continues to influence the views of the children. (b) the father is now influencing z to take a critical or negative view of the mother, in a similar way that x and y have. (c) it is likely that, if the father’s behaviour continues, z will resist spending time with his mother, as the older siblings have done.   the father is now influencing z to take a critical or negative view of the mother, in a similar way that x and y have. (c) it is likely that, if the father’s behaviour continues, z will resist spending time with his mother, as the older siblings have done.   it is likely that, if the father’s behaviour continues, z will resist spending time with his mother, as the older siblings have done.
what final parenting orders should the court make?
parental responsibility
although the maintenance of shared parental responsibility for all three children would be ideal, if the parents remain unable to agree on core issues related to health and education, the mother was identified to have a more balanced approach to this. (as per the original)
live with orders
there are many factors that may go to the weight that should be given to the wishes of the children and these will vary from case to case and it is undesirable and indeed impossible to catalogue or confine them in the manner suggested. ultimately it is a process of intuitive syntheses on the part of any trial judge weighing up all the evidence relevant to the wishes of the children and applying it in a common sense way as one of the factors in the overall assessment of the children’s best interests.
strengths and weaknesses of the father’s proposal  it will accord with the express wishes of both x and y. (b) x and y will continue to live with the father, who they love, and it is a lifestyle they clearly prefer. (c) such an outcome ensures that the children will remain living in an area they are familiar with (most likely in suburb v). they have resided in the suburb v area for several years, attended schools close by, participated in extracurricular activities in the area, and have a network of friends within the community. (d) the children’s attachment to each other is clear and a status quo order will ensure that that attachment is not disturbed. (e) an order for the mother to exercise sole parental responsibility, even if they remain living with their father, may address some of the concerns raised about suboptimal treatment of their mental health.   x and y will continue to live with the father, who they love, and it is a lifestyle they clearly prefer. (c) such an outcome ensures that the children will remain living in an area they are familiar with (most likely in suburb v). they have resided in the suburb v area for several years, attended schools close by, participated in extracurricular activities in the area, and have a network of friends within the community. (d) the children’s attachment to each other is clear and a status quo order will ensure that that attachment is not disturbed. (e) an order for the mother to exercise sole parental responsibility, even if they remain living with their father, may address some of the concerns raised about suboptimal treatment of their mental health.   such an outcome ensures that the children will remain living in an area they are familiar with (most likely in suburb v). they have resided in the suburb v area for several years, attended schools close by, participated in extracurricular activities in the area, and have a network of friends within the community. (d) the children’s attachment to each other is clear and a status quo order will ensure that that attachment is not disturbed. (e) an order for the mother to exercise sole parental responsibility, even if they remain living with their father, may address some of the concerns raised about suboptimal treatment of their mental health.   the children’s attachment to each other is clear and a status quo order will ensure that that attachment is not disturbed. (e) an order for the mother to exercise sole parental responsibility, even if they remain living with their father, may address some of the concerns raised about suboptimal treatment of their mental health.   an order for the mother to exercise sole parental responsibility, even if they remain living with their father, may address some of the concerns raised about suboptimal treatment of their mental health.   x and y are strongly aligned, enmeshed and dependent upon their father. y is at a critical stage of her development and unless orders are made to change the status quo, it is likely that this dynamic would become an integral part of their personality structure. if left unaddressed, it will cause y psychological harm. (b) the father’s sustained negative narrative regarding the mother means it is unlikely that in the future he would support and foster the children’s relationship with the mother and the maternal family. thus the current family dynamics would continue, resulting in an amplification of the children’s identification with the father and polarisation from the mother. ms hh, the family therapist, expressed to dr s “grave concerns for the children’s future given the unresolved family dynamics”. unless changes are brought about, this “unresolved family dynamic” will continue. (c) there were no changes or suggestions made by the father that would address the current circumstances of the children, described by dr s in cross-examination as problematic, concerning and unsatisfactory for the children. (d) the father will most likely struggle to manage his own mental health issues, which has a direct impact on the children’s wellbeing, health, school attendance, and quality of life. (e) there will be no improvement in y’s mental health. (f) there would be no improvement in the relationship between the mother and y, and, even if the relationship improved, that may not translate into y spending more time with the mother. (g) z is starting to reject their mother. in the face of the negativity displayed by the father and older siblings, there is a risk that z will increasingly align and become more enmeshed with them. they may also validate and encourage this behaviour. (h) there is the potential for z’s mental health, which to date has been unremarkable, to become negatively impacted. (i) the father likely faces eviction from his residence. the life the children have grown to love with the father most likely cannot continue long-term.   the father’s sustained negative narrative regarding the mother means it is unlikely that in the future he would support and foster the children’s relationship with the mother and the maternal family. thus the current family dynamics would continue, resulting in an amplification of the children’s identification with the father and polarisation from the mother. ms hh, the family therapist, expressed to dr s “grave concerns for the children’s future given the unresolved family dynamics”. unless changes are brought about, this “unresolved family dynamic” will continue. (c) there were no changes or suggestions made by the father that would address the current circumstances of the children, described by dr s in cross-examination as problematic, concerning and unsatisfactory for the children. (d) the father will most likely struggle to manage his own mental health issues, which has a direct impact on the children’s wellbeing, health, school attendance, and quality of life. (e) there will be no improvement in y’s mental health. (f) there would be no improvement in the relationship between the mother and y, and, even if the relationship improved, that may not translate into y spending more time with the mother. (g) z is starting to reject their mother. in the face of the negativity displayed by the father and older siblings, there is a risk that z will increasingly align and become more enmeshed with them. they may also validate and encourage this behaviour. (h) there is the potential for z’s mental health, which to date has been unremarkable, to become negatively impacted. (i) the father likely faces eviction from his residence. the life the children have grown to love with the father most likely cannot continue long-term.   there were no changes or suggestions made by the father that would address the current circumstances of the children, described by dr s in cross-examination as problematic, concerning and unsatisfactory for the children. (d) the father will most likely struggle to manage his own mental health issues, which has a direct impact on the children’s wellbeing, health, school attendance, and quality of life. (e) there will be no improvement in y’s mental health. (f) there would be no improvement in the relationship between the mother and y, and, even if the relationship improved, that may not translate into y spending more time with the mother. (g) z is starting to reject their mother. in the face of the negativity displayed by the father and older siblings, there is a risk that z will increasingly align and become more enmeshed with them. they may also validate and encourage this behaviour. (h) there is the potential for z’s mental health, which to date has been unremarkable, to become negatively impacted. (i) the father likely faces eviction from his residence. the life the children have grown to love with the father most likely cannot continue long-term.   the father will most likely struggle to manage his own mental health issues, which has a direct impact on the children’s wellbeing, health, school attendance, and quality of life. (e) there will be no improvement in y’s mental health. (f) there would be no improvement in the relationship between the mother and y, and, even if the relationship improved, that may not translate into y spending more time with the mother. (g) z is starting to reject their mother. in the face of the negativity displayed by the father and older siblings, there is a risk that z will increasingly align and become more enmeshed with them. they may also validate and encourage this behaviour. (h) there is the potential for z’s mental health, which to date has been unremarkable, to become negatively impacted. (i) the father likely faces eviction from his residence. the life the children have grown to love with the father most likely cannot continue long-term.   there will be no improvement in y’s mental health. (f) there would be no improvement in the relationship between the mother and y, and, even if the relationship improved, that may not translate into y spending more time with the mother. (g) z is starting to reject their mother. in the face of the negativity displayed by the father and older siblings, there is a risk that z will increasingly align and become more enmeshed with them. they may also validate and encourage this behaviour. (h) there is the potential for z’s mental health, which to date has been unremarkable, to become negatively impacted. (i) the father likely faces eviction from his residence. the life the children have grown to love with the father most likely cannot continue long-term.   there would be no improvement in the relationship between the mother and y, and, even if the relationship improved, that may not translate into y spending more time with the mother. (g) z is starting to reject their mother. in the face of the negativity displayed by the father and older siblings, there is a risk that z will increasingly align and become more enmeshed with them. they may also validate and encourage this behaviour. (h) there is the potential for z’s mental health, which to date has been unremarkable, to become negatively impacted. (i) the father likely faces eviction from his residence. the life the children have grown to love with the father most likely cannot continue long-term.   z is starting to reject their mother. in the face of the negativity displayed by the father and older siblings, there is a risk that z will increasingly align and become more enmeshed with them. they may also validate and encourage this behaviour. (h) there is the potential for z’s mental health, which to date has been unremarkable, to become negatively impacted. (i) the father likely faces eviction from his residence. the life the children have grown to love with the father most likely cannot continue long-term.   there is the potential for z’s mental health, which to date has been unremarkable, to become negatively impacted. (i) the father likely faces eviction from his residence. the life the children have grown to love with the father most likely cannot continue long-term.   the father likely faces eviction from his residence. the life the children have grown to love with the father most likely cannot continue long-term.
strengths and weaknesses of the mother’s proposal  the mother can provide a stable and loving environment for the children. (b) the mother is the parent most likely to promote and support the father’s relationship with the children. it will most likely result in the children enjoying a meaningful relationship with both the maternal and paternal family. (c) the mother is the parent more likely to ensure better school attendance, compared to the father. (d) long-term, it is likely that y’s mental health would improve in the mother’s care. this was the view of dr s, who felt that over time, and with good consistent care, psychological support and pharmacotherapy, y’s mental health would settle. (e) x would be relieved of the parental role and protective responsibility that he has played. (f) the change in residence would allow the father time for respite. it would allow the children the opportunity to take less responsibility in parenting themselves and introduce some structure into their lives especially around sleep routines, the use of electronic devices, diet, and consistent medical treatment. (g) whilst this outcome would result in a significant change of circumstances for y, the mother has the support of her family and partner, including to managing y’s oppositional response to changing residence.   the mother is the parent most likely to promote and support the father’s relationship with the children. it will most likely result in the children enjoying a meaningful relationship with both the maternal and paternal family. (c) the mother is the parent more likely to ensure better school attendance, compared to the father. (d) long-term, it is likely that y’s mental health would improve in the mother’s care. this was the view of dr s, who felt that over time, and with good consistent care, psychological support and pharmacotherapy, y’s mental health would settle. (e) x would be relieved of the parental role and protective responsibility that he has played. (f) the change in residence would allow the father time for respite. it would allow the children the opportunity to take less responsibility in parenting themselves and introduce some structure into their lives especially around sleep routines, the use of electronic devices, diet, and consistent medical treatment. (g) whilst this outcome would result in a significant change of circumstances for y, the mother has the support of her family and partner, including to managing y’s oppositional response to changing residence.   the mother is the parent more likely to ensure better school attendance, compared to the father. (d) long-term, it is likely that y’s mental health would improve in the mother’s care. this was the view of dr s, who felt that over time, and with good consistent care, psychological support and pharmacotherapy, y’s mental health would settle. (e) x would be relieved of the parental role and protective responsibility that he has played. (f) the change in residence would allow the father time for respite. it would allow the children the opportunity to take less responsibility in parenting themselves and introduce some structure into their lives especially around sleep routines, the use of electronic devices, diet, and consistent medical treatment. (g) whilst this outcome would result in a significant change of circumstances for y, the mother has the support of her family and partner, including to managing y’s oppositional response to changing residence.   long-term, it is likely that y’s mental health would improve in the mother’s care. this was the view of dr s, who felt that over time, and with good consistent care, psychological support and pharmacotherapy, y’s mental health would settle. (e) x would be relieved of the parental role and protective responsibility that he has played. (f) the change in residence would allow the father time for respite. it would allow the children the opportunity to take less responsibility in parenting themselves and introduce some structure into their lives especially around sleep routines, the use of electronic devices, diet, and consistent medical treatment. (g) whilst this outcome would result in a significant change of circumstances for y, the mother has the support of her family and partner, including to managing y’s oppositional response to changing residence.   x would be relieved of the parental role and protective responsibility that he has played. (f) the change in residence would allow the father time for respite. it would allow the children the opportunity to take less responsibility in parenting themselves and introduce some structure into their lives especially around sleep routines, the use of electronic devices, diet, and consistent medical treatment. (g) whilst this outcome would result in a significant change of circumstances for y, the mother has the support of her family and partner, including to managing y’s oppositional response to changing residence.   the change in residence would allow the father time for respite. it would allow the children the opportunity to take less responsibility in parenting themselves and introduce some structure into their lives especially around sleep routines, the use of electronic devices, diet, and consistent medical treatment. (g) whilst this outcome would result in a significant change of circumstances for y, the mother has the support of her family and partner, including to managing y’s oppositional response to changing residence.   whilst this outcome would result in a significant change of circumstances for y, the mother has the support of her family and partner, including to managing y’s oppositional response to changing residence.   given their close sibling relationship, the younger children will miss living with x and x will miss having them in his household. (b) it would be contrary to y’s clearly expressed and long held wishes. she has lived her life, at least in recent years, with authority to make decisions on her own behalf and has been actively encouraged to do so. by removing that agency, there is a strong possibility that she will ignore the orders made. this could play out by her running away and seeking the father out. indeed, dr s opined at paragraphs 320 and 321 of his report that this might result in:   it would be contrary to y’s clearly expressed and long held wishes. she has lived her life, at least in recent years, with authority to make decisions on her own behalf and has been actively encouraged to do so. by removing that agency, there is a strong possibility that she will ignore the orders made. this could play out by her running away and seeking the father out. indeed, dr s opined at paragraphs 320 and 321 of his report that this might result in:
...an exacerbation of their mood disturbance and behavioural dysregulation. they would be likely to respond by becoming oppositional and running away. ... the children would experience an exacerbation of emotional distress should they be separated from their loved father. (as per the original)   initially at least, y’s mental health may deteriorate. (d) while the mother offered a more stable future for the children, this might not be achieved in the short-term. the mother was non-committal about both her plans for the children’s accommodation and schooling should orders be made that they live with her. the mother also has plans to start a family with mr r, and this will add a further unknown dimension to the household. (e) y and z may need to change schools. it could potentially lead to a third change in schools in less than a year for y. she would need to make new friends and adjust to a new school environment when she already has significant health challenges. this would cause her further upheaval and trauma in the short-term and may not be in her best interests. (f) there were concerns about how y can manage her ocd issues if she has to travel distances to school or share a bedroom with z. the mother understood this issue and had been in discussion with y to make changes to her room. i note that y has also been living in the same household as z her entire life.   while the mother offered a more stable future for the children, this might not be achieved in the short-term. the mother was non-committal about both her plans for the children’s accommodation and schooling should orders be made that they live with her. the mother also has plans to start a family with mr r, and this will add a further unknown dimension to the household. (e) y and z may need to change schools. it could potentially lead to a third change in schools in less than a year for y. she would need to make new friends and adjust to a new school environment when she already has significant health challenges. this would cause her further upheaval and trauma in the short-term and may not be in her best interests. (f) there were concerns about how y can manage her ocd issues if she has to travel distances to school or share a bedroom with z. the mother understood this issue and had been in discussion with y to make changes to her room. i note that y has also been living in the same household as z her entire life.   y and z may need to change schools. it could potentially lead to a third change in schools in less than a year for y. she would need to make new friends and adjust to a new school environment when she already has significant health challenges. this would cause her further upheaval and trauma in the short-term and may not be in her best interests. (f) there were concerns about how y can manage her ocd issues if she has to travel distances to school or share a bedroom with z. the mother understood this issue and had been in discussion with y to make changes to her room. i note that y has also been living in the same household as z her entire life.   there were concerns about how y can manage her ocd issues if she has to travel distances to school or share a bedroom with z. the mother understood this issue and had been in discussion with y to make changes to her room. i note that y has also been living in the same household as z her entire life.
conclusions on live with orders  ensuring that the children have the benefit and involvement of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives. i am concerned that the father’s proposal will not ensure the meaningful involvement of the mother in the children’s lives to the maximum extent. by contrast, the mother’s proposal will. (b) ensuring that the children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential. i am concerned that the father’s proposal will not ensure that the children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential. by contrast, the mother’s proposal will. (c) when i reflect on the principles underlying these objects that are set out in s 60b(2), i am also satisfied that the mother’s proposal best achieves these objects.   ensuring that the children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential. i am concerned that the father’s proposal will not ensure that the children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential. by contrast, the mother’s proposal will. (c) when i reflect on the principles underlying these objects that are set out in s 60b(2), i am also satisfied that the mother’s proposal best achieves these objects.   when i reflect on the principles underlying these objects that are set out in s 60b(2), i am also satisfied that the mother’s proposal best achieves these objects.   both y and z would benefit from the greater stability and security that will be provided by the mother. i am confident that she is the parent best placed to manage x and y’s mental health as well as their school attendance. (b) the father has demonstrated no capacity to shield the children from these proceedings and the negative views he has of the mother. leaving the children to live with their father will most likely result in a continuation of their alignment and enmeshment with the father’s views, a poor relationship with their mother, and be emotionally harmful for them. i am however more confident that the mother will better ensure that the children enjoy a meaningful relationship with each parent in the future. y and z will be given the opportunity to re-establish their relationships with the mother and the extended maternal family. (c) while y’s mental health is currently unstable and may decline in the short-term, the mother has engaged appropriately with y’s therapists and will continue to do so. i accept that the orders made might lead to a short-term decline in her mental health because it is contrary to her express wishes. this will be a destabilising and distressing event for her. i am satisfied that the mother is able to support y’s mental health needs during this transitional period. the children’s mental health issues are likely to have been exacerbated by the nature of the father’s relationship with each of them. ultimately, and hopefully, there may be vast improvements in her mental health within the context of the stability provided by the mother’s household. (d) in supporting the children through these changes, the mother will also have the support of her family and friends. however, i am satisfied that the mother will work closely with y’s medical treaters and will seek out professional assistance when necessary during the transition into her care.   the father has demonstrated no capacity to shield the children from these proceedings and the negative views he has of the mother. leaving the children to live with their father will most likely result in a continuation of their alignment and enmeshment with the father’s views, a poor relationship with their mother, and be emotionally harmful for them. i am however more confident that the mother will better ensure that the children enjoy a meaningful relationship with each parent in the future. y and z will be given the opportunity to re-establish their relationships with the mother and the extended maternal family. (c) while y’s mental health is currently unstable and may decline in the short-term, the mother has engaged appropriately with y’s therapists and will continue to do so. i accept that the orders made might lead to a short-term decline in her mental health because it is contrary to her express wishes. this will be a destabilising and distressing event for her. i am satisfied that the mother is able to support y’s mental health needs during this transitional period. the children’s mental health issues are likely to have been exacerbated by the nature of the father’s relationship with each of them. ultimately, and hopefully, there may be vast improvements in her mental health within the context of the stability provided by the mother’s household. (d) in supporting the children through these changes, the mother will also have the support of her family and friends. however, i am satisfied that the mother will work closely with y’s medical treaters and will seek out professional assistance when necessary during the transition into her care.   while y’s mental health is currently unstable and may decline in the short-term, the mother has engaged appropriately with y’s therapists and will continue to do so. i accept that the orders made might lead to a short-term decline in her mental health because it is contrary to her express wishes. this will be a destabilising and distressing event for her. i am satisfied that the mother is able to support y’s mental health needs during this transitional period. the children’s mental health issues are likely to have been exacerbated by the nature of the father’s relationship with each of them. ultimately, and hopefully, there may be vast improvements in her mental health within the context of the stability provided by the mother’s household. (d) in supporting the children through these changes, the mother will also have the support of her family and friends. however, i am satisfied that the mother will work closely with y’s medical treaters and will seek out professional assistance when necessary during the transition into her care.   in supporting the children through these changes, the mother will also have the support of her family and friends. however, i am satisfied that the mother will work closely with y’s medical treaters and will seek out professional assistance when necessary during the transition into her care.
implementation of these changes
spend time with orders   x is currently completing his hsc. he will have sat his last exam shortly before the conclusion of the moratorium period. whilst the father is not restrained from making arrangements to see and spend time with the children through the mother, the moratorium period will allow the father to give his undivided support and attention to x. (b) the moratorium period will give the father time to restore his parenting capacity so that he is better placed to appropriately parent the children. at the hearing, the father was visibly tired. he said he had not had a break for many years. his financial circumstances were tenuous and he said that his business needed more of his attention to be viable. this break from parenting y and z will hopefully allow him to put his business back on track and make some hard decisions about whether he can retain the business and residential property in suburb v. it is perhaps better that he is able to make these decisions and if necessary transition to new accommodation without y and z in his care. (c) there is no question that the father loves and cares deeply for his children. however, his inability to also concurrently manage his own mental health issues during these proceedings has undoubtedly had an impact on the way that he has exercised judgment and made decisions. he needs to stabilise his mental health in order to improve his parenting capacity and hopefully he can use the next four months to also focus on self‑care.   the moratorium period will give the father time to restore his parenting capacity so that he is better placed to appropriately parent the children. at the hearing, the father was visibly tired. he said he had not had a break for many years. his financial circumstances were tenuous and he said that his business needed more of his attention to be viable. this break from parenting y and z will hopefully allow him to put his business back on track and make some hard decisions about whether he can retain the business and residential property in suburb v. it is perhaps better that he is able to make these decisions and if necessary transition to new accommodation without y and z in his care. (c) there is no question that the father loves and cares deeply for his children. however, his inability to also concurrently manage his own mental health issues during these proceedings has undoubtedly had an impact on the way that he has exercised judgment and made decisions. he needs to stabilise his mental health in order to improve his parenting capacity and hopefully he can use the next four months to also focus on self‑care.   there is no question that the father loves and cares deeply for his children. however, his inability to also concurrently manage his own mental health issues during these proceedings has undoubtedly had an impact on the way that he has exercised judgment and made decisions. he needs to stabilise his mental health in order to improve his parenting capacity and hopefully he can use the next four months to also focus on self‑care.   the mother’s home, (b) the mother’s parents’ home, (c) the grounds of any school that y or z may attend from time to time, and (d) any after school activity or extracurricular activities that y and z may participate in from time to time.   the mother’s parents’ home, (c) the grounds of any school that y or z may attend from time to time, and (d) any after school activity or extracurricular activities that y and z may participate in from time to time.
family therapy   x’s passport will be released to the father and held by him at all times until x turns 18 (other than for any period in which x is travelling internationally), (b) y and z’s passports will be released to the mother and held by her at all times (other than for any period in which either child or children are travelling internationally).   y and z’s passports will be released to the mother and held by her at all times (other than for any period in which either child or children are travelling internationally).
the icl’s costs
conclusions  to maintain his current medication. (b) to discontinue the medication that impacts on his disorganisation. (c) to continue seeing his current psychologist, mr d, and psychiatrist, dr e. i will make an order for these reasons for judgment to be released to all medical treaters of the family for this purpose. (d) in the event of a mental health crisis, to seek assistance from community mental health services, including at the aa hospital. (e) to remind himself to remain mentally afloat as this is of ongoing importance to the children’s mental health and evolving identity.   to discontinue the medication that impacts on his disorganisation. (c) to continue seeing his current psychologist, mr d, and psychiatrist, dr e. i will make an order for these reasons for judgment to be released to all medical treaters of the family for this purpose. (d) in the event of a mental health crisis, to seek assistance from community mental health services, including at the aa hospital. (e) to remind himself to remain mentally afloat as this is of ongoing importance to the children’s mental health and evolving identity.   to continue seeing his current psychologist, mr d, and psychiatrist, dr e. i will make an order for these reasons for judgment to be released to all medical treaters of the family for this purpose. (d) in the event of a mental health crisis, to seek assistance from community mental health services, including at the aa hospital. (e) to remind himself to remain mentally afloat as this is of ongoing importance to the children’s mental health and evolving identity.   in the event of a mental health crisis, to seek assistance from community mental health services, including at the aa hospital. (e) to remind himself to remain mentally afloat as this is of ongoing importance to the children’s mental health and evolving identity.   to remind himself to remain mentally afloat as this is of ongoing importance to the children’s mental health and evolving identity.   he loves and supports them, (b) he will be there in the future, (c) he knows that they will be adequately cared for by the mother, and (d) he should avoid communicating with the children about their welfare.   he will be there in the future, (c) he knows that they will be adequately cared for by the mother, and (d) he should avoid communicating with the children about their welfare.   he knows that they will be adequately cared for by the mother, and (d) he should avoid communicating with the children about their welfare.   he should avoid communicating with the children about their welfare.
associate: dated: 11 july 2023
dated: 11 july 2023
[1] the parties were asked what gender pronouns they preferred for themselves and the children. this is reflected in this judgment. where it was not clear which pronouns were preferred, non-gendered or non-binary pronouns have been used.