last updated: 15 november 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
jacobs & jacobs [2023] fedcfamc2f 1306
orders
the court orders that:  attend at the auction sale and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event that the reserve price is not reached at such auction. (b) execute the contract for sale (c) execute all other documents required to complete the sale.   execute the contract for sale (c) execute all other documents required to complete the sale.   execute all other documents required to complete the sale.   in full discharge of all commonwealth bank of australia (“cba” loan nos. ... and ..., with simultaneous release of collateralisation of loan nos. ... and ... against the registered title ... being that of d street, suburb e (“suburb e property”) of against that are and release of any encumbered amount that has been collateralised by the mortgagee bank commonwealth bank of australia under loan no. against the registered title, (b) in payment and adjustment in favour of the applicant wife, the sum equivalent to 50% of the total amount paid in discharge of line of credit account no. ... to the cba (utilised during its existence by both the applicant wife and the respondent husband benefiting both the suburb c property and the d street, suburb e property). (c) in payment of agent’s commission and auction expenses due on the sale, (d) in payment of legal costs due on the sale, (e) in payment of the applicant wife’s actual legal costs fixed in the amount of $13,565, and (f) any balance of the proceeds from the sale of the suburb c property, after the discharge of the obligations noted in orders 7(a) to 7(e) above, be paid to the respondent husband.   in payment and adjustment in favour of the applicant wife, the sum equivalent to 50% of the total amount paid in discharge of line of credit account no. ... to the cba (utilised during its existence by both the applicant wife and the respondent husband benefiting both the suburb c property and the d street, suburb e property). (c) in payment of agent’s commission and auction expenses due on the sale, (d) in payment of legal costs due on the sale, (e) in payment of the applicant wife’s actual legal costs fixed in the amount of $13,565, and (f) any balance of the proceeds from the sale of the suburb c property, after the discharge of the obligations noted in orders 7(a) to 7(e) above, be paid to the respondent husband.   in payment of agent’s commission and auction expenses due on the sale, (d) in payment of legal costs due on the sale, (e) in payment of the applicant wife’s actual legal costs fixed in the amount of $13,565, and (f) any balance of the proceeds from the sale of the suburb c property, after the discharge of the obligations noted in orders 7(a) to 7(e) above, be paid to the respondent husband.   in payment of legal costs due on the sale, (e) in payment of the applicant wife’s actual legal costs fixed in the amount of $13,565, and (f) any balance of the proceeds from the sale of the suburb c property, after the discharge of the obligations noted in orders 7(a) to 7(e) above, be paid to the respondent husband.   in payment of the applicant wife’s actual legal costs fixed in the amount of $13,565, and (f) any balance of the proceeds from the sale of the suburb c property, after the discharge of the obligations noted in orders 7(a) to 7(e) above, be paid to the respondent husband.   any balance of the proceeds from the sale of the suburb c property, after the discharge of the obligations noted in orders 7(a) to 7(e) above, be paid to the respondent husband.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge street
associate: dated: 18 october 2023
dated: 18 october 2023