last updated: 7 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
herbert & oliver [2023] fedcfamc2f 838
orders
the court orders that:
live with and spend time with arrangements  during the school term, every third weekend in a three weekly cycle commencing at 6:00 pm friday and until 6:00 pm sunday, (b) in addition to time spent under order 4(a) during the school term, at the father’s option in any given calendar month an additional weekend commencing at 6:00pm friday and until 6:00 pm sunday (or 6:00 pm monday in the event that monday is not a school day) provided that the father: (i) give notice in writing to the mother not later than 6:00 pm on the wednesday prior to that weekend of an intention that x spend time with him in accordance with this order, and (ii) such time occur in town c or at a place not more than two hours car travel from town c, and (iii) changeover occur at the mother’s residence, (c) during the term school holidays for all of term 1, term 2 and term 3 school holidays commencing at 12:00 pm on the first saturday of such holidays until 12:00 pm on the last saturday of such holidays, (d) during the christmas school holidays as agreed and in default of agreement: (i) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, for the first half commencing in december 2024 on the last day of the school year (20 december 2024) until the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holidays, (ii) in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter, for the second half commencing on the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holiday period until the day that falls two days prior to the first day of the new year school term.   in addition to time spent under order 4(a) during the school term, at the father’s option in any given calendar month an additional weekend commencing at 6:00pm friday and until 6:00 pm sunday (or 6:00 pm monday in the event that monday is not a school day) provided that the father: (i) give notice in writing to the mother not later than 6:00 pm on the wednesday prior to that weekend of an intention that x spend time with him in accordance with this order, and (ii) such time occur in town c or at a place not more than two hours car travel from town c, and (iii) changeover occur at the mother’s residence, (c) during the term school holidays for all of term 1, term 2 and term 3 school holidays commencing at 12:00 pm on the first saturday of such holidays until 12:00 pm on the last saturday of such holidays, (d) during the christmas school holidays as agreed and in default of agreement: (i) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, for the first half commencing in december 2024 on the last day of the school year (20 december 2024) until the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holidays, (ii) in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter, for the second half commencing on the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holiday period until the day that falls two days prior to the first day of the new year school term.   give notice in writing to the mother not later than 6:00 pm on the wednesday prior to that weekend of an intention that x spend time with him in accordance with this order, and (ii) such time occur in town c or at a place not more than two hours car travel from town c, and (iii) changeover occur at the mother’s residence,  ) such time occur in town c or at a place not more than two hours car travel from town c, and (iii) changeover occur at the mother’s residence,  i) changeover occur at the mother’s residence,   during the term school holidays for all of term 1, term 2 and term 3 school holidays commencing at 12:00 pm on the first saturday of such holidays until 12:00 pm on the last saturday of such holidays, (d) during the christmas school holidays as agreed and in default of agreement: (i) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, for the first half commencing in december 2024 on the last day of the school year (20 december 2024) until the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holidays, (ii) in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter, for the second half commencing on the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holiday period until the day that falls two days prior to the first day of the new year school term.   during the christmas school holidays as agreed and in default of agreement: (i) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, for the first half commencing in december 2024 on the last day of the school year (20 december 2024) until the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holidays, (ii) in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter, for the second half commencing on the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holiday period until the day that falls two days prior to the first day of the new year school term.   in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, for the first half commencing in december 2024 on the last day of the school year (20 december 2024) until the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holidays, (ii) in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter, for the second half commencing on the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holiday period until the day that falls two days prior to the first day of the new year school term.  ) in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter, for the second half commencing on the day that falls at the middle of the christmas school holiday period until the day that falls two days prior to the first day of the new year school term.
communication  each monday, wednesday and friday night between 5:30 pm and 7:00 pm with the father to make the call and the mother to facilitate the call (with the expectation that the call last not less than 10 minutes), and (b) at all reasonable times as requested by x with the father to make the call and the mother to facilitate the call.   at all reasonable times as requested by x with the father to make the call and the mother to facilitate the call.   each monday, wednesday and friday night between 5:30 pm and 7:00 pm with the mother to make the call and the father to facilitate the call (with the expectation that the call last not less than 10 minutes), and (b) at all reasonable times as requested by x with the mother to make the call and the father to facilitate the call.   at all reasonable times as requested by x with the mother to make the call and the father to facilitate the call.
special occasions  on x’s birthday in 2023 (if x is not otherwise in the father’s care) and each alternate year thereafter, as agreed between the parties in writing and in default of agreement, for a period of two days as agreed and failing agreement, from the conclusion of kindergarten/school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) on the day immediately preceding x’s birthday until the conclusion of kindergarten/school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) the day immediately following her birthday, (b) on the father’s day weekend each year from 6:00pm friday until 6:00pm sunday, and (c) at times and places as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   on the father’s day weekend each year from 6:00pm friday until 6:00pm sunday, and (c) at times and places as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   at times and places as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   on the mother’s day weekend each year from 3:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (b) on x’s birthday in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, as agreed between the parties in writing and in default of agreement, for a period of two days as agreed and failing agreement, from the conclusion of kindergarten/school (or 3:30 pm if a non-school day) on the day immediately preceding x’s birthday until the conclusion of kindergarten/school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) the day immediately following her birthday.   on x’s birthday in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, as agreed between the parties in writing and in default of agreement, for a period of two days as agreed and failing agreement, from the conclusion of kindergarten/school (or 3:30 pm if a non-school day) on the day immediately preceding x’s birthday until the conclusion of kindergarten/school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) the day immediately following her birthday.
changeovers
the mother’s health
restraints  speaking negatively about the other party within the hearing or presence of x or from permitting any other person to do so, (b) involving x in any form of conflict between the parents, (c) being adversely affected by alcohol or illegal drugs while spending time or communicating with x, or (d) exposing x to any form of family violence.   involving x in any form of conflict between the parents, (c) being adversely affected by alcohol or illegal drugs while spending time or communicating with x, or (d) exposing x to any form of family violence.   being adversely affected by alcohol or illegal drugs while spending time or communicating with x, or (d) exposing x to any form of family violence.   exposing x to any form of family violence.
other  keep the other advised at all times of the current residential address and telephone number (if any) of x and advise the other of any change within twenty-four (24) hours days of such change, (b) advise the other immediately in the event that x suffers any serious illness or injury, (c) advise the other if an appointment is made for x to attend upon a general practitioner, specialist or nurse relating to their health and wellbeing and keep the other party advised of the outcome of any such appointment, (d) advise the other of all extra-curricular activities in which x is involved to allow the other parent to be involved and permit the other to attend such activities, (e) authorise any medical practitioner upon which x may attend from time to time, to communicate with the other in respect to x’s medical condition and/or requirements, and (f) subject to any school policy authorise all kindergartens/schools at which x may attend, from time to time: (i) provide to the other parent, at the other parent’s expense, copies of all school reports, school notices and school photographs in relation to x, (ii) allow the school/kindergarten staff to communicate with the other parent, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to x’s progress and wellbeing at school/kindergarten, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions and events which parents are normally invited to attend.   advise the other immediately in the event that x suffers any serious illness or injury, (c) advise the other if an appointment is made for x to attend upon a general practitioner, specialist or nurse relating to their health and wellbeing and keep the other party advised of the outcome of any such appointment, (d) advise the other of all extra-curricular activities in which x is involved to allow the other parent to be involved and permit the other to attend such activities, (e) authorise any medical practitioner upon which x may attend from time to time, to communicate with the other in respect to x’s medical condition and/or requirements, and (f) subject to any school policy authorise all kindergartens/schools at which x may attend, from time to time: (i) provide to the other parent, at the other parent’s expense, copies of all school reports, school notices and school photographs in relation to x, (ii) allow the school/kindergarten staff to communicate with the other parent, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to x’s progress and wellbeing at school/kindergarten, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions and events which parents are normally invited to attend.   advise the other if an appointment is made for x to attend upon a general practitioner, specialist or nurse relating to their health and wellbeing and keep the other party advised of the outcome of any such appointment, (d) advise the other of all extra-curricular activities in which x is involved to allow the other parent to be involved and permit the other to attend such activities, (e) authorise any medical practitioner upon which x may attend from time to time, to communicate with the other in respect to x’s medical condition and/or requirements, and (f) subject to any school policy authorise all kindergartens/schools at which x may attend, from time to time: (i) provide to the other parent, at the other parent’s expense, copies of all school reports, school notices and school photographs in relation to x, (ii) allow the school/kindergarten staff to communicate with the other parent, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to x’s progress and wellbeing at school/kindergarten, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions and events which parents are normally invited to attend.   advise the other of all extra-curricular activities in which x is involved to allow the other parent to be involved and permit the other to attend such activities, (e) authorise any medical practitioner upon which x may attend from time to time, to communicate with the other in respect to x’s medical condition and/or requirements, and (f) subject to any school policy authorise all kindergartens/schools at which x may attend, from time to time: (i) provide to the other parent, at the other parent’s expense, copies of all school reports, school notices and school photographs in relation to x, (ii) allow the school/kindergarten staff to communicate with the other parent, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to x’s progress and wellbeing at school/kindergarten, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions and events which parents are normally invited to attend.   authorise any medical practitioner upon which x may attend from time to time, to communicate with the other in respect to x’s medical condition and/or requirements, and (f) subject to any school policy authorise all kindergartens/schools at which x may attend, from time to time: (i) provide to the other parent, at the other parent’s expense, copies of all school reports, school notices and school photographs in relation to x, (ii) allow the school/kindergarten staff to communicate with the other parent, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to x’s progress and wellbeing at school/kindergarten, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions and events which parents are normally invited to attend.   subject to any school policy authorise all kindergartens/schools at which x may attend, from time to time: (i) provide to the other parent, at the other parent’s expense, copies of all school reports, school notices and school photographs in relation to x, (ii) allow the school/kindergarten staff to communicate with the other parent, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to x’s progress and wellbeing at school/kindergarten, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions and events which parents are normally invited to attend.   provide to the other parent, at the other parent’s expense, copies of all school reports, school notices and school photographs in relation to x, (ii) allow the school/kindergarten staff to communicate with the other parent, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to x’s progress and wellbeing at school/kindergarten, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions and events which parents are normally invited to attend.  ) allow the school/kindergarten staff to communicate with the other parent, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to x’s progress and wellbeing at school/kindergarten, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions and events which parents are normally invited to attend.  i) permit the other to attend all school functions and events which parents are normally invited to attend.
reasons for judgment
judge champion:
introduction
issues  whether the court should make an interim or a final order as to the “live with” arrangements: this issue arose because in his written evidence mr g, the family report writer, opined that there was “no urgency to determine the primary care arrangements for [x] at this stage” (mr g, [36], cb302). this raised for consideration as to whether the making of any final order ought to be deferred in x’s best interests until closer to the time she goes to school lest underlying circumstances change, (2) whether x should primarily live with the mother or the father, and (3) whether any changes as to who x lives with should occur now or later (around the time x goes to school) noting that each party agrees that the current arrangements are not sustainable once x goes to school,   whether x should primarily live with the mother or the father, and (3) whether any changes as to who x lives with should occur now or later (around the time x goes to school) noting that each party agrees that the current arrangements are not sustainable once x goes to school,   whether any changes as to who x lives with should occur now or later (around the time x goes to school) noting that each party agrees that the current arrangements are not sustainable once x goes to school,
summary  to make a final order, not an interim order, (2) that from when x starts school, to order that x will live primarily with the mother. balancing various factors, the importance of x’s relationship with her sister h is a significant factor in tipping the scales in favour of an order that she primarily live with her mother. in recognition of the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with her father, the orders will be that x spends all of the term school holiday time with her father, an order the mother does not oppose, and that (3) not to order that changes to the live with arrangements occur now but rather to order that changes as to the live with arrangements will occur shortly before x goes to school. the current time configuration (fortnightly about) should continue until 7 october 2024 (the start of term 4 in 2024). keeping the current time configuration until 7 october 2024, maximises the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with her father by her continuing to spend equal time with him so long as is reasonably practicable. despite current challenges of her attending two kindergartens, x is meeting all her developmental milestones. her relationship with h, her half-sister, is strong despite x’s absences when she lives with her father. in effect, i have found that the upside benefit of time with her father outweighs the downside disruption of attending two kindergartens and the disruption of her relationship with h.   that from when x starts school, to order that x will live primarily with the mother. balancing various factors, the importance of x’s relationship with her sister h is a significant factor in tipping the scales in favour of an order that she primarily live with her mother. in recognition of the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with her father, the orders will be that x spends all of the term school holiday time with her father, an order the mother does not oppose, and that (3) not to order that changes to the live with arrangements occur now but rather to order that changes as to the live with arrangements will occur shortly before x goes to school. the current time configuration (fortnightly about) should continue until 7 october 2024 (the start of term 4 in 2024). keeping the current time configuration until 7 october 2024, maximises the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with her father by her continuing to spend equal time with him so long as is reasonably practicable. despite current challenges of her attending two kindergartens, x is meeting all her developmental milestones. her relationship with h, her half-sister, is strong despite x’s absences when she lives with her father. in effect, i have found that the upside benefit of time with her father outweighs the downside disruption of attending two kindergartens and the disruption of her relationship with h.   not to order that changes to the live with arrangements occur now but rather to order that changes as to the live with arrangements will occur shortly before x goes to school. the current time configuration (fortnightly about) should continue until 7 october 2024 (the start of term 4 in 2024). keeping the current time configuration until 7 october 2024, maximises the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with her father by her continuing to spend equal time with him so long as is reasonably practicable. despite current challenges of her attending two kindergartens, x is meeting all her developmental milestones. her relationship with h, her half-sister, is strong despite x’s absences when she lives with her father. in effect, i have found that the upside benefit of time with her father outweighs the downside disruption of attending two kindergartens and the disruption of her relationship with h.
background
chronology of events
a report was received which raised concerns for [x] and [h]’s physical and emotional wellbeing in the [ms herbert]’s care due to [ms herbert]’s [...] disability impacting her parenting capacity. at the time of the report there were no available support workers/nannies for the family due to recruiting issues. a first home visit was conducted [in late] 2020, and child protection substantiated the allegations on the likelihood of unintentional neglect. (emphasis added)
the mother’s proposal
the father’s proposal
the expert evidence
mr g, the family consultant
there is no urgency to determine the primary care arrangements for [x] at this stage. [x] has been spending equal weekly and then fortnightly time with each parent for the past year and has adapted to the care arrangement. neither parent has reported that she is not coping. to make such an arrangement work, especially alternate fortnight care, there needs to be good communication between the parents and [x] needs to be able to maintain contact with the non-carer parent regularly [emphasis added]   oliver] and [ms herbert] need a clear plan for the next couple of years so that they can focus on co-parenting [x] instead of seeing the other parent as a rival for her care
the alternate fortnight care arrangement can continue to work if both parents actively promote the other parent during their absence. changeovers once a fortnight are preferable to once a week, as [x] has to travel a [five] hour return trip twice on the weekend of the changeover.   oliver] and [ms herbert] are both realistic that [x]’s future when she attends school will be in one primary location. this does not have to be resolved at present. under the current arrangement [x] can enjoy a meaningful relationship with both parents during her formative developmental years. [emphasis added]
it is recommended that the current care arrangement remains in place until [x] is ready to attend school in two to three years’ time.
ms q, psychologist
consideration
primary considerations
is there a benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both of her parents?
is there a need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence?
additional considerations
are any views of x relevant?
what is the relevance of x’s relationship with each of her parents and other persons including any grandparent or other relative?
the cases in which the welfare of the children requires that a family be divided must be very rare [...] these children have never been under separate control. they have grown up together and are now attending the same school. they can be expected to support each other in their school days which ... may extend into their late teens.
however, the fact is that the effect of the order that the husband seeks will be, to a large extent, to deprive the two younger children of the benefit of a relationship with their elder brother, and also to deprive him of the benefits of a relationship with them. the fact that siblings fight from time to time does not seem to me to be a proper reason for separating them. in fact, it may well be part of the learning of living skills which is very important to them in later life.
it is easy to understand why the court considers sibling relationships so carefully. experience informs that sibling relationships are likely to be lifelong. in ordinary circumstances, they are children’s most uninterrupted relationships, even more when the children’s parents separate... a decision to deny siblings the opportunity to continue to share developmental experiences by living together and to develop and maintain potentially lifelong ties is a most serious step.
have x’s parents taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to x and to spend time with x and to communicate with x?
have x’s parents fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, obligations to maintain her?
what is the likely effect of any changes in x’s circumstances, including the likely effect on her of any separation from either of her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom she has been living?
is there practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with and communicating with a parent and will that difficulty or expense substantially affect her right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis?
do x’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of x) have the capacity to provide for her needs including emotional and intellectual needs?
is the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of x and of either of x’s parents or any other characteristics of x that the court thinks are relevant?
if x is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child what is the likely impact any proposed parenting order will have on her right to enjoy her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture?
what is the attitude to x and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of x’s parents?
communication
the change to the live with arrangements commencing as at 7 october 2024
is there any family violence involving x or a member of her family?
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to x or a member of her family, what relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, and any other relevant matter?
is it preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to x?
is there any other relevant fact or circumstance?
is the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility rebutted?
is x spending equal time with each of her parents in her best interests and/or reasonably practicable?
conclusions
associate: dated: 14 july 2023
dated: 14 july 2023