last updated: 19 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
shankar & shankar [2023] fedcfamc2f 880
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
suburb c property   the husband shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to transfer to the wife all of his right, title and interest in the property situated at b street, suburb c, being the whole of the land contained in folio ... (“the suburb c property”), and (b) the wife shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to transfer to the husband all of her right, title and interest in the property situated at d street, suburb e, being the whole of the land in folio ...) (“the suburb e property”).   the wife shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to transfer to the husband all of her right, title and interest in the property situated at d street, suburb e, being the whole of the land in folio ...) (“the suburb e property”).   the wife shall do all acts and things to discharge the loan secured by mortgage in favour of the national australia bank (“the nab”) with account ending ...80, and (b) the husband shall do all acts and things to discharge the loan secured by mortgage in favour of the nab with account ending ...21, and (c) the husband shall pay to the wife the sum of $168,750 into a bank nominated by her in writing.   the husband shall do all acts and things to discharge the loan secured by mortgage in favour of the nab with account ending ...21, and (c) the husband shall pay to the wife the sum of $168,750 into a bank nominated by her in writing.   the husband shall pay to the wife the sum of $168,750 into a bank nominated by her in writing.   the wife is solely responsible for the payment of the home loan repayments, council and water rates, insurances and all other outgoings on the suburb c property and shall indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in respect of the same, and (b) the husband is solely responsible for the payment of the home loan repayments, council and water rates, insurances and all other outgoings on the suburb e property and shall indemnify and keep indemnified the wife in respect of the same.   the husband is solely responsible for the payment of the home loan repayments, council and water rates, insurances and all other outgoings on the suburb e property and shall indemnify and keep indemnified the wife in respect of the same.   the wife shall retain, to the exclusion of the husband, the suburb c property, all bank accounts, superannuation entitlements, pension entitlements, vehicles (including the motor vehicle 1, personal effects and household contents of which she is the account holder, named member or interest holder, registered owner or is otherwise in possession, and (b) the husband shall retain, to the exclusion of the wife, the suburb e property, all bank accounts, superannuation entitlements, pension entitlements, vehicles (including the motor vehicle 2 and motor vehicle 3), f pty ltd, f pty ltd (deregistered), personal effects and household contents of which he or the said corporate entity is the account holder, named member or interest holder, registered owner or is otherwise in possession.   the husband shall retain, to the exclusion of the wife, the suburb e property, all bank accounts, superannuation entitlements, pension entitlements, vehicles (including the motor vehicle 2 and motor vehicle 3), f pty ltd, f pty ltd (deregistered), personal effects and household contents of which he or the said corporate entity is the account holder, named member or interest holder, registered owner or is otherwise in possession.
reasons for judgment
judge eldershaw:
introduction
documents
applications
background
initial contributions
the 1999 incident
suburb c property purchase
ms h
2001 alleged belt incident
mr j
2004 alleged knife incident
queensland property purchase
sole trading as f pty ltd
to the best of my recollection, [the husband] had a fluctuating income for a number of years ranging between $115,000 and $200,000 each year whilst operating as a sole trader. this included cash payments received by [the husband] for carrying [out] work.
x
f pty ltd
in or about 2008, [the husband] and i purchased a [motor vehicle 4] shortly after selling our [motor vehicle 5]. the car was purchased in my personal name but was later subsequently transferred to the company name, [f] pty ltd. to the best of my recollection, [the husband] obtained a car loan in the company name, [f] pty ltd, in the amount of approximately $20,000 to fund the purchase of the [motor vehicle 4].
2009 temporary separation and first advo
...i began speaking to lawyers about parenting orders and obtaining an advo but stopped because [the husband] said to me words to the effect of: “i am sorry, i will change, i never meant to hurt you” and “you are a bad mother if you leave, you are taking the kids away from their family, you cannot do that to them”. i felt i had to return home, and so [the husband] and i reconciled.
renovations to queensland property
2010 noose incident
in or about 2010, after the children were asleep, [the husband] dragged me outside to saying words to the effect of, “i’m going to hang you now”. he then held me whilst he cut the clothes line with a knife that he had taken outside with him. he started to fashion a noose and again said to me words to the effect of, “i’m going to hang you”. i was extremely upset and frightened by his behaviour at this point.
other 2010 and 2011 allegations of family violence  .] in or about 2010, i was sitting on the lounge and watching television with the children. [the husband] became angry, though i don’t recall why. he slapped me with an open hand to the face and as i fell to one side he then kicked me to the side of the head. that resulted in significant pain to my jaw and ear area. my daughter [ms h] said to me in the immediate aftermath, “mummy why don’t you divorce him.” i was upset and tearful as a result of that which was observed by my children. [in or about] 2011, i had an argument with [the husband] at home. he used the stroller of our youngest child, [x], to pin me against the wall. [in or about] 2011, [the husband] threw [an object] at me whilst i was in the bedroom using the computer. the [object] struck me above the eye and i had a small cut at that time. i went to [suburb c] police station. they asked me if i was seeking an advo. at that time, i did not want the police to bring that application and i said “no”. i do not believe they made an incident report. they gave me the contact details of the domestic violence support scheme and i left.
the 2011 incident and second advo .] [in or about] 2011, i returned home at about 2pm from the police station, and on that evening, [the husband] struck me with an open hand to my head. on or about 2011, a temporary advo was made, however, [the husband] continued to be verbally and physically abusive towards me.
he said: “why did you hit [mr j], why is he the only one you hit, why not the girls?”
5. my husband then spoke to [mr j].
he said: “did mummy hurt you? did she hit you? [mr j] said: “yes” he said: “was it hard?” [mr j] said: “yes”
6. my husband then continued to shout at me:
he said: “you have no respect for men” i said: “what about you, what about the respect you’ve given me?” my husband began swearing and verbally abusing me. he stood up from the lounge chair and started walking towards me at a fast pace, i turned and began walking away taking about one step towards my bedroom. my husband grabbed me with his right hand by my neck and squeezing it tightly with his fingers. while doing this he was continuing to verbally abuse me. he pushed me causing me to loose my balance and take a few steps forward. he turned and walked away. i walked into my bedroom where my daughters where sitting in my bed, they were afraid as they saw the whole thing, my daughter [ms h] said to me “mummy quick shut and lock the door before daddy comes again”. i shut the door and locked it and got into bed with my daughters and tried to go to sleep. about 1.00am my husband came into the room and climbed into bed with me, i woke up from the movement. i said: “what are you doing here you mother fucker, i don’t want you here with me, get out of the bedroom” my husband suddenly slapped me across the right side of the face with his right hand as we were lying in bed. i felt sudden pain and my cheek felt like it was burning. he said: “don’t you ever swear at me again” i said: “what about you, you do the same aswell” my husband got up out of the bed and began walking towards the bedroom door, i swore at him again and he turned and walked back to where i was lying on the bed and he raised he left hand, swinging it hard hitting me in my right ear causing me to feel a shooting pain through my ear. he began abusing me again and left the room. my daughter [x] entered the room to see if i was okay and locked the door behind her. afraid to do anything i went to sleep with my daughter in my bed. [in or about] 2011 i went to [suburb n medical centre] to have my ear examined by a doctor as the pain was excruciating and i could feel constant sharp stabbing internally in my ear, i received a prescription for pain killers from the doctor.
13. about 2.00pm i went to [suburb c] police station to make a statement. i fear for my safety as there has been previous incidents in the past of abuse and i believe he will hurt me again in the future. i wish for an apprehended violence order to be applied for.   per the original)
suburb e property purchase and other renovations   purchased and installed the kitchen, (b) arranged sub-contractors to renovate the bathroom but said that her father worked on the project, (c) did renovations at the property, supervised the other trades, purchased and installed the timber floor, and (d) rendered the exterior.   arranged sub-contractors to renovate the bathroom but said that her father worked on the project, (c) did renovations at the property, supervised the other trades, purchased and installed the timber floor, and (d) rendered the exterior.   did renovations at the property, supervised the other trades, purchased and installed the timber floor, and (d) rendered the exterior.   rendered the exterior.
2015 to 2017
...although the [motor vehicle 6] was registered in the company name, it was used by the family for personal use.
w pty ltd
suburb o property
q company credit card
2020 incident and third advo
about 1.00pm [in] 2020, the victim was driving the accused back home after he had [a medical procedure]. the accused was in significant pain and quite upset with the victim as she referred the accused to the [doctor] and [sic] was not pleased with the service. when they arrived home, the victim drove the vehicle up the driveway which caused the accused [pain]. offence 1: common assault the accused has reacted by slapping the victim to the back of the head with a right open hand. this has caused the victim immediate pain and her head to jolt as the accused used force. both parties have then entered the home and days later, the victim has decided to leave the family home due to the intimidation and treatment by the accused. about 2.00pm [in] 2020, the victim has contacted police who attended a short time later. police were informed by the victim that the accused would assault her every week by either punching her arm or slapping her, however these matters have gone unreported. the victim supplied police a dvec statement and the victim did not have any injuries due to the time the matter has been reported. police arranged the accused to attend [suburb t] police station where he was arrested and cautioned with all the protocols and procedures of lepra 2002 adhered to. the accused was introduced to the custody manager and he was erisp interviewed. the accused admitted to “pushing” the victim when she drive up the driveway, however denies slapping or punching the victim over their years of marriage. the accused is before the court. the victim is in fear of the accused and subsequently moved out of the family home to her mothers house. (as per the original)
disputed matters of fact concerning family violence
post separation
2.7 the remainder disbursed as follows:
2.7.1 60 per centum to be paid to nab home loan account ending [...]80, being the mortgage encumbering the property at [b street, suburb c] nsw, being the whole of the land contained in [...] (‘the [suburb c] property’), and 2.7.2 40 per centum to be paid to nab home loan account ending [...]21 being the mortgage encumbering the property [d street, suburb e] nsw being the whole of the land contained in ... (‘the [suburb e] property’).
income and employment
legal framework  in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate:   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them - altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or
[...]   the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.
[...]  in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account:   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage, or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property, whether or not that last‑mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage, or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property, whether or not that last‑mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and
consideration
what are the assets, liabilities and financial resources of the parties or either of them?
the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property
the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last mentioned property
the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent
the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage
the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) of the act so far as they are relevant
income disparity  30 june 2021 was $73,250. gross sales of that year were $189,000, and (b) 30 june 2022 was $74,650. gross sales for that year were $235,000.   30 june 2022 was $74,650. gross sales for that year were $235,000.
section 75(2)(o): non-payment of loan account ...21
section 75(2)(o): capital gains tax
section 75(2)(o): family violence
that is, these principles, which should only apply to exceptional cases, may become common coinage in property cases and be used inappropriately as tactical weapons or for personal attacks and so return this court to fault and misconduct in property matters – a circumstance which proved so debilitating in the past. in addition there is the risk of substantial additional time and cost. ... it is essential to bear in mind the relatively narrow band of cases to which these considerations apply. to be relevant, it would be necessary to show that the conduct occurred during the course of the marriage and had discernible impact upon the contributions of the other party. it is not directed to conduct which does not have that effect... it has to be said, that their honours terms “exceptional” and “narrow” lose much of their force if cases involving significant violence are to be the subject of the application of the principles. such cases might have been regarded as exceptional at the time kennon was decided but they cannot today be so regarded. unfortunately the prevalence of family violence is wide and artificial barriers to its recognition, such as trying to limit its recognition in property cases to exceptional or narrow cases, has no basis in principle. as i shall endeavour to explain shortly, the focus of the majority’s reasoning was on the nature and quality of the contributions themselves which were not limited by such qualifying adjectives.
23. in kennon, the principle was identified as follows:
put shortly, our view is that where there is a course of violent conduct by one party towards the other during the marriage which is demonstrated to have had a significant adverse impact upon that party’s contributions to the marriage, or, put the other way, to have made his or her contributions significantly more arduous than they ought to have been, that is a fact which a trial judge is entitled to take into account in assessing the parties’ respective contributions within s 79. for the reasons given, the words “significantly” and “more arduous” are not to be read as coterminous with “exceptional”. rather, they arise from the basis of the principle itself which focuses on contributions. if the nature and extent of a person’s contributions are made more difficult or harder so that they should be accorded greater weight, such that they should be taken into account in the determining of the outcome, they have therefore been “significantly impacted” or made “more arduous”. the focus is not on the conduct per se, but on its effects on contributions. the threshold for recognition is therefore met by conduct which has a discernible effect on the contributions of the other party such that it should be recognised in determining the respective contributions of the parties. that, in my view, should be the focus and terms such as “exceptional” or “narrow”, or indeed, “onerous” add an unnecessary and unacceptable gloss suggesting that a rare and high level of impact is required and that the violence or its impact must be exceptional. that is not however, what their honours said. all that was required was a “significant adverse impact” upon a party’s contributions. the word “significant” was used, in my opinion, as describing that the effect must be sufficient to warrant recognition but not imparting some artificial threshold. the effect of the conduct must be such that a greater weight should be given to the contributions. more recent cases have softened some of the harshness of the original application of the principles identified in kennon. for example, it is now the position that the adverse effect of the violence on the contributions of a party can be inferred from the lay evidence of the parties and that there is no need to call evidence to “quantify” that effect (maine & maine [2016] famcafc 270, (2016) 56 fam lr 500 at [47]–[52] (“maine”), britt & britt [2017] famcafc 27, (2017) flc 93-764 at [74]–[75], keating & keating [2019] famcafc 46, (2019) flc 93-894 at [27]–[43], [52]–[67], benson & drury [2020] famcafc 303, (2020) flc 93-998 (“benson & drury”) at [47]–[50]). it seems to me that regarding kennon claims as “special” or “exceptional” is apt to mislead. in reality, all the majority said in that case was that a person’s contributions are to be assessed in the light of all of the circumstances and where those circumstances have the effect of making the contributions more difficult, onerous or arduous, that should be recognised in the assessment of contributions. that, of course, takes place in a holistic manner (dickons v dickons [2012] famcafc 154, (2012) 50 fam lr 244, jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78, (2019) flc 93-898). the primary judge did not use those words. rather, her honour said “the wife’s non-financial contributions were impacted and made more difficult and distressing” (at [46]) and “more arduous” (at [126]). they were found to be of such a nature so as to require consideration. i would not take that to be an incorrect application of the principles set out in kennon. the difficulty that arises in this matter is, however, that the primary judge did not explain how the acts of violence of the husband led to the non-financial contributions of the wife being made difficult, distressing and more arduous. the reasons are silent on the issue. in maine, the court held that the application of the principle in kennon “required of his honour findings in respect of evidence that addressed specifically... the impact that the violence had upon the wife’s contributions” (at [52]). the requisite finding could, as discussed, be inferred as explained in benson & drury at [50]. the husband submits that the absence of this discussion indicates that her honour did not understand and did not correctly apply the principles set out in kennon (ground 2(a)). alternatively, it is said that the failure itself is an error (ground 1(c), ground 2(b) and ground 3). i incline to the latter view, but either way, error has been demonstrated. whilst the events described by the wife were no doubt distressing, the evidence and the findings did not deal with the magnitude and extent of its effect. whilst matters can certainly be inferred, that inference must be properly based on the evidence before the court.
here, the primary judge found the appellant perpetrated family violence upon the respondent and drew an inference that such violence did have an effect upon the respondent’s contributions, making them “all the more arduous” (at [162]). an inference is an assent to the existence of a fact which is based on the proven existence of some other fact or facts, drawn as part of the fact finding process as an exercise of ordinary powers of deduction and reason in the light of human experience, unaffected by any rule of law (g v h [1994] hca 48, (1994) 181 clr 387 at [4]). obviously, the strength of the subject inference depends upon the quality of the underlying evidence. it must be reasonable to draw the inference from primary facts. mere conjecture will not suffice (seltsam pty ltd v mcguiness (2000) 49 nswlr 262 at 275–278 per spigelman cj, carr v baker [1936] nswstrp 20, (1936) 36 sr (nsw) 301 at 306–307 per jordan cj). importantly, the evaluation of the evidence from which the subject inference is sought to be drawn should be thorough and balanced. in the context of a kennon argument, any factual controversies over the alleged misconduct of one spouse and its alleged deleterious consequential effects upon the other spouse should be resolved by familiar forensic techniques. disputed but untested allegations, are not facts (keating at [55]–[66]).
is there an incidence of family violence?  there was an incident of family violence in 1999 when the husband engaged in a physical act borne of aggression against the wife, (b) the husband struck the wife with a belt when she was pregnant with mr j in 2001, (c) the husband threatened the wife with a knife in 2004, (d) in 2010, 2011 and 2020, the husband: (i) dragged the wife from the home with a knife and cut a length of line, which he fashioned into a noose, threatening either to kill her or himself with it, (ii) threw a mobile phone at the wife causing a cut to her forehead and bleeding, in the presence of x, (iii) hit and kicked the wife on her back, arms, legs and head in the presence of the children causing bruising, and the wife needed a week or two to recover, (iv) slapped the wife with an open hand on her face and then kicked her in the head in the presence of the children, causing significant pain to her jaw and ear area, (v) pinned the wife against the wall at the home using a child’s stroller, (vi) threw an object at the wife while in the home causing a cut above her eye, (vii) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.   the husband struck the wife with a belt when she was pregnant with mr j in 2001, (c) the husband threatened the wife with a knife in 2004, (d) in 2010, 2011 and 2020, the husband: (i) dragged the wife from the home with a knife and cut a length of line, which he fashioned into a noose, threatening either to kill her or himself with it, (ii) threw a mobile phone at the wife causing a cut to her forehead and bleeding, in the presence of x, (iii) hit and kicked the wife on her back, arms, legs and head in the presence of the children causing bruising, and the wife needed a week or two to recover, (iv) slapped the wife with an open hand on her face and then kicked her in the head in the presence of the children, causing significant pain to her jaw and ear area, (v) pinned the wife against the wall at the home using a child’s stroller, (vi) threw an object at the wife while in the home causing a cut above her eye, (vii) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.   the husband threatened the wife with a knife in 2004, (d) in 2010, 2011 and 2020, the husband: (i) dragged the wife from the home with a knife and cut a length of line, which he fashioned into a noose, threatening either to kill her or himself with it, (ii) threw a mobile phone at the wife causing a cut to her forehead and bleeding, in the presence of x, (iii) hit and kicked the wife on her back, arms, legs and head in the presence of the children causing bruising, and the wife needed a week or two to recover, (iv) slapped the wife with an open hand on her face and then kicked her in the head in the presence of the children, causing significant pain to her jaw and ear area, (v) pinned the wife against the wall at the home using a child’s stroller, (vi) threw an object at the wife while in the home causing a cut above her eye, (vii) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.   in 2010, 2011 and 2020, the husband: (i) dragged the wife from the home with a knife and cut a length of line, which he fashioned into a noose, threatening either to kill her or himself with it, (ii) threw a mobile phone at the wife causing a cut to her forehead and bleeding, in the presence of x, (iii) hit and kicked the wife on her back, arms, legs and head in the presence of the children causing bruising, and the wife needed a week or two to recover, (iv) slapped the wife with an open hand on her face and then kicked her in the head in the presence of the children, causing significant pain to her jaw and ear area, (v) pinned the wife against the wall at the home using a child’s stroller, (vi) threw an object at the wife while in the home causing a cut above her eye, (vii) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.   dragged the wife from the home with a knife and cut a length of line, which he fashioned into a noose, threatening either to kill her or himself with it, (ii) threw a mobile phone at the wife causing a cut to her forehead and bleeding, in the presence of x, (iii) hit and kicked the wife on her back, arms, legs and head in the presence of the children causing bruising, and the wife needed a week or two to recover, (iv) slapped the wife with an open hand on her face and then kicked her in the head in the presence of the children, causing significant pain to her jaw and ear area, (v) pinned the wife against the wall at the home using a child’s stroller, (vi) threw an object at the wife while in the home causing a cut above her eye, (vii) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.  ) threw a mobile phone at the wife causing a cut to her forehead and bleeding, in the presence of x, (iii) hit and kicked the wife on her back, arms, legs and head in the presence of the children causing bruising, and the wife needed a week or two to recover, (iv) slapped the wife with an open hand on her face and then kicked her in the head in the presence of the children, causing significant pain to her jaw and ear area, (v) pinned the wife against the wall at the home using a child’s stroller, (vi) threw an object at the wife while in the home causing a cut above her eye, (vii) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.  i) hit and kicked the wife on her back, arms, legs and head in the presence of the children causing bruising, and the wife needed a week or two to recover, (iv) slapped the wife with an open hand on her face and then kicked her in the head in the presence of the children, causing significant pain to her jaw and ear area, (v) pinned the wife against the wall at the home using a child’s stroller, (vi) threw an object at the wife while in the home causing a cut above her eye, (vii) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.  ) slapped the wife with an open hand on her face and then kicked her in the head in the presence of the children, causing significant pain to her jaw and ear area, (v) pinned the wife against the wall at the home using a child’s stroller, (vi) threw an object at the wife while in the home causing a cut above her eye, (vii) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.   pinned the wife against the wall at the home using a child’s stroller, (vi) threw an object at the wife while in the home causing a cut above her eye, (vii) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.  ) threw an object at the wife while in the home causing a cut above her eye, (vii) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.  i) physically assaulting the wife on two occasions in 2011, and (viii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.  ii) physically assaulting the wife while she was driving in 2020.
should the conduct be recognised in determining contributions?
assessment
conclusion
associate: dated: 19 july 2023
dated: 19 july 2023