last updated: 4 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
tavarus & tavarus [2023] fedcfamc2f 845
orders
the court orders on a final basis:
parenting
live with mother
no time or communication with father
and the court notes:
and the court further orders on a final basis:
restraints and injunctions  communicating with or asking someone else to communicate all or any of children and/or the mother by any means whatsoever, (b) filming or recording all or any of children and/or the mother, or asking someone else to film or record all or any of the children and/or the mother, (c) with the exception of an appearance in court, approaching to within one hundred (100) metres of where any of the children and/or the mother live, work, go to school, or any place where they are spending time (including but not limited to shopping centres, sporting venues, or any public place), (d) locating, or attempting to locate, or asking someone else to locate, any of the children and/or the mother, and (e) asking any person to bring or deliver up all or any of the children to him (or to another person or place), or communicate with all or any of the children on his behalf.   filming or recording all or any of children and/or the mother, or asking someone else to film or record all or any of the children and/or the mother, (c) with the exception of an appearance in court, approaching to within one hundred (100) metres of where any of the children and/or the mother live, work, go to school, or any place where they are spending time (including but not limited to shopping centres, sporting venues, or any public place), (d) locating, or attempting to locate, or asking someone else to locate, any of the children and/or the mother, and (e) asking any person to bring or deliver up all or any of the children to him (or to another person or place), or communicate with all or any of the children on his behalf.   with the exception of an appearance in court, approaching to within one hundred (100) metres of where any of the children and/or the mother live, work, go to school, or any place where they are spending time (including but not limited to shopping centres, sporting venues, or any public place), (d) locating, or attempting to locate, or asking someone else to locate, any of the children and/or the mother, and (e) asking any person to bring or deliver up all or any of the children to him (or to another person or place), or communicate with all or any of the children on his behalf.   locating, or attempting to locate, or asking someone else to locate, any of the children and/or the mother, and (e) asking any person to bring or deliver up all or any of the children to him (or to another person or place), or communicate with all or any of the children on his behalf.   asking any person to bring or deliver up all or any of the children to him (or to another person or place), or communicate with all or any of the children on his behalf.
international travel and passports
other orders
property
to effect such property division, the following orders will apply
husband responsible for charges associated with the former matrimonial home
default order in the event that the husband fails to pay out the wife   the former matrimonial home shall be listed for sale by private treaty with e real estate or such other agent as determined by the wife as sole trustee, (b) the listing price for sale by private treaty will be such an amount as determined solely by the wife as sole trustee and in consultation with the real estate agent and any other enquiries the wife as sole trustee wishes to make, (c) the husband is to cooperate in every way with the directions of the wife as sole trustee in relation to working with the real estate agent in relation to the marketing of the former matrimonial home for sale, including making the key available, allowing unimpeded inspection of the former matrimonial home at all reasonably requested times by the agent or trustee, ensuring the former matrimonial home is in a clean, neat, and good order at the time of the inspections/auctions/open houses, vacating the property prior to any inspections as directed by the sole trustee or real estate agent to enable any prospective buyers to have access to and properly inspect the former matrimonial home in the absence of the husband. so that there is no misunderstanding, the husband is to vacate the former matrimonial home completely and leave the precincts of the former matrimonial home as and when requested to so by the sole trustee, the auctioneer or the real estate agent, (d) the husband is restrained from taking any action which causes any interference with any real estate agent, prospective purchasers, or the process of the sale, or with the responsibilities or obligations of the wife in her role as sole trustee, (e) the husband is not to confer/communicate/discuss with any agent relating to the sale without the prior written consent of the wife as sole trustee, give any permission to sell, or exercise sole or exclusive agency in respect of the former matrimonial home.   the listing price for sale by private treaty will be such an amount as determined solely by the wife as sole trustee and in consultation with the real estate agent and any other enquiries the wife as sole trustee wishes to make, (c) the husband is to cooperate in every way with the directions of the wife as sole trustee in relation to working with the real estate agent in relation to the marketing of the former matrimonial home for sale, including making the key available, allowing unimpeded inspection of the former matrimonial home at all reasonably requested times by the agent or trustee, ensuring the former matrimonial home is in a clean, neat, and good order at the time of the inspections/auctions/open houses, vacating the property prior to any inspections as directed by the sole trustee or real estate agent to enable any prospective buyers to have access to and properly inspect the former matrimonial home in the absence of the husband. so that there is no misunderstanding, the husband is to vacate the former matrimonial home completely and leave the precincts of the former matrimonial home as and when requested to so by the sole trustee, the auctioneer or the real estate agent, (d) the husband is restrained from taking any action which causes any interference with any real estate agent, prospective purchasers, or the process of the sale, or with the responsibilities or obligations of the wife in her role as sole trustee, (e) the husband is not to confer/communicate/discuss with any agent relating to the sale without the prior written consent of the wife as sole trustee, give any permission to sell, or exercise sole or exclusive agency in respect of the former matrimonial home.   the husband is to cooperate in every way with the directions of the wife as sole trustee in relation to working with the real estate agent in relation to the marketing of the former matrimonial home for sale, including making the key available, allowing unimpeded inspection of the former matrimonial home at all reasonably requested times by the agent or trustee, ensuring the former matrimonial home is in a clean, neat, and good order at the time of the inspections/auctions/open houses, vacating the property prior to any inspections as directed by the sole trustee or real estate agent to enable any prospective buyers to have access to and properly inspect the former matrimonial home in the absence of the husband. so that there is no misunderstanding, the husband is to vacate the former matrimonial home completely and leave the precincts of the former matrimonial home as and when requested to so by the sole trustee, the auctioneer or the real estate agent, (d) the husband is restrained from taking any action which causes any interference with any real estate agent, prospective purchasers, or the process of the sale, or with the responsibilities or obligations of the wife in her role as sole trustee, (e) the husband is not to confer/communicate/discuss with any agent relating to the sale without the prior written consent of the wife as sole trustee, give any permission to sell, or exercise sole or exclusive agency in respect of the former matrimonial home.   the husband is restrained from taking any action which causes any interference with any real estate agent, prospective purchasers, or the process of the sale, or with the responsibilities or obligations of the wife in her role as sole trustee, (e) the husband is not to confer/communicate/discuss with any agent relating to the sale without the prior written consent of the wife as sole trustee, give any permission to sell, or exercise sole or exclusive agency in respect of the former matrimonial home.   the husband is not to confer/communicate/discuss with any agent relating to the sale without the prior written consent of the wife as sole trustee, give any permission to sell, or exercise sole or exclusive agency in respect of the former matrimonial home.   the auctioneer shall be appointed by the wife as sole trustee for sale of the former matrimonial home, (b) the auction shall take place as soon as possible after the deadline date for the sale of the property by private treaty, (c) the reserve price shall be such an amount as determined by the wife as sole trustee and in consultation with the real estate agent and any other enquiries the wife as sole trustee wishes to make, (d) in the event that the former matrimonial home is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the auction then the parties are to do all acts and sign all necessary documents to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks (or other time as directed by the sole trustee) of that date upon the same terms and conditions as applied to the first auction, (e) in relation to the preparation of the former matrimonial home for the auction and any other subsequent auction, all of the provisions set out in order 21(c)‑(e) inclusive apply.   the auction shall take place as soon as possible after the deadline date for the sale of the property by private treaty, (c) the reserve price shall be such an amount as determined by the wife as sole trustee and in consultation with the real estate agent and any other enquiries the wife as sole trustee wishes to make, (d) in the event that the former matrimonial home is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the auction then the parties are to do all acts and sign all necessary documents to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks (or other time as directed by the sole trustee) of that date upon the same terms and conditions as applied to the first auction, (e) in relation to the preparation of the former matrimonial home for the auction and any other subsequent auction, all of the provisions set out in order 21(c)‑(e) inclusive apply.   the reserve price shall be such an amount as determined by the wife as sole trustee and in consultation with the real estate agent and any other enquiries the wife as sole trustee wishes to make, (d) in the event that the former matrimonial home is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the auction then the parties are to do all acts and sign all necessary documents to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks (or other time as directed by the sole trustee) of that date upon the same terms and conditions as applied to the first auction, (e) in relation to the preparation of the former matrimonial home for the auction and any other subsequent auction, all of the provisions set out in order 21(c)‑(e) inclusive apply.   in the event that the former matrimonial home is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the auction then the parties are to do all acts and sign all necessary documents to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks (or other time as directed by the sole trustee) of that date upon the same terms and conditions as applied to the first auction, (e) in relation to the preparation of the former matrimonial home for the auction and any other subsequent auction, all of the provisions set out in order 21(c)‑(e) inclusive apply.   in relation to the preparation of the former matrimonial home for the auction and any other subsequent auction, all of the provisions set out in order 21(c)‑(e) inclusive apply.   to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale/auction, (b) to discharge the mortgage secured against the property subject to the provisions relating to the husband being solely responsible for the mortgage repayments as and when they fall due and any other standing charges associated with the former matrimonial home, (c) the balance of the proceeds of sale are to be divided so as to achieve an overall property settlement of 65% to the wife and 35% to the husband, after: (i) taking into account the assets or superannuation already in the possession of each of the parties, as indicated in the list of assets comprising the property pool (at paragraph 387 of this judgment), (ii) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution the amount of any outstanding costs orders of this court and with such sum to be paid into the account nominated by the recipient, legal aid queensland, (iii) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution any further amount owing as a result of the husband’s failure to comply with order 17 herein.   to discharge the mortgage secured against the property subject to the provisions relating to the husband being solely responsible for the mortgage repayments as and when they fall due and any other standing charges associated with the former matrimonial home, (c) the balance of the proceeds of sale are to be divided so as to achieve an overall property settlement of 65% to the wife and 35% to the husband, after: (i) taking into account the assets or superannuation already in the possession of each of the parties, as indicated in the list of assets comprising the property pool (at paragraph 387 of this judgment), (ii) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution the amount of any outstanding costs orders of this court and with such sum to be paid into the account nominated by the recipient, legal aid queensland, (iii) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution any further amount owing as a result of the husband’s failure to comply with order 17 herein.   the balance of the proceeds of sale are to be divided so as to achieve an overall property settlement of 65% to the wife and 35% to the husband, after: (i) taking into account the assets or superannuation already in the possession of each of the parties, as indicated in the list of assets comprising the property pool (at paragraph 387 of this judgment), (ii) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution the amount of any outstanding costs orders of this court and with such sum to be paid into the account nominated by the recipient, legal aid queensland, (iii) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution any further amount owing as a result of the husband’s failure to comply with order 17 herein.   taking into account the assets or superannuation already in the possession of each of the parties, as indicated in the list of assets comprising the property pool (at paragraph 387 of this judgment), (ii) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution the amount of any outstanding costs orders of this court and with such sum to be paid into the account nominated by the recipient, legal aid queensland, (iii) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution any further amount owing as a result of the husband’s failure to comply with order 17 herein.  ) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution the amount of any outstanding costs orders of this court and with such sum to be paid into the account nominated by the recipient, legal aid queensland, (iii) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution any further amount owing as a result of the husband’s failure to comply with order 17 herein.  i) deducting from the husband’s share prior to distribution any further amount owing as a result of the husband’s failure to comply with order 17 herein.
registrar to sign
upon completion of the terms of these orders, the following orders apply
costs
reasons for judgment
judge willis am:
introduction  x born in 2009. x was 13 at the time of trial. (b) y born in 2011. at the time of trial y was aged 11. (c) the third child is ww born in 2016. this child prefers to go by the name z and so that is how he is referred to in this judgment. z (ww) was aged 5 (turning 6) at the time of trial.   y born in 2011. at the time of trial y was aged 11. (c) the third child is ww born in 2016. this child prefers to go by the name z and so that is how he is referred to in this judgment. z (ww) was aged 5 (turning 6) at the time of trial.   the third child is ww born in 2016. this child prefers to go by the name z and so that is how he is referred to in this judgment. z (ww) was aged 5 (turning 6) at the time of trial.
parenting orders sought - father
parenting orders sought - mother
orders sought - independent children’s lawyer
background
the father: “we came up from elevator and i’m staying by woolworths and [ms tavarus] and the boys and mum and dad have gone into big w but i’m staying far away”. audio: few minutes go past. can hear children. can hear the father start to shuffle/run. the father repeatedly saying: “you’re breaking the law, get away, don’t do it – you’re breaking a dvo get away from me, let go of my boys. [ms tavarus] go away!” the mother crying: “call the police please, he’s trying to steal my son.” audio: children crying. the father: “you’re breaking a dvo and she’s taking my child, get her away from me.” audio: can hear bystanders interrupt. verbal altercation. the father: “i am not going to, i have the son. you’re breaking a dvo, leave me alone.” audio: big argument. overlapping voices. children screaming: “dad! stop!” audio: multiple people screaming – “you’re breaking a dvo.” the father: “let go of my arm” x 10. audio: the father hysterically screaming. children screaming. unknown man: “let go of the child right now. let go of the child. you need to let go of the baby.” the mother: “you’re hurting me” – screaming. unknown man: “let go of the child mate.” the father: “why are you doing this to me? let go of my arm. you have to let go of my arm, you’re assaulting me. let go of my arm. you have to let go of me. give my son back. let me walk away, let go of my arm.” unknown man: “no mate. i’m not letting go.” audio: verbal argument between unknown man and the father. inaudible.
221. [in] mid-2019, i was shopping with the children in the [o shopping centre]. as i was leaving, i saw [mr tavarus] and his parents coming up the travelator. to avoid them, i turned and went into big w. i tried not to let the boys know that i was worried. 222. i heard [ms n] calling to the older boys to come to her. [x] told her “no, go away you’re trying to hurt my mother” and the boys ran away. [z] was in the trolley that i was pushing. 223. i was afraid and tried to get help. [mr m] came around a shelf and picked [z] up and out of the trolley. i told him that he wasn’t allowed to take [z] without my permission and [mr m] responded with: “yes i am, i’m allowed to give him a hug as a grandparent”. 224. [mr m] started walking away with [z] and i saw him give [z] to [ms n] who started running away with [z] towards the exit. a friend of mine, [mr p], was nearby and he asked if i needed help. i told him that i did and asked him to call the police. 225. i ran after [ms n] and saw her give [z] to [mr tavarus]. i saw that [x] was also with [mr tavarus] and [ms n] going down the travelator. i followed and saw that [x] was yelling and trying to pull [z] away from [mr tavarus], [z] was screaming. i was afraid but followed them, calling out for them to stop. [y] followed along behind me. 226. i managed to catch up to [mr tavarus] and tried to pull [z] back into my arms. [ms n] and [mr tavarus] pushed me backwards, stopping me from reaching [z]. i called for help and several people and security came running. 227. [mr tavarus] and [ms n] pulled [z] between them and tried to lay on the floor with [z] between them and the floor. people grabbed [mr tavarus] and held him down. security pulled [z] from [mr tavarus] and returned him to me. [z] was crying and i tried to calm him down. 228. when the police arrived, they told me to take the boys and make a statement the following day. 229. [in] mid-2019, i applied for a domestic violence orders naming [mr tavarus'] parents as the respondents. a temporary protection order was made that day.
the law  children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives).
the seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. in such matters “reasonable satisfaction” should not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences.
the issues in dispute the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
2009
2012
2013
2014
2015
2017
2018
2019
hi [ms tavarus], hope you have a good week. i understand you are still going to church, so i wanted to share these with you in response to what you wrote in the protection order against me. when we talked about this subject last year, i quoted some of these verses. the one you appear to be upset about is romans 7.3 (see below). this is what the bible says – this idea comes from the bible... it is not something that i made up. i hope you can understand i was only quoting this and had no intention of being “mean” about it, and i also didn’t know you would get upset at me over it. i did marry you for life and i know that god doesn’t want us to separate. the thing is that marriage is a “covenant” that a man and a wife do before god. in this way, it is god who makes the rules for how it works. there are other bible verses that apply just to men as well. if there’s any way we could do counselling with [pastor ll] i would be very excited about it. thanks for your understanding. the verses quoted are luke 16, 18: anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman commits adultery, and the man who marries a divorced woman commits adultery. under that, 1 corinthian 7.39: a woman is bound to her husband as long as he lives, but if a husband dies, she is free to marry any one she wishes, but he must belong to the lord. next one, ephesians 5.33: however, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband. next one, romans 7.23: for example, by law a married woman is bound to her husband as long as he is alive, but if her husband dies, she is released from the law that binds her to him. so then if she has sexual relations with another man while her husband is still alive, she is called an adulteress, but if her husband dies, she is released from that law and is not an adulteress if she marries another man. next one, hebrews 13.4: marriage should be honoured by all and the marriage bed kept pure, for god will judge the adulterer and all the sexual immorals.
2022
i spent time with the boys and we played games and laughed and had a lot of fun. at 11.30, i had the following conversation with [y] while we were playing hide and seek, and [x] was counting 30 before he looked for us. me: [y], did someone make a story that daddy smacked you with something? [y]: what? me: did someone make a story that daddy smacked you with something? [y]: (more confused.) what? me: before? [y]: before what? me: i can’t remember. did someone say someone smacked you with a hanger? [y]: (thinking and looking confused.) no. the father goes on to say: [y] and i had a wonderful day, with many outbursts of laughter, especially when y had caught me not being about to hide in hide and seek properly. [y] was unperturbed by my question, and it was entirely obvious that he had no idea about the story. i never hit [y] with a clothes hanger across his bottom. i would never hit the children.
no. so if i can explain. as i’ve said, i – he was – his demeanour changed. it was very odd in my experience. he was staring ahead. so the interview – sorry, the observations were in a room with a conference table and chairs around them. and i’m seated on one side and [mr tavarus] and the children were on the other side of that table. and they were kind of playing on the table with – one of the kids had a [toy] and they were playing games and cards sitting up at the table together. and when that happened, after [x] left, he started questioning the room, and then he sat on the floor where there wasn’t as much room because it’s a big conference table that they playing on. and i had to physically move myself around the table so i could see him interact with the children. it’s quite an odd response.
surveillance of w
96. i have collated an abundance of evidence that [w] has lived primarily with [ms kk] and her partner from february 2019 until this day. this includes brining [w] to [ms tavarus] to check in to her childcare centre, as well as transferring [w] to and from [ms tavarus] before the scheduled visits with [w]’s mother when that was working. 97. on 27 january 2022, i observed [w] and her sister [...] playing, and [w] told me that she was going to [ms kk], and that [ms kk] was her mummy. this interaction can be heard in the audio attached and labelled here as .... 98. i have also seen a video of [w] identifying [ms kk] and [mr oo] as her parents, and a copy of this is in my possession. 99. this entire incident over the ‘giving-away’ of [w] shows [ms tavarus] is unfit to care for children.
that’s not true. and the recording doesn’t show that. the first mention of [ms kk] is [w] vents her frustration with [her sister] that they weren’t sharing toys or whatever. and [w] said that she was going to go to [ms kk]. that’s the very first time. that it was mentioned. her honour: and were you recording then, sir?---yes. because that - - - okay. so i think what the question is is when did you start recording?---it would have been sometime after they arrived and we were sitting in the lounge - - - okay?---and talking about - - - talking - - -?---things. - - - with the parents?---and the dangers and stuff. and the dangers of - - -?---of – that they were – that there were court orders and that we could get in – you know, they could get into trouble with the orders if it was found that [w] was brought to me. but not that i’m any risk to anyone but it’s just that we have to document what happened to show the truth.
i only care about what happened to [w], but i’m not part of any other court things. i don’t know what happens in her court. are you or are you not aware that the court made a final order that [w] live with [ms tavarus]?---i understand that, but i don’t have any firsthand – that’s only what i’ve been told. so why have you included in this proceeding your points in your affidavit stating you’ve compiled an abundance of evidence about [w]?---because what has happened to [w] is wrong. it’s really wrong. and no one cares about [w]. you know, who – how can – where’s the humanity that – if you look at what happened to [w] and where she is, and no one cares and no one wants to help her, you know, what’s – what’s going on?
5. [mr tavarus] will provide for and be responsible for all aspects of [w]’s care, including where she will live, her physical, health and educational needs and any other need [w] may have regarding her future, wellbeing and safety.
father’s violence – unacceptable risk
so are you seriously telling the court that my client was able to hold you down on the kitchen table by holding your – pushing your head onto the kitchen table?---that’s correct. he was physically able to do that?---yes. that’s correct. i suggest that’s a nonsense. given the size of my client and your size, i just – i suggest it’s a total nonsense?---that’s – that’s untrue. i suggest you just made that up?---no.
now, your honour, there’s also this business about the mother being pushed and pulled around the house by the father. i mean, your honour – and also her being held down on the table by the father when – around about the time the contract – the house contract was being negotiated. your honour, that, in my submission, given the physical nature of both the parties, in my submission, that is just not possible. it is not believable that my client, who’s a slight man, would hold down the mother, who is not a slight person, and could do that physically.
s.60cc(3)(j) and (k) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family
that a court should adopt findings by other judges about matters contentious before those other judges and, in one form or another, contentious in fresh proceedings before the court, is, as i said during the course of discussion of the topic at the hearing, somewhat “counterintuitive”- at least to me. nevertheless, it seems to be plain that the section permits me to do so. moreover, the section can, in my view, be seen to have particular utility in a case such as the present where historical issues are mirrored in current issues before the court and where those issues are directly “relevant” to the best interests of children – the specific focus of division 12a of the act.
pursuant to s.259f criminal code, the defendant is subject to a restraining order for a period of 5 years.   the defendant is restrained from locating, attempting to locate or asking someone else to locate the complainant in these proceedings [ms tavarus] and the children of the defendant and the complainant, namely [x] , [y] and [z], unless allowed by any court including a court exercising family law jurisdiction or by his legal representative or with the approval of the officer in charge of the [town d] police station or by any agreement in writing between the defendant and complainant. (2) he is further restrained from following or approaching to within 50 metres of the said complainant when she is at any place, unless with the agreement of the complainant in writing or when attending court proceedings or mediation. (3) he is to be of good behaviour towards the children named in (1) above and not commit acts that would constitute associated domestic violence against them and not expose them to domestic violence. (4) this order shall commence from september 2020 and remain in force until september 2025.   he is further restrained from following or approaching to within 50 metres of the said complainant when she is at any place, unless with the agreement of the complainant in writing or when attending court proceedings or mediation. (3) he is to be of good behaviour towards the children named in (1) above and not commit acts that would constitute associated domestic violence against them and not expose them to domestic violence. (4) this order shall commence from september 2020 and remain in force until september 2025.   he is to be of good behaviour towards the children named in (1) above and not commit acts that would constitute associated domestic violence against them and not expose them to domestic violence. (4) this order shall commence from september 2020 and remain in force until september 2025.   this order shall commence from september 2020 and remain in force until september 2025.
now, you accept that that was in his honour’s judgment?---yes. he wrote that. all right. now, you’re aware, aren’t you, that magistrate noud of the magistrates court at [town d] found that he was satisfied at the conclusion of the trial, in which you and [ms tavarus] brought cross-applications for a protection order, his honour found: the acts found to comprise domestic violence was a practice used by [mr tavarus] where he regularly electronically recorded [ms tavarus] without her knowledge or consent. all right. now, his honour gave the explicit example of you downloading [ms tavarus’] dash camera footage in his judgment, didn’t he?---yes. as an example of you regularly electronically recording her as an act of domestic violence?---no. it’s not an example of that. i’m not asking of your opinion. i’m asking you whether or not you accept that was his honour’s finding?---that’s his opinion. yes.  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and
s.60cc(3) the additional considerations are:
s.60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
first family report
61. [y] struggles with the visits with [mr tavarus], and in the past year it has been very difficult to get [y] to attend the visits, and i have to force [y] into the car to go to the visits with [mr tavarus]. the morning of the visit, [y] is very tearful, and he has made himself vomit several times to try and avoid going to the visit. when it is time to leave, [y] says things like: “i don’t want to go” and he has tried to run away. on the way to the visits, [y] cries and says: “do we have to do this” and “i’m sick, i don’t want to go”. i try my best to encourage [y] and i always try and do a fun activity with the boys after the visits, to encourage them to attend the visits and be positive. 62. after the visits with [mr tavarus], [y] is normally upset and sits quietly in the car, there have been several occasions that [y] has told me “i am feeling sad” and has told me that what [mr tavarus] says to him has upset him. there was an occasion that [y] returned from the visit upset and said words to the effect of: “dad showed me a picture of my room with another girl in it playing with my toys” and “i am sad that someone is using my room and my bed”. 63. on or about december 2020, [y] returned from spending time with [mr tavarus], and he was very upset. i asked him why he was upset, and he said: “dad has a shirt, and it has a photo of [w] on it, and it said: “i love you” on [w],” and “he was asking about [w], and he said he is allowed to ask about [w] because he named her, and [w] is his favourite girl”. the next day, i saw [y] and [w] playing in the hallway. [y] picked [w] up into the air and dropped her, causing her to fall on the ground. i ran over and asked him why he did that, and he said: “i am feeling jealous and confused because [dad] said [w] is special.”
second family report
s.60cc(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and other persons including grandparents or other relative of the child
s.60cc(3)(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity (i) to participate in making decisions about major, long term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child
s.60cc(3)(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
s.60cc(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living
i suggest that at this juncture in his [x’s] life particularly he [x] needs his father in his life to give him some guidance, even if that is – that guidance is given in a contact centre?---no. i don’t believe that’s – that’s the case. like, i’ve already – my evidence is that i don’t believe that’s the case. i think that having contact with his father is making his behaviour – is exacerbating his behaviour.
s.60cc(3)(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
s.60cc(3)(f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
validity of the results of the initial assessment indicated that there may have been some idiosyncratic responses to particular items which could affect the test results. additionally, some indicators fell outside the normal range suggesting that [mr tavarus] might not have answered in a completely forthright manner. these results indicate that these results should be interpreted with caution. following completion of the initial assessment, [mr tavarus] contact the examiner and reported that after some research he felt that he had not answered some of the questions correctly. he requested that the results be discarded, and he be provided with an opportunity to complete the questionnaire again. the results of the second questionnaire are detailed in this report.
submissive, conforming, and perhaps naïve. that he finds it difficult to assert himself and display any anger in relationships, this may be driven by anxiety about potential rejection by others. he will tend to feel helpless and overwhelmed under relatively mild pressure and will seek the assistance of others. his concerns about offending others could potentially cause situations where others could take advantage of him.
in relation to allegations of physical, emotional, psychological, or financial violence between them during their relationship. he told me 'i am a pacifist personality and i only care about nurturing and building things up ... when these documents started coming along over the last year i was in shock and disbelief because it is not my personality ... because i am the quiet type and [ms tavarus] is the outgoing, i don 't want to dominate, i am just a happy go lucky type ... there is a tendency to dominate but i run away and hide from that ... i am not being mean but that is her big personality and i am the little personality'.
my psychological reports filed earlier show my personality type has negative potential for violence when my profile is compared with thousands of other clinical profiles. [ms tavarus] was the dominant individual in our relationship, and this is reflected by my psychological reports showing a high rating for my submissiveness. this is because the reality is i do my best to avoid conflict.
s.60cc(3)(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant
ss.60cc(3)(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
s.60cc(3)(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
parental responsibility
conclusions – best interests
propertyfurther background
i would like to propose that by 24 march 2023, i would show proof of having the sum of $142,000 in a trust fund in my name. on that date, having also an approval from the bank for a mortgage of $140,000 ($20,000 of which is to be paid to [ms tavarus] also), solicitors would change the title of the [c street, town d] property into my sole ownership and make a cash payment of 160,000 to [ms tavarus]. signed, [mr tavarus].
step 1 – determining the assets and liabilities
add back – father’s superannuation withdrawals
conclusion – assets and liabilities
step 2 – financial and non-financial contributions (evaluation of section 79(4))
step 3 – section 75(2) factors
default position – wife as trustee for sale
step 4 – just and equitable
costsfurther background
it is however, a mistake to think that if a costs order is made, that order can only be on a party and party basis or on an indemnity basis. the words “such order as to costs... as the court considers just” permit the court to fashion an order that is apt to the circumstances. one such well known example is an assessment on a trustee basis, which is more generous than party and party costs, but falls short of an indemnity. orders for a partial indemnity or for a particular period are obvious possibilities. the court may also fix costs in a particular sum, taking account of all relevant circumstances, that type of order too is neither one for party and party costs nor an indemnity costs order. for convenience in these reasons we shall refer to such orders as “special costs order.”
conclusions – costs  not having the relevant evidence ready for the final trial. the sole reason that an additional day was required was because of the husband’s failure to provide sufficient evidence as to his capacity to borrow the necessary funds. (b) the husband took the opportunity at the final hearing day to file an affidavit that was, in large part, struck out. (c) the husband has overall been found to have failed in his obligation of disclosure in this matter.   the husband took the opportunity at the final hearing day to file an affidavit that was, in large part, struck out. (c) the husband has overall been found to have failed in his obligation of disclosure in this matter.   the husband has overall been found to have failed in his obligation of disclosure in this matter.
associate: dated: 26 july 2023
dated: 26 july 2023
[1] affidavit of ms tavarus filed 12 september 2022, paragraph 77.[2] affidavit of ms tavarus filed 12 september 2022 at paragraph 205.[3] as will be seen, another withdrawal was found to have been made in 2021 at the trial.[4] the men’s legal service.[5] exhibit icl-5 in these proceedings. [6] affidavit of ms tavarus filed 12 september 2022 at paragraph 87-88.[7] affidavit of ms tavarus filed 12 september 2022 at paragraph 89.[8] transcript of 21 september 2022 pages 335-7.[9] paragraphs 9.23 and 9.24 of the second family report. [10] paragraph 4.7 of the second family report. [11] first family report at paragraph 8.12.[12] see the father’s own recording of the police trying to get him to agree to give the mother a car. [13] the mother’s evidence was that the father chose x’s name whilst the mother was recovering from a very difficult birth. the mother went along with this knowing another opportunity would come for her to name another child.[14] at paragraph 7.4 of the second family report.[15] pages 38 to 47 of the transcript of 21 september 2022.[16] page 41, line 20 of the transcript of 21 september 2022.[17] page 41, line 45 of the transcript of 21 september 2022.[18] page 27 of the annexures to the father’s affidavit filed 14 september 2022. [19] father’s trial affidavit filed 14 september 2022 at paragraphs 145-147.[20] bloomberg & rod [2010] famcafc 112.[21] paragraphs 9.23 and 9.24 of the second family report.[22] transcript of 21 september 2022 at page 23.[23] first family report at paragraph 10.2.[24] exhibit m2 in these proceedings.[25] father’s trial affidavit filed 14 september 2022 at paragraph 149.[26] father’s trial affidavit filed 14 september 2022 at paragraph 105.[27] paragraph 190 of the father’s trial affidavit filed 14 september 2022.[28] transcript of 28 september 2022 at page 33.[29] moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375.[30] paragraphs 357 and 358 of the mother’s trial affidavit filed 12 september 2022.[31] not previously disclosed by him. [32] transcript of 21 september 2022 at page 96.[33] transcript of 28 september 2022 at page 44.[34] (1980) hca 4; (1980) 28 alr 213.