last updated: 16 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
terrill & deighton [2023] fedcfamc2f 930
orders
the court orders that:  a parenting orders program, and (b) a tuning into teens program.   a tuning into teens program.
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessyintroduction
mother’s application to appear via electronic means
substantive application
chronology of events
first orders: november 2021
the first expert report
socit & child protection
socit & child protection withdraw
second expert report
8 december 2022 final orders: children live with father
father alleges mother acted in “bad faith”
trouble in summer and first term holidays
children don’t return after july school holidays
the mother’s interim application
1. the children remain in queensland and live with the mother. the children spend time with the father for one week during each queensland school holidays period. the children to stay at either their uncles' house or their grandparents residence, while spending time with the father. that the mother can enrol the children into a queensland school, extracurricular activities and counselling as required to facilitate these orders, changeover shall take place by the children travelling via airplane with the mother or nominated family member (until [z] turns 12 years of age) and the father is to solely bear the cost of all the childrens flights. he father is to nominate a family member ... to collect and drop off the children from the mother at melbourne airport during changeovers.
father’s interim application: school holiday time in victoria only
13c court may refer parties to family counselling, family dispute resolution and other family services (1) a court exercising jurisdiction in proceedings under this act may, at any stage in the proceedings, make one or more of the following orders: (a) that one or more of the parties to the proceedings attend family counselling,   that one or more of the parties to the proceedings attend family counselling,   that the parties to the proceedings attend family dispute resolution, (c) that one or more of the parties to the proceedings participate in an appropriate course, program or other service.   that one or more of the parties to the proceedings participate in an appropriate course, program or other service.   the court may suggest a particular purpose for the attendance or participation. (3) the order may require the party or parties to encourage the participation of specified other persons who are likely to be affected by the proceedings. (4) the court may make any other orders it considers reasonably necessary or appropriate in relation to the order. (5) the court may make orders under this section:   on its own initiative, or (b) on the application of:  a party to the proceedings, or (ii) a lawyer independently representing a child's interests under an order made under section 68l.  ) a lawyer independently representing a child's interests under an order made under section 68l.  tes omitted)
associate: dated: 28 july 2023
dated: 28 july 2023
[1] rice v asplund [1978] famca 84; (1979) flc 90-725.