last updated: 16 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hansom & toth [2023] fedcfamc2f 920
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  religion (b) health (including medical and dental treatment) (c) schooling (d) culture (e) where the children live (if it makes it more difficult to spend time with the parents)   health (including medical and dental treatment) (c) schooling (d) culture (e) where the children live (if it makes it more difficult to spend time with the parents)   schooling (d) culture (e) where the children live (if it makes it more difficult to spend time with the parents)   culture (e) where the children live (if it makes it more difficult to spend time with the parents)   where the children live (if it makes it more difficult to spend time with the parents)   inform the parents in writing 14 days prior to any decision regarding major long-term issues, detailing the decision to be made, their suggestions and reason for that suggestion. (b) the parents will advise the paternal grandmother, in writing, within 7 days of receiving the grandmother’s letter as above, of their decision regarding the major long-term decision and their reasons for same and any failure to respond to such communication shall be deemed acceptance of the decision. (c) if the parties are unable to agree, they shall attend professional mediation to attempt to resolve the issue.   the parents will advise the paternal grandmother, in writing, within 7 days of receiving the grandmother’s letter as above, of their decision regarding the major long-term decision and their reasons for same and any failure to respond to such communication shall be deemed acceptance of the decision. (c) if the parties are unable to agree, they shall attend professional mediation to attempt to resolve the issue.   if the parties are unable to agree, they shall attend professional mediation to attempt to resolve the issue.
medical  the child becoming seriously ill, (b) the child becoming hospitalised, (c) the child being involved in an accident.   the child becoming hospitalised, (c) the child being involved in an accident.   the child being involved in an accident.
schooling/ extracurricular activity
contact details
live with arrangement for the child
spend time  that the parents are to coordinate between themselves as to who shall have the child during the parents’ time blocks, and that parent time block shall be in accordance with the following regime. (b) during usual pre-school terms, until the child reaches school age, each weekend, with collection from pre-school at the conclusion of the pre-school day on friday, until before pre-school on monday, with drop off at pre-school, and in the event that either the friday or monday are a public holiday, the parents time with the child shall be extended to incorporate a changeover from pre-school on either of the thursday or tuesday on either side of the relevant public holiday. (c) upon commencement of primary school: (i) during the new south wales school terms, each weekend from after the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday, and in the event that either the friday or monday are a public holiday, the parents time with the child shall be extended to incorporate a changeover from pre-school on either of the thursday or tuesday on either side of the relevant public holiday. (ii) for one half of each of the new south wales terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays: 1. the first half in even numbered years – with changeover to occur from school on the last day of the school term, and handover to be coordinated with the paternal grandmother, and 2. the second half in odd numbered years – with changeover to be coordinated between the parent who is to have the child and the paternal grandmother at 12 noon on the saturday 7 days after school holidays commence, and handover to be at 12 noon two days prior to school recommencing. (iii) during the term 4 “christmas” school holidays as follows: 1. in odd years, from 2 pm on 2 january until 2 pm on 15 january, and 2. in even years, from 2 pm on 15 january until 2 pm on the earlier of 28 january, or two days before the start of the school term. (d) christmas and new year: (i) in odd years, from 23 december until 27 december, and (ii) in even years, from 27 december until 2 january. (e) the parents’ time shall be suspended on the following days: (i) country g day, (ii) the child’s birthday in even years, (iii) on the paternal grandmother’s birthday, (iv) over the easter weekend, from 4 pm on easter saturday until 10 am (or before school) on tuesday.   during usual pre-school terms, until the child reaches school age, each weekend, with collection from pre-school at the conclusion of the pre-school day on friday, until before pre-school on monday, with drop off at pre-school, and in the event that either the friday or monday are a public holiday, the parents time with the child shall be extended to incorporate a changeover from pre-school on either of the thursday or tuesday on either side of the relevant public holiday. (c) upon commencement of primary school: (i) during the new south wales school terms, each weekend from after the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday, and in the event that either the friday or monday are a public holiday, the parents time with the child shall be extended to incorporate a changeover from pre-school on either of the thursday or tuesday on either side of the relevant public holiday. (ii) for one half of each of the new south wales terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays: 1. the first half in even numbered years – with changeover to occur from school on the last day of the school term, and handover to be coordinated with the paternal grandmother, and 2. the second half in odd numbered years – with changeover to be coordinated between the parent who is to have the child and the paternal grandmother at 12 noon on the saturday 7 days after school holidays commence, and handover to be at 12 noon two days prior to school recommencing. (iii) during the term 4 “christmas” school holidays as follows: 1. in odd years, from 2 pm on 2 january until 2 pm on 15 january, and 2. in even years, from 2 pm on 15 january until 2 pm on the earlier of 28 january, or two days before the start of the school term. (d) christmas and new year: (i) in odd years, from 23 december until 27 december, and (ii) in even years, from 27 december until 2 january. (e) the parents’ time shall be suspended on the following days: (i) country g day, (ii) the child’s birthday in even years, (iii) on the paternal grandmother’s birthday, (iv) over the easter weekend, from 4 pm on easter saturday until 10 am (or before school) on tuesday.   upon commencement of primary school: (i) during the new south wales school terms, each weekend from after the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday, and in the event that either the friday or monday are a public holiday, the parents time with the child shall be extended to incorporate a changeover from pre-school on either of the thursday or tuesday on either side of the relevant public holiday. (ii) for one half of each of the new south wales terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays: 1. the first half in even numbered years – with changeover to occur from school on the last day of the school term, and handover to be coordinated with the paternal grandmother, and 2. the second half in odd numbered years – with changeover to be coordinated between the parent who is to have the child and the paternal grandmother at 12 noon on the saturday 7 days after school holidays commence, and handover to be at 12 noon two days prior to school recommencing. (iii) during the term 4 “christmas” school holidays as follows: 1. in odd years, from 2 pm on 2 january until 2 pm on 15 january, and 2. in even years, from 2 pm on 15 january until 2 pm on the earlier of 28 january, or two days before the start of the school term. (d) christmas and new year: (i) in odd years, from 23 december until 27 december, and (ii) in even years, from 27 december until 2 january. (e) the parents’ time shall be suspended on the following days: (i) country g day, (ii) the child’s birthday in even years, (iii) on the paternal grandmother’s birthday, (iv) over the easter weekend, from 4 pm on easter saturday until 10 am (or before school) on tuesday.   during the new south wales school terms, each weekend from after the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday, and in the event that either the friday or monday are a public holiday, the parents time with the child shall be extended to incorporate a changeover from pre-school on either of the thursday or tuesday on either side of the relevant public holiday. (ii) for one half of each of the new south wales terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays: 1. the first half in even numbered years – with changeover to occur from school on the last day of the school term, and handover to be coordinated with the paternal grandmother, and 2. the second half in odd numbered years – with changeover to be coordinated between the parent who is to have the child and the paternal grandmother at 12 noon on the saturday 7 days after school holidays commence, and handover to be at 12 noon two days prior to school recommencing. (iii) during the term 4 “christmas” school holidays as follows: 1. in odd years, from 2 pm on 2 january until 2 pm on 15 january, and 2. in even years, from 2 pm on 15 january until 2 pm on the earlier of 28 january, or two days before the start of the school term.  ) for one half of each of the new south wales terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays: 1. the first half in even numbered years – with changeover to occur from school on the last day of the school term, and handover to be coordinated with the paternal grandmother, and 2. the second half in odd numbered years – with changeover to be coordinated between the parent who is to have the child and the paternal grandmother at 12 noon on the saturday 7 days after school holidays commence, and handover to be at 12 noon two days prior to school recommencing. (iii) during the term 4 “christmas” school holidays as follows: 1. in odd years, from 2 pm on 2 january until 2 pm on 15 january, and 2. in even years, from 2 pm on 15 january until 2 pm on the earlier of 28 january, or two days before the start of the school term.  i) during the term 4 “christmas” school holidays as follows: 1. in odd years, from 2 pm on 2 january until 2 pm on 15 january, and 2. in even years, from 2 pm on 15 january until 2 pm on the earlier of 28 january, or two days before the start of the school term.   christmas and new year: (i) in odd years, from 23 december until 27 december, and (ii) in even years, from 27 december until 2 january. (e) the parents’ time shall be suspended on the following days: (i) country g day, (ii) the child’s birthday in even years, (iii) on the paternal grandmother’s birthday, (iv) over the easter weekend, from 4 pm on easter saturday until 10 am (or before school) on tuesday.   in odd years, from 23 december until 27 december, and (ii) in even years, from 27 december until 2 january.  ) in even years, from 27 december until 2 january.   the parents’ time shall be suspended on the following days: (i) country g day, (ii) the child’s birthday in even years, (iii) on the paternal grandmother’s birthday, (iv) over the easter weekend, from 4 pm on easter saturday until 10 am (or before school) on tuesday.   country g day, (ii) the child’s birthday in even years, (iii) on the paternal grandmother’s birthday, (iv) over the easter weekend, from 4 pm on easter saturday until 10 am (or before school) on tuesday.  ) the child’s birthday in even years, (iii) on the paternal grandmother’s birthday, (iv) over the easter weekend, from 4 pm on easter saturday until 10 am (or before school) on tuesday.  i) on the paternal grandmother’s birthday, (iv) over the easter weekend, from 4 pm on easter saturday until 10 am (or before school) on tuesday.  ) over the easter weekend, from 4 pm on easter saturday until 10 am (or before school) on tuesday.
implementation
first preference carer  they will have the child for the relevant parent block, (b) what time they are collecting the child, (c) to confirm the location of changeover, and (d) to confirm the date, time and location of handover at the end of the parent time block.   what time they are collecting the child, (c) to confirm the location of changeover, and (d) to confirm the date, time and location of handover at the end of the parent time block.   to confirm the location of changeover, and (d) to confirm the date, time and location of handover at the end of the parent time block.   to confirm the date, time and location of handover at the end of the parent time block.
electronic communication
restraints  discussing the other parent or events in the other parent’s home in the presence or hearing the child or permitting any other person to do so, (b) involving the child in decisions or discussions about the future living arrangements of the child and the amount of time they spend with the other parent or permitting any other person to do so, (c) criticising or making derogatory statements about the other parties, their partners or their family in the presence or hearing of any of the child or permitting others to do so, (d) questioning or conversing with the child about where the child want to live or permitting anyone else to do so, (e) passing messages to the other parent, or paternal grandmother, through the child in any form except any communication book provided for in these orders, (f) allowing the child to be dressed in a way that is not weather appropriate, including ensuring the child has appropriate levels of warmth, socks, shoes, and wet weather clothing where necessary, (g) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle without an age appropriate restraint, (h) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle driven by an unlicensed driver, and (i) allowing the child to travel in an unregistered vehicle.   involving the child in decisions or discussions about the future living arrangements of the child and the amount of time they spend with the other parent or permitting any other person to do so, (c) criticising or making derogatory statements about the other parties, their partners or their family in the presence or hearing of any of the child or permitting others to do so, (d) questioning or conversing with the child about where the child want to live or permitting anyone else to do so, (e) passing messages to the other parent, or paternal grandmother, through the child in any form except any communication book provided for in these orders, (f) allowing the child to be dressed in a way that is not weather appropriate, including ensuring the child has appropriate levels of warmth, socks, shoes, and wet weather clothing where necessary, (g) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle without an age appropriate restraint, (h) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle driven by an unlicensed driver, and (i) allowing the child to travel in an unregistered vehicle.   criticising or making derogatory statements about the other parties, their partners or their family in the presence or hearing of any of the child or permitting others to do so, (d) questioning or conversing with the child about where the child want to live or permitting anyone else to do so, (e) passing messages to the other parent, or paternal grandmother, through the child in any form except any communication book provided for in these orders, (f) allowing the child to be dressed in a way that is not weather appropriate, including ensuring the child has appropriate levels of warmth, socks, shoes, and wet weather clothing where necessary, (g) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle without an age appropriate restraint, (h) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle driven by an unlicensed driver, and (i) allowing the child to travel in an unregistered vehicle.   questioning or conversing with the child about where the child want to live or permitting anyone else to do so, (e) passing messages to the other parent, or paternal grandmother, through the child in any form except any communication book provided for in these orders, (f) allowing the child to be dressed in a way that is not weather appropriate, including ensuring the child has appropriate levels of warmth, socks, shoes, and wet weather clothing where necessary, (g) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle without an age appropriate restraint, (h) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle driven by an unlicensed driver, and (i) allowing the child to travel in an unregistered vehicle.   passing messages to the other parent, or paternal grandmother, through the child in any form except any communication book provided for in these orders, (f) allowing the child to be dressed in a way that is not weather appropriate, including ensuring the child has appropriate levels of warmth, socks, shoes, and wet weather clothing where necessary, (g) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle without an age appropriate restraint, (h) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle driven by an unlicensed driver, and (i) allowing the child to travel in an unregistered vehicle.   allowing the child to be dressed in a way that is not weather appropriate, including ensuring the child has appropriate levels of warmth, socks, shoes, and wet weather clothing where necessary, (g) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle without an age appropriate restraint, (h) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle driven by an unlicensed driver, and (i) allowing the child to travel in an unregistered vehicle.   allowing the child to travel in a vehicle without an age appropriate restraint, (h) allowing the child to travel in a vehicle driven by an unlicensed driver, and (i) allowing the child to travel in an unregistered vehicle.   allowing the child to travel in a vehicle driven by an unlicensed driver, and (i) allowing the child to travel in an unregistered vehicle.   allowing the child to travel in an unregistered vehicle.
travel  the party who is to travel internationally with the child on any given occasion will give the paternal grandmother 28 days written notice of the: (i) proposed departure and return dates (ii) itinerary of the proposed travel and accommodation overseas, (iii) the address and telephone number of the premises where the children will be staying from time to time during the trip (b) the party who is to travel internationally with the children any given occasion will provide the paternal grandmother with copies of return airline tickets booking and written confirmation of payment for the return airline tickets not later than 7 days prior to the proposed departure date.   proposed departure and return dates (ii) itinerary of the proposed travel and accommodation overseas, (iii) the address and telephone number of the premises where the children will be staying from time to time during the trip  ) itinerary of the proposed travel and accommodation overseas, (iii) the address and telephone number of the premises where the children will be staying from time to time during the trip  i) the address and telephone number of the premises where the children will be staying from time to time during the trip   the party who is to travel internationally with the children any given occasion will provide the paternal grandmother with copies of return airline tickets booking and written confirmation of payment for the return airline tickets not later than 7 days prior to the proposed departure date.
passports
parenting program
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge street
undefended hearing
“a respondent who merely wishes to ask the court to dismiss the appellant’s application (and seeks no other order) and who wishes to place no evidence before the court, but who wishes to submit that the application should be dismissed even on the applicant’s evidence, is certainly not obliged by the rules to file any answer or affidavit, but only a notice of address for service. however, if such a respondent then attends the hearing and in fact makes no submissions against the application (as the husband did in this case) then, in anyone’s language, the application is ‘undefended’ or ‘unopposed’. unlike some other jurisdictions, such a circumstance does not and cannot lead, in this court, to a ‘judgment by default’ in favour of the applicant, because the court must still decide, on the evidence before it, that the applicant is entitled, in law, to the relief claimed and that, in the exercise of its discretion, it is appropriate to grant that relief. nevertheless, the proceedings in such a case are clearly ‘undefended’, and it would be a misuse of language to describe them otherwise. they certainly could not be described as ‘defended’.”
evidence
chronology
family report
second respondent’s evidence
parenting law  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm arising from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm arising from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.
the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
best interests of the child   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
...no doubt in the majority of cases, there will be a positive benefit for the child having a significant relationship with both parents, but there will also be some cases where there will be no positive benefit to be derived by a child by a court attempting to craft orders to foster a relationship with one parent, if this would not be in the child’s best interests.
... having a “meaningful relationship” with both parents is but one part of a set of arrangements that makes up a care arrangement. all parts of the arrangement must be considered before deciding what outcome is in the child’s best interests.
there is no legislative definition of “meaningful relationship” but for there to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child. (emphasis added)
and that desirability only operates when there is a chance of a meaningful relationship, which is beneficial to the child. it is not, in other words, a question of contact for contact sake. if there is a situation where contact with a parent is, on balance, likely to cause more harm to the child than good, or even is not likely to confer any benefit, then little purpose is served by this court making orders for such contact. that does not detract from the desirability of the child having a meaningful relationship, but the possibility of a meaningful relationship must first exist. (emphasis added)
issue of risk
138. the assessment of risk is a predictive exercise and while it is, naturally enough, liable to be influenced by factual findings about past events, the contemplation of risk entails the foresight of possible harm. it is an oddity to expect that the mere possibility of future harm can or should be proven as a probability, as has been implied before (potter and potter [2007] famca 350, (2007) flc 93-326 at [110], [129]). risks of harm must be heeded even if they are improbable eventualities. 139. speaking of the risk of some future occurrence is just another way of expressing the chance of it happening. the concept of chance lies along a continuum, encompassing all outcomes which lie in the range between highly probable and remotely possible, assuming the polar extremes of certainty are ignored. in the current context, the higher the chance of the children’s sexual abuse, the greater the risk of their physical or psychological harm. at some point on the continuum the risk of such harm becomes so potent it cannot be tolerated: it is unacceptable. ... 142. as was recognised by hale lj (as her ladyship then was) in re c and b (children) (care order: future harm) [2001] 1 f.l.r 611 at [28], in child-related proceedings, a comparatively small risk of really serious harm can justify action, while even the virtual certainty of slight harm might not. it could hardly be otherwise, because no prudent adult would willingly expose a child to the risk of sexual abuse when there is an unacceptably high chance of its occurrence, even though the chance is not proven by the evidence to be probable. requiring the proof of any possible future child abuse as a probability would pervert the law as settled by the high court in m v m and malec. (emphasis in the original)
additional considerations
issues relating to the children – their views, level of maturity, culture and relationships:   sub-section (3)(a) – any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views, (ii) sub-section (3)(b) – the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and other persons, including any grandparent or other relative of the child, (iii) sub-section (3)(g) – the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and either of the child’s parents and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks relevant, and (iv) sub-section (3)(h) – issues pertaining to the culture of the child if the child is aboriginal or a torres strait islander.  ) sub-section (3)(b) – the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and other persons, including any grandparent or other relative of the child, (iii) sub-section (3)(g) – the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and either of the child’s parents and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks relevant, and (iv) sub-section (3)(h) – issues pertaining to the culture of the child if the child is aboriginal or a torres strait islander.  i) sub-section (3)(g) – the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and either of the child’s parents and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks relevant, and (iv) sub-section (3)(h) – issues pertaining to the culture of the child if the child is aboriginal or a torres strait islander.  ) sub-section (3)(h) – issues pertaining to the culture of the child if the child is aboriginal or a torres strait islander.
issues relating to the parents – decision making, time spent with children, fulfilled obligations, attitude, capacity and exercise of responsibility:   sub-section (3)(c) – the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child, (vi) sub-section (3)(ca) – the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (vii) sub-section (3)(f) – the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person, to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, and (viii) sub-section (3)(i) – the attitude to the child, and parental responsibilities, by each of the child’s parents.  ) sub-section (3)(ca) – the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (vii) sub-section (3)(f) – the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person, to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, and (viii) sub-section (3)(i) – the attitude to the child, and parental responsibilities, by each of the child’s parents.  i) sub-section (3)(f) – the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person, to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, and (viii) sub-section (3)(i) – the attitude to the child, and parental responsibilities, by each of the child’s parents.  ii) sub-section (3)(i) – the attitude to the child, and parental responsibilities, by each of the child’s parents.
issues of family violence:  ) sub-section (3)(j) – any family violence involving a child or a member of the child’s family, and (x) sub-section (3)(k) – any family violence order that applies or has applied involving the child or a member of the child’s family and if applicable, taking into account a number of stated matters.   sub-section (3)(k) – any family violence order that applies or has applied involving the child or a member of the child’s family and if applicable, taking into account a number of stated matters.
effect of change:  ) sub-section (3)(d) – the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, any other child or other person (including any grandparent or other relative) with whom the child has been living.
practical difficulty of implementation:  i) sub-section (3)(e) – the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.
avoiding further proceedings:  ii) sub-section (3)(l) – whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.
other relevant matters:  v) sub-section (3)(m) – any other facts or circumstances the court considers relevant.
submisssions
findings
associate: dated: 27 july 2023
dated: 27 july 2023