last updated: 7 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
earlman & blazena [2023] fedcfamc2f 922
orders
the court orders that:  each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, and (b) each party forgo any claims he or she may have to any superannuation or related benefits (including the tpd payment) belonging to or earned by the other.   each party forgo any claims he or she may have to any superannuation or related benefits (including the tpd payment) belonging to or earned by the other.
reasons for judgment
judge champion:
introduction
property interests
asset
ownership
value ($)
c street, town d
ms blazena
e$465,000
motor vehicle 2
e$38,200
motor vehicle 1
e$6,500
total non-superannuation assets
$509,700
superannuation
mr earlman
$142,028
total superannuation assets
total property interests
$651,728
agreed matters  ms blazena ought to retain the sole ownership of the town d property, (b) ms blazena would transfer, at her expense, ownership of the motor vehicle 1 to mr earlman, and (c) mr earlman would retain all his superannuation.   ms blazena would transfer, at her expense, ownership of the motor vehicle 1 to mr earlman, and (c) mr earlman would retain all his superannuation.   mr earlman would retain all his superannuation.
the tpd payment
disputed matters
summary
a note on the witnesses
background and findings
pre-relationship superannuation
the parties brought limited assets to the relationship
ms blazena’s disability
mr earlman as ms blazena’s carer
i say that throughout our relationship [mr earlman], before i received my diagnosis, did the majority of the cooking and shopping as he enjoyed cooking and was home more often than i was. in return, i did all the other household domestic jobs such as cleaning and laundry. this did not change after i became unwell and i continued to do as well as i could manage, all of the household domestic jobs.
ms blazena’ receipt of the tpd payment
motor vehicle 2
arrangement of financial affairs
town d property
events and the parties’ circumstances since the end of the relationship
statutory framework
justice and equity
contributions
in the same way as a spouse is deemed to contribute to the superannuation entitlements of his or her spouse during cohabitation (in the normal course) it is contended that the same should apply so far as the tpd benefits received pursuant to the trust deed establishing the superannuation fund
an adjustment under s. 90sm(4)(d), (e), (f) and (g) and 90sf(3)?
section 90sf(3)(a) - health of the parties
section 90sf(3)(b) -gainful employment
section 90sf(3)(g) -a reasonable standard of living
other s. 90sf(3) factors
a just and equitable order
associate: dated: 27 july 2023
dated: 27 july 2023