last updated: 17 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
levin & amsel [2023] fedcfamc2f 955
orders
on a final and undefended basis the court orders that:
the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
introduction
issues  should the court proceed on an undefended basis? (b) what court orders should be made for parental responsibility? (c) what time should the children spend with each parent? (d) should an order be made permitting international relocation by the father and the children and, if so, from what date can the father and the children relocate?   what court orders should be made for parental responsibility? (c) what time should the children spend with each parent? (d) should an order be made permitting international relocation by the father and the children and, if so, from what date can the father and the children relocate?   what time should the children spend with each parent? (d) should an order be made permitting international relocation by the father and the children and, if so, from what date can the father and the children relocate?   should an order be made permitting international relocation by the father and the children and, if so, from what date can the father and the children relocate?
evidence
background  drinking excessively in her room, (b) refusing to leave her room, and (c) stumbling and talking incoherently.   refusing to leave her room, and (c) stumbling and talking incoherently.   stumbling and talking incoherently.   became isolated and ceased interacting outside of the home, (b) ceased speaking to the father, (c) spoke of the father’s supposed impending death in front of the children, (d) started to refer to the father as “the biological father” and would say to the children, “would you ask your biological father” to do various things she wanted him to do around the house, (e) “ramble” to herself and to the children about her “universal philosophies”, (f) would tell the children to shut up and go outside when they became upset by what she was saying, and (g) gave an object to y for his birthday which she would then use to hit the children.[3]   ceased speaking to the father, (c) spoke of the father’s supposed impending death in front of the children, (d) started to refer to the father as “the biological father” and would say to the children, “would you ask your biological father” to do various things she wanted him to do around the house, (e) “ramble” to herself and to the children about her “universal philosophies”, (f) would tell the children to shut up and go outside when they became upset by what she was saying, and (g) gave an object to y for his birthday which she would then use to hit the children.[3]   spoke of the father’s supposed impending death in front of the children, (d) started to refer to the father as “the biological father” and would say to the children, “would you ask your biological father” to do various things she wanted him to do around the house, (e) “ramble” to herself and to the children about her “universal philosophies”, (f) would tell the children to shut up and go outside when they became upset by what she was saying, and (g) gave an object to y for his birthday which she would then use to hit the children.[3]   started to refer to the father as “the biological father” and would say to the children, “would you ask your biological father” to do various things she wanted him to do around the house, (e) “ramble” to herself and to the children about her “universal philosophies”, (f) would tell the children to shut up and go outside when they became upset by what she was saying, and (g) gave an object to y for his birthday which she would then use to hit the children.[3]   “ramble” to herself and to the children about her “universal philosophies”, (f) would tell the children to shut up and go outside when they became upset by what she was saying, and (g) gave an object to y for his birthday which she would then use to hit the children.[3]   would tell the children to shut up and go outside when they became upset by what she was saying, and (g) gave an object to y for his birthday which she would then use to hit the children.[3]   gave an object to y for his birthday which she would then use to hit the children.[3]
if you bring the damage to the earth, i will throw you out onto the street...i will push you out of the cliff if you bring the damage to the earth, universe...you will be proud of your mum. now you are still too young to understand...i know who i am. i just give you a little bit, a little bit, psychological preparation, you will be very proud of your mother. about your father that’s your choice... i will push you out of the cliff if you break the universe law, big law.
your meat should be cut into...diced. then fed to (pig). the reason why u [sic] know...cos [sic] you are not even reading basic human standard that means you are not qualified to be a human. you should be a low level animal. not only you but u this type of humanity.
...[c]ontact with you just bring me some negative factors into me because you are rotten you are evil and you cannot even reach a basic level besic [sic] standards of being a human you deserve to go to hell and die and cut into pieces. yes that’s what i said, good.
procedural history  the mother file and serve her material by 4 pm on 28 february 2023, (b) an icl be appointed, and (c) pursuant to section 69zw of the family law act 1975 (cth), production of material was requested from the new south wales police service and dcj.   an icl be appointed, and (c) pursuant to section 69zw of the family law act 1975 (cth), production of material was requested from the new south wales police service and dcj.   pursuant to section 69zw of the family law act 1975 (cth), production of material was requested from the new south wales police service and dcj.   the matter is designated an evatt matter, and (b) the matter is adjourned to 24 march 2023 for case management via microsoft teams.   the matter is adjourned to 24 march 2023 for case management via microsoft teams.   a request for dcj to intervene in the proceedings, (b) a copy of the child impact report was released to the icl and dcj, (c) a further release of the child impact report was adjourned for consideration to 16 june 2023. (d) the icl was to forward notice of the future listing date to the mother by registered pre-paid post to her residential address, and (e) the family and advocacy support service (“fass”) were requested to attend on 16 june 2023 to provide assistance.   a copy of the child impact report was released to the icl and dcj, (c) a further release of the child impact report was adjourned for consideration to 16 june 2023. (d) the icl was to forward notice of the future listing date to the mother by registered pre-paid post to her residential address, and (e) the family and advocacy support service (“fass”) were requested to attend on 16 june 2023 to provide assistance.   a further release of the child impact report was adjourned for consideration to 16 june 2023. (d) the icl was to forward notice of the future listing date to the mother by registered pre-paid post to her residential address, and (e) the family and advocacy support service (“fass”) were requested to attend on 16 june 2023 to provide assistance.   the icl was to forward notice of the future listing date to the mother by registered pre-paid post to her residential address, and (e) the family and advocacy support service (“fass”) were requested to attend on 16 june 2023 to provide assistance.   the family and advocacy support service (“fass”) were requested to attend on 16 june 2023 to provide assistance.   that the matter be listed for an undefended hearing on 27 july 2023 at 12 noon by microsoft teams, (b) by no later than 13 july 2023, the parties file and serve any additional evidence that they intended to rely on, (c) by no later than 20 july 2023, the icl file an affidavit of service in relation to the service of these orders on the mother, and (d) by no later than 25 july 2023, the parties file and serve a case outline document.   by no later than 13 july 2023, the parties file and serve any additional evidence that they intended to rely on, (c) by no later than 20 july 2023, the icl file an affidavit of service in relation to the service of these orders on the mother, and (d) by no later than 25 july 2023, the parties file and serve a case outline document.   by no later than 20 july 2023, the icl file an affidavit of service in relation to the service of these orders on the mother, and (d) by no later than 25 july 2023, the parties file and serve a case outline document.   by no later than 25 july 2023, the parties file and serve a case outline document.
child impact report   can become aggressive and quite upset towards his mother, as well as [mr levin] when he feels that his father does not intervene. [mr levin] said that at times he finds it very challenging to intervene because he is worried about [ms amsel]’s reaction towards him or the children. for example, he said that [ms amsel] sent [x] outside recently at night-time as punishment, and he tried to tell her this is not right and she was verbally abusive towards him.
with regard to the children’s descriptions of their relationship with their mother, the court child expert is hesitant to provide the detail of their interviews, given that they both remain living in the same home as their mother. the court child expert was left with significant concern about [x] and [y]’s physical and psychological safety whilst living with their mother. the court child expert is of the view that [ms amsel] has used excessive physical discipline with the children, which makes them feel upset and worried. [x] and [y] indicated that they worry about their mother and that at times she can be quite angry with them and their father. the court child expert has significant concern that [ms amsel] has wielded [weapons] in front of the children and that the children appear to be fearful of their mother.   levin] expressed worries about [ms amsel]’s ability to meet the children’s needs and keep them safe, which he attributes to the decline in her mental health. [mr levin] is concerned about [ms amsel]’s excessive physical discipline of the children and her current limited ability to meet the emotional needs of the children. the court child expert is of the view that [x] and [y] have experienced troubling physical and psychological abuse by their mother. of most concern is [ms amsel]’s use of [weapons] as a means of intimidation or potential self-harm. it is also worrying that [mr levin] is of the view that he cannot intervene when [ms amsel] disciplines the children, out of concern about her reaction. the children and [mr levin] appear to be at ongoing risk of physical harm. the court child expert is particularly concerned about how the alleged abuse is taking a toll on [x]’s mental health, as he seems to be the target in the home and it is evident that he feels as though no one can help him when [ms amsel] mistreats him.   and [y] both indicated that they would like to relocate to [country b] with their father and it seems that they have formed these views due to their lived experiences, and it is quite evident that the children feel the safest in their father’s care. the children may have trouble being away from their mother, should she also not relocate to [country b]. however, the children are in need of stability and certainty in their home environment and it seems that [mr levin] is best placed to provide this for the children.
should i proceed to an undefended final hearing?  a litigant who does not participate in the proceedings or comply with orders and directions can expect the court to take strong measures, and (b) the court must weigh the consequences for the non-compliant party in proceeding on an undefended basis against the interests of the applicant and having the matter heard and determined without undue delay, expense or technicality.   the court must weigh the consequences for the non-compliant party in proceeding on an undefended basis against the interests of the applicant and having the matter heard and determined without undue delay, expense or technicality.   mr r filed 25 july 2023, in which mr r gives evidence that he handed a copy of the orders of 16 june 2023 and a letter from the icl to the mother. i accept his evidence that the mother said that she would not accept the documents and attempted to return them to mr r. i accept his evidence that the mother walked to a bin and put the documents in the bin. (b) ms bennett filed on 25 july 2023, in which ms bennett gives evidence that she sent a copy of the orders of 16 june 2023 and a letter from the icl to the mother by registered pre-paid post. i accept that the documents were returned to sender as the recipient, being the mother, refused to accept them. (c) ms s filed on 6 february 2023, in which ms s handed the father’s court documents to the mother who then tried to return them.   ms bennett filed on 25 july 2023, in which ms bennett gives evidence that she sent a copy of the orders of 16 june 2023 and a letter from the icl to the mother by registered pre-paid post. i accept that the documents were returned to sender as the recipient, being the mother, refused to accept them. (c) ms s filed on 6 february 2023, in which ms s handed the father’s court documents to the mother who then tried to return them.   ms s filed on 6 february 2023, in which ms s handed the father’s court documents to the mother who then tried to return them.
the law
assessment of risk  direct physical abuse by the mother, especially x, (b) verbal abuse and threats by the mother, including threats to cause lethal harm to the children and the father, (c) physical threats by the mother, including the use of a weapon in those threats, (d) the mother’s alcohol misuse, (e) the mother’s poor mental health, (f) neglect as a consequence of the mother not attending to their everyday needs, including collecting them from the bus stop, having to break into the house because the mother will not open the door, and the mother not feeding the children, (g) family violence where the mother has been the perpetrator of violence against the father and the children, (h) the mother’s threats of harm, including harm to the children, father and herself, and (i) the mother’s beliefs.   verbal abuse and threats by the mother, including threats to cause lethal harm to the children and the father, (c) physical threats by the mother, including the use of a weapon in those threats, (d) the mother’s alcohol misuse, (e) the mother’s poor mental health, (f) neglect as a consequence of the mother not attending to their everyday needs, including collecting them from the bus stop, having to break into the house because the mother will not open the door, and the mother not feeding the children, (g) family violence where the mother has been the perpetrator of violence against the father and the children, (h) the mother’s threats of harm, including harm to the children, father and herself, and (i) the mother’s beliefs.   physical threats by the mother, including the use of a weapon in those threats, (d) the mother’s alcohol misuse, (e) the mother’s poor mental health, (f) neglect as a consequence of the mother not attending to their everyday needs, including collecting them from the bus stop, having to break into the house because the mother will not open the door, and the mother not feeding the children, (g) family violence where the mother has been the perpetrator of violence against the father and the children, (h) the mother’s threats of harm, including harm to the children, father and herself, and (i) the mother’s beliefs.   the mother’s alcohol misuse, (e) the mother’s poor mental health, (f) neglect as a consequence of the mother not attending to their everyday needs, including collecting them from the bus stop, having to break into the house because the mother will not open the door, and the mother not feeding the children, (g) family violence where the mother has been the perpetrator of violence against the father and the children, (h) the mother’s threats of harm, including harm to the children, father and herself, and (i) the mother’s beliefs.   the mother’s poor mental health, (f) neglect as a consequence of the mother not attending to their everyday needs, including collecting them from the bus stop, having to break into the house because the mother will not open the door, and the mother not feeding the children, (g) family violence where the mother has been the perpetrator of violence against the father and the children, (h) the mother’s threats of harm, including harm to the children, father and herself, and (i) the mother’s beliefs.   neglect as a consequence of the mother not attending to their everyday needs, including collecting them from the bus stop, having to break into the house because the mother will not open the door, and the mother not feeding the children, (g) family violence where the mother has been the perpetrator of violence against the father and the children, (h) the mother’s threats of harm, including harm to the children, father and herself, and (i) the mother’s beliefs.   family violence where the mother has been the perpetrator of violence against the father and the children, (h) the mother’s threats of harm, including harm to the children, father and herself, and (i) the mother’s beliefs.   the mother’s threats of harm, including harm to the children, father and herself, and (i) the mother’s beliefs.   the mother’s beliefs.
additional considerations
what are the children’s views?
what is the nature of the relationship between the children and each of their parents and grandparents?
what is the parents’ capacity to participate in decisions about the children?
what will be the effect of change on the children?
what are the advantages of the proposed relocation?
what are the disadvantages of the proposed relocation if the mother does not move with the family?
what is the practical difficulty and expense of the father’s proposal?
what is the capacity of each of the parents to provide for the needs of the children?
what is the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of each parent?
have the children been exposed to violence?
is it preferable to make an order that will not lead to further proceedings?
is there any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant?
parental responsibility
should the children relocate to country b?
from what date can the children relocate?
orders for the children to spend time with the mother
conclusion
associate: dated: 3 august 2023
dated: 3 august 2023
[1] exhibit icl2 pages 36-41.[2] ibid page 37. [3] ibid page 26. [4] ibid pages 4, 9-13.[5] ibid.[6] child impact report by ms q dated 6 june 2023 [20].[7] the word ‘not’ was omitted from this sentence in the oral delivery of the judgment in error. [8] child impact report [9].[9] ibid [13]. [10] ibid [17]. [11] ibid [18]. [12] ibid [23]. [13] ibid [25]. [14] family law act 1975 (cth) s 69zn(7) (“the act”). [15] ibid s 60cc(1).[16] ibid s 60cc(2a).[17] ibid s 4ab(3).[18] ibid s 4ab(4).[19] deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82 at [61].[20] m & m (1988) flc 91-979.[21] bant & clayton [2015] famcafc 222 at [99].[22] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97; (2022) flc 94-092 at [86].[23] exhibit icl2 page 19. [24] ibid page 23.[25] ibid page 34.[26] child impact report [9]. [27] exhibit icl2 pages 1-7.