last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
visser & drost (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 1368
orders
the court orders that:  the court will declare the applicant is entitled to immediate possession of the property situated at b street, suburb c, more particularly described in certificate of title folio identifier ... (“the suburb c property”). (b) the court will order the respondent shall vacate the suburb c property on or before 18 september 2023. (c) the court will order that if the respondent fails to vacate the suburb c property on or before the 18 september 2023, an enforcement warrant pursuant to rule 11.56 will issued, authorising an enforcement officer to enter and to give possession of the suburb c property to the applicant and for removal of the respondent, as well as any other person not entitled to possession, and the removal of the respondent’s belongings, upon the filing of an affidavit by or on behalf of the applicant in accordance with rule 11.55 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).   the court will order the respondent shall vacate the suburb c property on or before 18 september 2023. (c) the court will order that if the respondent fails to vacate the suburb c property on or before the 18 september 2023, an enforcement warrant pursuant to rule 11.56 will issued, authorising an enforcement officer to enter and to give possession of the suburb c property to the applicant and for removal of the respondent, as well as any other person not entitled to possession, and the removal of the respondent’s belongings, upon the filing of an affidavit by or on behalf of the applicant in accordance with rule 11.55 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).   the court will order that if the respondent fails to vacate the suburb c property on or before the 18 september 2023, an enforcement warrant pursuant to rule 11.56 will issued, authorising an enforcement officer to enter and to give possession of the suburb c property to the applicant and for removal of the respondent, as well as any other person not entitled to possession, and the removal of the respondent’s belongings, upon the filing of an affidavit by or on behalf of the applicant in accordance with rule 11.55 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).
the court declares that:
the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge street  the extent of the delay, whether there is an adequate explanation for it, and any relevant consequences of the delay, (b) the nature of the litigation and the consequences for the parties of the grant, or refusal, of the application, (c) the prospects of the appeal succeeding if reinstated, and (d) whether refusal of the re-instatement application would constitute an injustice.   the nature of the litigation and the consequences for the parties of the grant, or refusal, of the application, (c) the prospects of the appeal succeeding if reinstated, and (d) whether refusal of the re-instatement application would constitute an injustice.   the prospects of the appeal succeeding if reinstated, and (d) whether refusal of the re-instatement application would constitute an injustice.   whether refusal of the re-instatement application would constitute an injustice.
litigation is sufficiently stressful and expensive for all concerned without the unnecessary aggravations of additional costs, stress, distraction and delay occasioned by inefficiency, incompetence or sheer disregard of the rules. to the extent that the contention advanced on behalf of [the appellant] reflects an assumption that inefficiency or incompetently conducted litigation, and the waste in terms of time and money inflected upon the other party or parties, is nevertheless consistent with the promotion of access to justice because the end may ultimately justify the means, that assumption must be rejected. inefficient or incompetent conduct of litigation may cause injustice even if it is not intended to do so. litigation that is conducted inefficiently, incompetently or in disregard of the rule by one party is not less oppressive to the other party because it is not intended to be oppressive... (footnote omitted)
associate: dated: 15 november 2023
dated: 15 november 2023