last updated: 4 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
perrot & xun [2023] fedcfamc2f 811
orders
the court orders on a final basis that:
parental responsibility  the mother shall, other than in the case of an emergency, before making a decision in the exercise of her parental responsibility, provide the father with an opportunity to provide input into the decision by writing to the father and informing him of the decision to be made, (b) the mother will allow the father three (3) days within which to respond, before making the decision, and (c) the mother shall then inform the father in writing of the decision made.   the mother will allow the father three (3) days within which to respond, before making the decision, and (c) the mother shall then inform the father in writing of the decision made.   the mother shall then inform the father in writing of the decision made.
and the court further orders by consent on a final basis that:
living arrangements
and the court further orders on a final basis that:
time with the father
conditions
and it is noted that: for the purposes of these orders, suitable accommodation is defined as a residence with 2 bedrooms (minimum), where the child has his own room that is not required to be shared (other than at times with his half sibling b), with appropriate facilities of a shower and toilet.   fails to take the child to such activity, or (b) takes the child to the activity 15 minutes or more late on 2 or more occasions in each 6 week period, then the father’s time with the child pursuant to these orders will change and instead the father’s time will commence after the conclusion of such activity, with handover to occur at the conclusion of that activity, for the remainder of that season.   takes the child to the activity 15 minutes or more late on 2 or more occasions in each 6 week period, then the father’s time with the child pursuant to these orders will change and instead the father’s time will commence after the conclusion of such activity, with handover to occur at the conclusion of that activity, for the remainder of that season.
and it is noted that: the intention of this condition is that if the father fails to take, or is late taking the child, to a weekend activity (typically on a saturday) then the father’s time will commence on saturday at the conclusion of the activity rather than friday after school.
school holidays   during the june / july school holidays in 2023 only: (i) with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to the middle of the holiday period (the first week of the holiday period). (ii) with the mother from 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to the middle of the holiday period until the commencement of school on the first day of the new school term (the second week of the holiday period). (b) during the 2023 september / october school holidays and each year thereafter: (i) with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to the middle of the holiday period (the first week of the holiday period). (ii) with the mother from 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to the middle of the holiday period until the commencement of school on the first day of the new school term (the second week of the holiday period). (c) during the 2023 christmas school holidays and each year thereafter: (i) with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to 7 days later (the first week of the holiday period). (ii) with the father from 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to 14 days prior to the last friday of the holiday period, until 8:00am on that friday (the last 2 weeks of the holiday period). (iii) with the mother at all other times during the holiday period. (d) during the 2024 easter school holidays and each year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until the commencement of the first day of the new school term (the entire easter school holiday period). (e) during the 2024 june / july school holiday period and each year thereafter, with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until the commencement of the first day of the new school term (the entire june / july school holiday period).   with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to the middle of the holiday period (the first week of the holiday period). (ii) with the mother from 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to the middle of the holiday period until the commencement of school on the first day of the new school term (the second week of the holiday period).  ) with the mother from 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to the middle of the holiday period until the commencement of school on the first day of the new school term (the second week of the holiday period).   during the 2023 september / october school holidays and each year thereafter: (i) with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to the middle of the holiday period (the first week of the holiday period). (ii) with the mother from 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to the middle of the holiday period until the commencement of school on the first day of the new school term (the second week of the holiday period). (c) during the 2023 christmas school holidays and each year thereafter: (i) with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to 7 days later (the first week of the holiday period). (ii) with the father from 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to 14 days prior to the last friday of the holiday period, until 8:00am on that friday (the last 2 weeks of the holiday period). (iii) with the mother at all other times during the holiday period. (d) during the 2024 easter school holidays and each year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until the commencement of the first day of the new school term (the entire easter school holiday period). (e) during the 2024 june / july school holiday period and each year thereafter, with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until the commencement of the first day of the new school term (the entire june / july school holiday period).   during the 2023 christmas school holidays and each year thereafter: (i) with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to 7 days later (the first week of the holiday period). (ii) with the father from 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to 14 days prior to the last friday of the holiday period, until 8:00am on that friday (the last 2 weeks of the holiday period). (iii) with the mother at all other times during the holiday period. (d) during the 2024 easter school holidays and each year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until the commencement of the first day of the new school term (the entire easter school holiday period). (e) during the 2024 june / july school holiday period and each year thereafter, with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until the commencement of the first day of the new school term (the entire june / july school holiday period).   with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to 7 days later (the first week of the holiday period). (ii) with the father from 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to 14 days prior to the last friday of the holiday period, until 8:00am on that friday (the last 2 weeks of the holiday period). (iii) with the mother at all other times during the holiday period.  ) with the father from 8:00am on the saturday falling closest to 14 days prior to the last friday of the holiday period, until 8:00am on that friday (the last 2 weeks of the holiday period). (iii) with the mother at all other times during the holiday period.  i) with the mother at all other times during the holiday period.   during the 2024 easter school holidays and each year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until the commencement of the first day of the new school term (the entire easter school holiday period). (e) during the 2024 june / july school holiday period and each year thereafter, with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until the commencement of the first day of the new school term (the entire june / july school holiday period).   during the 2024 june / july school holiday period and each year thereafter, with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until the commencement of the first day of the new school term (the entire june / july school holiday period).
special occasions   with the father on father’s day from 8:30am to 5:00pm. (b) with the mother on mother’s day from 8:30am to 5:00pm. (c) on the child’s birthday for 3 hours on a school day and 5 hours on a non-school day. (d) on the birthdays of the child’s half siblings, with the child to spend this time with the parent who is the parent of his sibling, for 3 hours on a school day and 5 hours on a non-school day (being b’s birthday and c’s birthday). (e) if the birthday time provided for in orders 17(c) and 17(d) herein interrupts a parent’s block holiday time with the child, the birthday time will not occur noting that it is not the intention of these orders to interrupt a parent’s block holiday time.   with the mother on mother’s day from 8:30am to 5:00pm. (c) on the child’s birthday for 3 hours on a school day and 5 hours on a non-school day. (d) on the birthdays of the child’s half siblings, with the child to spend this time with the parent who is the parent of his sibling, for 3 hours on a school day and 5 hours on a non-school day (being b’s birthday and c’s birthday). (e) if the birthday time provided for in orders 17(c) and 17(d) herein interrupts a parent’s block holiday time with the child, the birthday time will not occur noting that it is not the intention of these orders to interrupt a parent’s block holiday time.   on the child’s birthday for 3 hours on a school day and 5 hours on a non-school day. (d) on the birthdays of the child’s half siblings, with the child to spend this time with the parent who is the parent of his sibling, for 3 hours on a school day and 5 hours on a non-school day (being b’s birthday and c’s birthday). (e) if the birthday time provided for in orders 17(c) and 17(d) herein interrupts a parent’s block holiday time with the child, the birthday time will not occur noting that it is not the intention of these orders to interrupt a parent’s block holiday time.   on the birthdays of the child’s half siblings, with the child to spend this time with the parent who is the parent of his sibling, for 3 hours on a school day and 5 hours on a non-school day (being b’s birthday and c’s birthday). (e) if the birthday time provided for in orders 17(c) and 17(d) herein interrupts a parent’s block holiday time with the child, the birthday time will not occur noting that it is not the intention of these orders to interrupt a parent’s block holiday time.   if the birthday time provided for in orders 17(c) and 17(d) herein interrupts a parent’s block holiday time with the child, the birthday time will not occur noting that it is not the intention of these orders to interrupt a parent’s block holiday time.
christmas days with the mother
chinese new year with the father  the first 2 days of the chinese new year: (i) the child will live with the father commencing at 8:00am on the first day if the child is not already with him, (ii) if the first 2 days of the chinese new year fall on a school day, the father is not required to take the child to school, subject to the following clause, (iii) if the first 2 days fall on the first 2 days of the new school term, the father is required to take the child to school for those 2 days. (b) the last 2 days of the chinese new year: (i) if the third and fourth days are on school days, the child is to attend school on those days but remain living with the father.   the child will live with the father commencing at 8:00am on the first day if the child is not already with him, (ii) if the first 2 days of the chinese new year fall on a school day, the father is not required to take the child to school, subject to the following clause, (iii) if the first 2 days fall on the first 2 days of the new school term, the father is required to take the child to school for those 2 days.  ) if the first 2 days of the chinese new year fall on a school day, the father is not required to take the child to school, subject to the following clause, (iii) if the first 2 days fall on the first 2 days of the new school term, the father is required to take the child to school for those 2 days.  i) if the first 2 days fall on the first 2 days of the new school term, the father is required to take the child to school for those 2 days.   the last 2 days of the chinese new year: (i) if the third and fourth days are on school days, the child is to attend school on those days but remain living with the father.   if the third and fourth days are on school days, the child is to attend school on those days but remain living with the father.
and it is noted that: the next chinese new year starts on saturday, 10 february 2024.
changeover  the father will use his best efforts to be on time and keep the mother informed in the event of a sudden delay, (b) the father will confirm with the mother via facebook messenger that he is out the front of the mother’s residence and will wait for confirmation that someone is available to let x into the residence before leaving, (c) that if the mother is unable to personally come out of the residence to collect the child then the child shall exit the father’s vehicle and enter the house.   the father will confirm with the mother via facebook messenger that he is out the front of the mother’s residence and will wait for confirmation that someone is available to let x into the residence before leaving, (c) that if the mother is unable to personally come out of the residence to collect the child then the child shall exit the father’s vehicle and enter the house.   that if the mother is unable to personally come out of the residence to collect the child then the child shall exit the father’s vehicle and enter the house.
communication and exchange of information
conduct of the parents   not denigrate the other parent or the other parent’s family or partner in the presence or hearing of the child, and shall remove the child from the presence of others who may be doing so, (b) respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child about the personal life of the other parent or the partner of the other parent, or allow a third party to do so, (c) not discuss any issues in dispute between the parents, or discuss these court proceedings, or allow a third party to do so in the presence or hearing of the child, and (d) not engage in any form of corporal punishment of the child or allow anyone else to do so.   respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child about the personal life of the other parent or the partner of the other parent, or allow a third party to do so, (c) not discuss any issues in dispute between the parents, or discuss these court proceedings, or allow a third party to do so in the presence or hearing of the child, and (d) not engage in any form of corporal punishment of the child or allow anyone else to do so.   not discuss any issues in dispute between the parents, or discuss these court proceedings, or allow a third party to do so in the presence or hearing of the child, and (d) not engage in any form of corporal punishment of the child or allow anyone else to do so.   not engage in any form of corporal punishment of the child or allow anyone else to do so.
school attendance restraint – the father  he has the prior written agreement of the school to do so, and (b) the father checks in to the school office to fulfil his obligation to register that he is on the school grounds.   the father checks in to the school office to fulfil his obligation to register that he is on the school grounds.
and it is noted that: so there is no misunderstanding, the court does not give the father permission to attend at the child’s school any time he chooses to, or to play or sit and chat with the child (and the child’s friends) during lunchtime and school breaks (as has happened in the past) without the father first discussing his request to do so with the school authorities and receiving their prior written agreement, and then ensuring that he complies with the obligation to register his presence at the school with the school authorities.
authority given by these orders
travel within australia  24 hours’ notice of their intention to travel, (b) a copy of the child’s departure and return and detailed short travel itinerary, (c) broadly advise contact details of city and suburb including addresses and telephone numbers where the child can be reached.   a copy of the child’s departure and return and detailed short travel itinerary, (c) broadly advise contact details of city and suburb including addresses and telephone numbers where the child can be reached.   broadly advise contact details of city and suburb including addresses and telephone numbers where the child can be reached.
overseas travel and passport
mother’s overseas travel
other orders
reasons for judgment
judge willis am:
introduction
background
chronology of events
date
event
1979
the father mr xun born, now aged 43.
1989
the mother ms perrot born, now aged 34.
2012
parties commence a relationship
2016
the child x born, now aged 7.
30 january 2017
parties separated.
2018
the mother moves to her parents’ house in town g with the child for 9 months.
27 june 2020
the father withheld the child overnight.
9 july 2020
the parties attend mediation.
28 september 2020
the mother commences proceedings.
january 2021
x commenced prep at h school.
23 january 2021
9 july 2021
the child inclusive memorandum report released.
28 february 2022
first family report filed.
19 july 2022
interim orders by consent for equal shared parental responsibility and that the child live with the mother and spend time with the father building to each alternate weekend upon father securing suitable accommodation.
2022
the mother’s child to her current partner c was born, now aged 1.
11 november 2022
18 january 2023
the parties attend a second family dispute resolution conference. no agreement was reached.
18 april 2023
second family report filed.
26 april 2023
mother files trial material.
the law
the first is the importance to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s 60b (1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s 60cc (1). when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61daa). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time the child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds it would be not in the best interests of the child for it to apply. if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interest (s.65daa(1)) and if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2)).
the witnesses
the mother
mr e
the father
the issues in dispute  parental responsibility – the father seeks an order for equal shared parental responsibility. the mother seeks an order for equal shared parental responsibility but that she have sole parental responsibility for education and health. (b) the father seeks an order that he have the additional day on the alternate friday so that the x is with him each friday as well the alternate weekends. (c) the father asks that he not be restrained from attending at school to see / play / sit with x whenever he feels like it, including during the child’s lunch breaks and morning tea breaks or when the mother is collecting x. the mother and icl are opposed to this. (d) the father wishes to share the changeovers with each parent meeting at a nominated third location / midway venue. the mother and the icl are opposed to this. the mother wishes changeovers to stay at her home and that the father exclusively shall do the picking up and returning. (e) the father wishes to have 4 days of chinese new year with x, and if the first day of chinese new year is the first day of school, the child will attend school, and then the father’s 4 days will start. the mother does not wish the child to miss any school in the first week of the new school year for chinese new year. (f) the mother wishes to be able to travel with the child to new zealand. the father has been asking the mother about the child travelling with him to country f.   the father seeks an order that he have the additional day on the alternate friday so that the x is with him each friday as well the alternate weekends. (c) the father asks that he not be restrained from attending at school to see / play / sit with x whenever he feels like it, including during the child’s lunch breaks and morning tea breaks or when the mother is collecting x. the mother and icl are opposed to this. (d) the father wishes to share the changeovers with each parent meeting at a nominated third location / midway venue. the mother and the icl are opposed to this. the mother wishes changeovers to stay at her home and that the father exclusively shall do the picking up and returning. (e) the father wishes to have 4 days of chinese new year with x, and if the first day of chinese new year is the first day of school, the child will attend school, and then the father’s 4 days will start. the mother does not wish the child to miss any school in the first week of the new school year for chinese new year. (f) the mother wishes to be able to travel with the child to new zealand. the father has been asking the mother about the child travelling with him to country f.   the father asks that he not be restrained from attending at school to see / play / sit with x whenever he feels like it, including during the child’s lunch breaks and morning tea breaks or when the mother is collecting x. the mother and icl are opposed to this. (d) the father wishes to share the changeovers with each parent meeting at a nominated third location / midway venue. the mother and the icl are opposed to this. the mother wishes changeovers to stay at her home and that the father exclusively shall do the picking up and returning. (e) the father wishes to have 4 days of chinese new year with x, and if the first day of chinese new year is the first day of school, the child will attend school, and then the father’s 4 days will start. the mother does not wish the child to miss any school in the first week of the new school year for chinese new year. (f) the mother wishes to be able to travel with the child to new zealand. the father has been asking the mother about the child travelling with him to country f.   the father wishes to share the changeovers with each parent meeting at a nominated third location / midway venue. the mother and the icl are opposed to this. the mother wishes changeovers to stay at her home and that the father exclusively shall do the picking up and returning. (e) the father wishes to have 4 days of chinese new year with x, and if the first day of chinese new year is the first day of school, the child will attend school, and then the father’s 4 days will start. the mother does not wish the child to miss any school in the first week of the new school year for chinese new year. (f) the mother wishes to be able to travel with the child to new zealand. the father has been asking the mother about the child travelling with him to country f.   the father wishes to have 4 days of chinese new year with x, and if the first day of chinese new year is the first day of school, the child will attend school, and then the father’s 4 days will start. the mother does not wish the child to miss any school in the first week of the new school year for chinese new year. (f) the mother wishes to be able to travel with the child to new zealand. the father has been asking the mother about the child travelling with him to country f.   the mother wishes to be able to travel with the child to new zealand. the father has been asking the mother about the child travelling with him to country f.
the father’s attendance at school to see / play / sit with x
...when i visit him, it was a joy for him and all his friends were playing with – like, we were all playing together so there was none – no embarrassment. he actually enjoyed it. it could be a problem if it’s someone that is dangerous, but no. i don’t see myself as being a problem... maybe, if i was a predator, but no. i’m not a predator... because there are many parents that pick up their son and just hang around the playground, and we kind of all pretty much know each other. so i don’t see it as a problem because yes, we – most of the times, we’ve met each other, and it seems like an okay thing.[5]
time at chinese new year
s. 60cc(2) the primary considerations are:
the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and
the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
s.60cc(3) the additional considerations are:
s.60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
s.60cc(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child)
s.60cc(3)(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major, long term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child.
s.60cc(3)(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child.
s.60cc(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living.
s.60cc(3)(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.
s.60cc(3)(f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs.
s.60cc(3)(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant.
s.60cc(3)(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents.
s.60cc(3)(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.
s.60cc(3)(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  his failure to give any real attention or importance to having his current address on his licence as opposed to having an address of 5 or more years ago, (b) his unconvincing evidence that he thinks he has voted recently and that he is on an electoral role, but doesn’t know which one or when he did actually vote, (c) his evidence that his date of birth on his passport is inaccurate, (d) his evidence that his birth certificate and his real birth date are different to his passport date of birth.   his unconvincing evidence that he thinks he has voted recently and that he is on an electoral role, but doesn’t know which one or when he did actually vote, (c) his evidence that his date of birth on his passport is inaccurate, (d) his evidence that his birth certificate and his real birth date are different to his passport date of birth.   his evidence that his date of birth on his passport is inaccurate, (d) his evidence that his birth certificate and his real birth date are different to his passport date of birth.   his evidence that his birth certificate and his real birth date are different to his passport date of birth.
s.61d parenting orders and parental responsibility
conclusion – best interests
associate: dated: 1 august 2023
dated: 1 august 2023
[1] page 108 of the transcript of 22 may 2023, line 35.[2] page 91 of the transcript of 22 may 2023, line 10.[3] page 134 of the trial transcript[4] page 186 of the transcript of 23 may 2023 (day 2).[5] pages 109-112 of the trial transcript of 22 may 2023.[6] “normal days” meaning not the first and second days of the school year.