last updated: 23 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bannerman & bannerman (no 3) [2023] fedcfamc2f 969
orders
the court orders that:  assaulting, molesting, harassing, stalking, abusing or otherwise interfering with the protected parties, (b) entering upon or loitering near the premises known as b street, town e, victoria or any other premises at which the protected parties are residing, employed or attending for the purposes of education, (c) entering or contacting the place of work or the school of the protected parties in any manner whatsoever, (d) taking x born in 2008 out of the state of victoria,   entering upon or loitering near the premises known as b street, town e, victoria or any other premises at which the protected parties are residing, employed or attending for the purposes of education, (c) entering or contacting the place of work or the school of the protected parties in any manner whatsoever, (d) taking x born in 2008 out of the state of victoria,   entering or contacting the place of work or the school of the protected parties in any manner whatsoever, (d) taking x born in 2008 out of the state of victoria,   taking x born in 2008 out of the state of victoria,
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessyintroduction
background
new facts and circumstances: x does not return and threats to kill
different orders sought by the parents
short history and significant events
short form family report
... ... [the mother] says that she initially left the family home in january when she says it was very difficult to remain because of the change in [the father]’s personality over the past couple of years. she says he had changed and was now “two people”, one who was very nice, and the other who was quite volatile. she said he became worse to the point of being dangerous, where she feared for her life. ... ... [the mother] says that the main problem for [x] is that he is very angry with his father, and wants his father to return various things to him ... [the mother] described them as having very little in the way of a relationship since before [x] was born, with the inference she had become pregnant as the result of a sexual assault. [the mother] says she wanted to have an abortion, but was worn down to have the baby. ... [the mother] appears to have fairly extreme views of [the father], particularly around the allegations he tried to suffocate her, and not being able to acknowledge he was ever a good father, but rather seeing almost all aspects of their relationship as being abusive. ... ... [x] also said his dad used to hit him “really, really, hard” on both his legs and arms. he said he used to be left with a red mark, and when asked “why?” he said there was no real reason, maybe because he hadn’t brushed his teeth. when asked how often he was hit, [x] responded that it was frequently, as in multiple times a week, with him then adding it was multiple times per day. [x] said he had never seen his father hit the older kids, and that it mainly happened when his mother was away. [x] said his father would scare him to the point of having a panic attack, with his heart racing, a lump in his throat, and he would start shaking. ... [x] presents as an emotionally immature boy for his age. he is articulate and certainly aware of various medical conditions and symptoms ... [x] also appears to have little resilience for a 14 year old, and as such is also exhibiting little in the way of individuation, a vital step towards developing maturity and independence. [x] needs to have stable care, and at present it appears his father is more able to provide this than his mother. he also needs to be reconnected with family and friends, something which has not been happening in his mother’s care. [x] needs to be reintegrated with his brother and sister, who while living away from the family home could contribute to him feeling connected and supported through regular phone calls and visits. [the mother] needs to reconnect with psychiatric care and for a current assessment and care plan to be provided to the court. [x] also needs to have a mental health care plan preferably with a paediatric psychiatrist who could also involve both parents in both assessment and treatment. any health care professionals seen by [x] must also involve [the father] as well as [the mother] in any treatment plans. [x] also needs to have a period of stable care, and returning to his family home would reconnect him with home, school and community. while [x] is likely to oppose this move, it is urgent that the deterioration in his situation in terms of his lack of attendance at school, deterioration in family relationships, and lack of contact with his father, be addressed as soon as possible with some time being allowed for [x] to settle. ... while it would be desirable for [x] to maintain relationships with both parents in the long term, these relationships need to be positive and supportive, and not so enmeshed that [x] has taken on and become involved in supporting his mother’s extreme views, both of things such as covid vaccines, and her view of his father.
september 2022 orders: x lives with father, no time with mother
treating psychologist report
... it is my impression that [x] has navigated the period of adjustment to living with his father reasonably well. his negative comments about his father are reducing and his attitude toward school is slowly improving...
report dr h, accredited family violence social worker
• psychological abuse • emotional abuse • verbal abuse • financial abuse • reproductive abuse • reputational damage • physical abuse • coercive control • systems abuse this assessment also reflected that (x) experienced in-utero and post-natal abuse perpetrated by (mr b) and continues to experience the following categories of abuse perpetrated by (mr b) • emotional abuse • verbal abuse • coercive control • maternal alienation • systems abuse this assessment highlights that (ms b) was and continues to be exposed to and subject to family violence from (mr b). use of family violence can often be supported and justified by a sense of entitlement and rigid adherence to traditional gendered beliefs. rigid adherence to traditional gendered beliefs has been acknowledged as a primary driver of family violence. this assessment highlights (mr b)s use of tactics in perpetrating family violence against {ms b) throughout their relationship, including before and after the birth of (x) and (mr b)s weaponising of systems in this control. actics utilised by (mr b) throughout this time include, intimidation and threats, gaslighting of (ms b)'s emotional well-being, undermining (ms b)s confidence as a mother, isolation from family, minimisation and denial of his abuse and control, victim blaming, using his male privilege and weaponising child protection processes, the education system and legal processes to undermine {ms b)s role as her son's primary carer. these tactics are well known perpetrator tactics. this assessment highlights attempts by (ms b) to resist this abuse and ongoing coercive control. this report will demonstrate how (ms b)s resistance has been met with increased systems abuse initiated by (mr b).
... ... family violence is supported and justified by a sense of entitlement and rigid adherence to traditional gendered beliefs. rigid adherence to traditional gendered beliefs has been acknowledged as a primary driver of family violence. in relationships characterised by violence, it is not unusual for there to be a strong demarcation in gender roles. this was the case for (ms b) at this time. ... this above information demonstrates that prior to the birth of (x), there were numerous incidents of family violence perpetrated by (mr b) towards (ms b). this abuse included:
• financial abuse • emotional/psychological abuse • verbal abuse • reproductive abuse • gas-lighting • controlling behaviours • maternal/parental abuse • sexual abuse
... (mr b) has used various tactics to alienate (ms b) from the school and the school community, and in doing so, has weaponised the school against (ms b) and minimised responses to (x) allegations of abuse by (mr b). i now discuss these tactics. ....... this demonstrates control over (ms b) and (x) through abuse of the education department systems, through not allowing {ms b} and (x) to participate in discussions to negotiate a solution, and manipulation of system processes to favour (mr b). ... (ms b)s relationship with (mr b) continues to be one of family violence perpetrated by (mr b) on to (ms b) and (x) and on (mr b) attacking the mother-child relationship. the use of power and control continues to be evident in psychological abuse, verbal abuse, financial abuse, social abuse, maternal alienation and the weaponising of systems against (ms b) to continue this abuse. family violence consists of a constellation of coercively controlling behaviours and this assessment has demonstrated a history of ongoing controlling behaviours by (mr b) towards (ms b) and (x). ... (notes omitted)
supervised time ordered
psychiatric examination of the parties
... [the mother]'s prominent mental health problems have mostly been managed by her previous treating psychiatrist [dr k]. [dr k] managed her complex mental health problems for many years. ... [the mother] took umbrage to [the father] liaising with [dr k] resulting in her declining to continue with treatment. it seems likely that [dr k] identified [the mother] as having such extensive mental health problems that it would likely warrant enduring treatment. [the mother] seems to have been insulted by this proposition. ... it is very likely that [the mother] is mentally fit to have more unsupervised time with [x]. however, it is not possible to forecast whether similar issues may arise in the future that could lead to [x’s] mental health being compromised. [the mother] is currently not receiving any meaningful psychiatric treatment. whilst her mental health issues may be currently relatively dormant, it is difficult to predict what may arise under specific stressors in the future. ... ... [dr h] has opined that [the mother] is a victim of serial domestic violence. i am less persuaded that [the mother]'s account to [dr h] is entirely accurate, but i defer to the court to examine the evidence to assist in forming conclusions. it is possible that [the father] contributed to triggering or aggravating [the mother] to the extent that she adversely reacted and this further perpetuated conflict. he may have also committed acts of family violence, as alleged by [the mother]. ...  e father] presented as a pleasantly mannered man who appeared to generally engage in an open and forthcoming manner. he maintained a composed mood state. he was briefly teary when he reflected on the period of separation from [x]. he appeared to be intelligent and considered in his responses. ... he openly supported [the mother]'s relationship with [x], including to the extent that he thought they should have overnight time together.
orders for unsupervised time on 30 march 2023
family report dated 19 july 2023
... to conclude the writer formed the admittedly quite circumstantial opinion that the mother lived very much in her world of what was right and wrong for her alone, she was very fixated, and it seemed that the way she talked about the child’s needs she was really talking about her needs, and they seemed to be for her now to keep the child safe by keeping him away from the evil father, and perhaps even that now the child no longer wished to have the father in his life, he belonged to her, and then for her to very much determine what direction his immediate future might take. ... the father has shown from his previous actions to be willing to bypass court orders, ostensibly so he thought, to be in the best interests of both the mother and child. now that he believes the mother is so mentally unstable that she has so influenced the child that the child has been prepared to even perhaps knowingly lie and tell horrendous stories of his abuse by him, and now refuse to have anything to do with him, the father indicated he was utterly shattered and really didn’t know what to do. as such, while he still believes the child should return to his care, he also indicated that the child’s mental health may be too unstable at the moment for such to occur without the very real prospect of severe mental health consequences for the already very vulnerable child, so he first proposed some type of contact centre process between him and the child and/or some type of very carefully calibrated family therapy, and with such initially only between him and the child. conversely, the mother’s proposal was quite simple and she said that the child was old enough to decide where he wished to live, and currently he did not wish to see the father anymore, so under such circumstance he should be returned to her care, and then only the child should decide at some later whether he has any further inclination to see the father or have him in his life at all.
... to conclude, the writer suspects that from evaluating all the materials, for reasons not entirely clear, there now appears to be an enmeshed and psychologically-emotionally unhealthy relationship between the mother and child, and it appears to be gaining its sustenance from their shared and obsessive togetherness, and their seemingly perhaps somewhat questionable allegations about the father’s abuse of them, especially that of the child, which in turn appears to be now greatly satisfying both, but while such has enabled them to live together, what worries the writer is that neither, especially the mother, showed any apparent concern about what their allegations, if not substantially true, might be doing to the father. until further investigations have been completed the child temporarily lives with the mother.
the late breaking child protection email ] june 2023, child protection met with [the mother] [ms bannerman] and [x]. [x] advised that he did not want to live with his father, that he is fearful of him and finds his behaviour aggressive. [the mother] was adamant that [x] was at risk in his father’s care and that he did not wish to live with his father. file records indicate that [the mother] interjected during [x’s] interview and that [x] appeared to parrot certain phrases and statements made by his mother. child protection assessed that [x] should return to his father’s care pursuant to family law orders and that it appeared that [the mother] was likely projecting her views of [the father] and influencing [x]. child protection has spoken with [x’s] psychologist who advised that she had no concerns for [x] in his father’s care. the child protection investigation has not yet concluded. ... it is noted that [in mid]-2023, [x’s] school reported that [x] had said that he would kill himself or his father should he have to live with his father. the school indicated concern for [x] in the context of the back and forth between his parents.
the late breaking child protection detailed letter received friday 28 july 2023  stated that he feels that he either has to stab [the father] or die now as there is no other way out of this situation. [x] stated that he understands the consequences of stabbing his father and understands what it means to kill someone. [x] appeared to blame [the father] for the cause of the divorce and that he did not understand why the courts had placed him with [the father]. at times [x] appeared very rehearsed in his responses. ... [x] appeared to have limited insight to the gravity of these statements, despite saying he understood the consequences. [the mother] advised she believes that whilst [x] is not able to articulate any specific memories relating to his father hitting him, she believes that it occurred. ... ... on 27 june 2023 child protection spoke to [x’s] psychologist [ms d] who advised that she has no concerns for [x] in his father's care. whilst [x] speaks of wanting to harm his father she has assessed that she is of the professional opinion that [x] will not harm his father. she believes that [x’s] mental health is grossly impacted by his mother's and that their time together should be limited as much as possible. ... ... child protection do acknowledge [x] is a nearly 15-year-old young person, who will think on his feet, however child protection believe it is in his best interest to remain in the primary care of [the father] where he has been provided with stability, safety, and opportunities to grow and develop in an environment free from harm.
further adjournment
the hearing on tuesday, 1 august 2023
oral evidence of the family report writer
application of the law to circumstances
60ca child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. ... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests ... primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,
... (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,
... (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family,   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family,
4 interpretation ... “abuse", in relation to a child, means: (a) an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child, or (b) a person (the first person ) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child. (emphasis added)   a person (the first person ) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or   causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or  ] it is true that in goode & goode, at [68], the full court said that the circumscribed nature of interim hearings means that the court should not be drawn into issues of fact or matters relating to the merits of the substantive case where findings are not possible. however, that does not mean that merely because the facts are in dispute the evidence on the topic must be disregarded, and the case determined solely by reference to the agreed facts. rather, the proper approach to contentious matters of fact in the determination of interim hearings is as explained in marvel v marvel at [122] and [123], as follows:  2] in ss v ah [2010] famcafc 13 the majority (boland and thackray jj) discussed at [88] of their reasons the care necessary to be exercised in making findings in interim parenting proceedings. their honours said:
[88] in our view, findings made at an interim hearing should be couched with great circumspection, no matter how firmly a judge’s intuition may suggest that the finding will be borne out after a full testing of the evidence. 3] later, at [100] their honours amplified their comments and said:
[100] the intuition involved in decision-making concerning children is arguably of even greater importance when a judge is obliged to make interim decisions following a hearing at which time constraints prevent the evidence being tested. apart from relying upon the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative than to weigh the probabilities of competing claims and the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected. it is not always feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in issue. ] for the present purposes, it is important to note her honour found there was no “unacceptable risk” of harm posed to the children in the mother’s household, not that there was no risk of harm at all. there is obviously a difference between a risk of some occurrence and an unacceptable high risk of the same occurrence. the former may be tolerated, but not the latter.
balancing the risks to x’s welfare
associate: dated: 3 august 2023
dated: 3 august 2023
[1] although not referred to in the list of materials taken into account by dr f, the family report writer, it is clear enough from paragraphs 59 and 60 of the family report that he had regard to the report referred to in these reasons. [2] there is no suggestion being “hit” was lawful chastisement.[3] see [81] of the precedent decision or “authority” of the appeal court, the full court, of goode and goode [2006] famca 1346, (2006) flc 93-286. [4] see the discussion at [50] in the precedent or authority of isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97; (2022) flc 94-092 adopting the statement of hale lj in re c & b (children) (care order: future harm) 1 f. l. r 811 at [142]..