last updated: 11 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rattray & macauley [2023] fedcfamc2f 1011
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:  the wife shall pay to the husband the sum of $398,000. (b) the husband shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to cause the transfer to the wife of all his right title and interest in the property situated at and known as b street, suburb c nsw (“the b street, suburb c property”) being the whole of the land in folio identifier .... (c) the wife do all acts and things and sign all necessary documents to discharge the mortgage secured over the suburb c property and refinance that mortgage in her sole name.   the husband shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to cause the transfer to the wife of all his right title and interest in the property situated at and known as b street, suburb c nsw (“the b street, suburb c property”) being the whole of the land in folio identifier .... (c) the wife do all acts and things and sign all necessary documents to discharge the mortgage secured over the suburb c property and refinance that mortgage in her sole name.   the wife do all acts and things and sign all necessary documents to discharge the mortgage secured over the suburb c property and refinance that mortgage in her sole name.
and the wife shall indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in respect of all liabilities in relation to the suburb c property whenever and however arising.  the listing price for the suburb c property shall be as agreed between the parties and if there is no agreement then the listing price shall be as advised by a valuer nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (b) the suburb c property shall be listed for sale by private treaty with estate agents as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the estate agent shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (c) in the event that the suburb c property has not been sold by or before a date three (3) months from the date that the suburb c property is listed for sale by private treaty, then the husband and wife shall make all such arrangements and do all such acts and things and sign all such documents and pay all moneys equally, necessary to procure a sale by public auction of the suburb c property upon the following terms: (i) the auctioneer shall be as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the auctioneer shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (ii) the auction shall take place within three months after the deadline date for sale by private treaty. (iii) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the suburb c property's auction. (d) in the event that the suburb c property is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction, then the husband and wife shall do all such acts and sign all necessary documents and shall pay all moneys equally necessary to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise upon the same terms and conditions as apply to the first auction.   the suburb c property shall be listed for sale by private treaty with estate agents as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the estate agent shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (c) in the event that the suburb c property has not been sold by or before a date three (3) months from the date that the suburb c property is listed for sale by private treaty, then the husband and wife shall make all such arrangements and do all such acts and things and sign all such documents and pay all moneys equally, necessary to procure a sale by public auction of the suburb c property upon the following terms: (i) the auctioneer shall be as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the auctioneer shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (ii) the auction shall take place within three months after the deadline date for sale by private treaty. (iii) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the suburb c property's auction. (d) in the event that the suburb c property is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction, then the husband and wife shall do all such acts and sign all necessary documents and shall pay all moneys equally necessary to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise upon the same terms and conditions as apply to the first auction.   in the event that the suburb c property has not been sold by or before a date three (3) months from the date that the suburb c property is listed for sale by private treaty, then the husband and wife shall make all such arrangements and do all such acts and things and sign all such documents and pay all moneys equally, necessary to procure a sale by public auction of the suburb c property upon the following terms: (i) the auctioneer shall be as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the auctioneer shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (ii) the auction shall take place within three months after the deadline date for sale by private treaty. (iii) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the suburb c property's auction. (d) in the event that the suburb c property is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction, then the husband and wife shall do all such acts and sign all necessary documents and shall pay all moneys equally necessary to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise upon the same terms and conditions as apply to the first auction.   the auctioneer shall be as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the auctioneer shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (ii) the auction shall take place within three months after the deadline date for sale by private treaty. (iii) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the suburb c property's auction.  ) the auction shall take place within three months after the deadline date for sale by private treaty. (iii) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the suburb c property's auction.  i) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the suburb c property's auction.  ) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the suburb c property's auction.   in the event that the suburb c property is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction, then the husband and wife shall do all such acts and sign all necessary documents and shall pay all moneys equally necessary to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise upon the same terms and conditions as apply to the first auction.   to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale and to pay any council and water rates and maintenance levies outstanding in respect of the suburb c property. (b) to discharge the mortgage affecting the suburb c property. (c) the balance of the proceeds of sale shall be divided: (i) 60 per cent thereof to the wife, less her half share of the above sale costs. (ii) 40 per cent thereof to the husband, less his half share of the above sale costs.   to discharge the mortgage affecting the suburb c property. (c) the balance of the proceeds of sale shall be divided: (i) 60 per cent thereof to the wife, less her half share of the above sale costs. (ii) 40 per cent thereof to the husband, less his half share of the above sale costs.   the balance of the proceeds of sale shall be divided: (i) 60 per cent thereof to the wife, less her half share of the above sale costs. (ii) 40 per cent thereof to the husband, less his half share of the above sale costs.   60 per cent thereof to the wife, less her half share of the above sale costs. (ii) 40 per cent thereof to the husband, less his half share of the above sale costs.  ) 40 per cent thereof to the husband, less his half share of the above sale costs.   the wife shall have the sole right to occupy the suburb c property and that during such right of occupation the wife shall pay all instalments pursuant to the mortgage and all rates and taxes and like apportionable outgoings of the suburb c property as they fall due. (b) the parties hold their respective interest in the suburb c property upon trust pursuant to these orders. (c) neither party shall encumber or further encumber the suburb c property without the consent in writing of the other party.   the parties hold their respective interest in the suburb c property upon trust pursuant to these orders. (c) neither party shall encumber or further encumber the suburb c property without the consent in writing of the other party.   neither party shall encumber or further encumber the suburb c property without the consent in writing of the other party.   each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property and chattels of whatsoever nature and kind in the possession of such parties at the date of the making of these orders and that for this purpose bank accounts are deemed to be in the possession of the person whose name appears on the bank's records thereof, insurance policies are deemed to be in the possession of the party named as the life insured, superannuation entitlements are deemed to be in the possession of the person who is named as the worker whose age or working future provides the conditions for payment out of such entitlement. (b) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
application in a proceeding by wife filed 14 july 2023 and application for adjournment of the final hearing  within 14 days of date of these orders, the respondent's solicitors provide to the applicant's solicitors the names of 3 proposed single expert witness psychiatrists and 3 single expert witness certified practising valuers (3 of each). (b) within 7 days thereafter, the applicant will select 1 psychiatrist proposed by the respondent to be appointed in the proceedings. (c) within 14 days thereafter, the respondent's solicitors shall provide to the applicant's solicitors a proposed joint letter of instruction addressed to each appointed single expert witness. (d) within 14 days thereafter, the applicant's solicitors shall provide to the respondent's solicitors amendments, if any, to the joint letters of instructions. (e) within 14 days thereafter, the shall each sign and send letters of instruction to each single expert witness. (f) that the cost of each single expert witnesses shall be borne equally by the parties.   within 7 days thereafter, the applicant will select 1 psychiatrist proposed by the respondent to be appointed in the proceedings. (c) within 14 days thereafter, the respondent's solicitors shall provide to the applicant's solicitors a proposed joint letter of instruction addressed to each appointed single expert witness. (d) within 14 days thereafter, the applicant's solicitors shall provide to the respondent's solicitors amendments, if any, to the joint letters of instructions. (e) within 14 days thereafter, the shall each sign and send letters of instruction to each single expert witness. (f) that the cost of each single expert witnesses shall be borne equally by the parties.   within 14 days thereafter, the respondent's solicitors shall provide to the applicant's solicitors a proposed joint letter of instruction addressed to each appointed single expert witness. (d) within 14 days thereafter, the applicant's solicitors shall provide to the respondent's solicitors amendments, if any, to the joint letters of instructions. (e) within 14 days thereafter, the shall each sign and send letters of instruction to each single expert witness. (f) that the cost of each single expert witnesses shall be borne equally by the parties.   within 14 days thereafter, the applicant's solicitors shall provide to the respondent's solicitors amendments, if any, to the joint letters of instructions. (e) within 14 days thereafter, the shall each sign and send letters of instruction to each single expert witness. (f) that the cost of each single expert witnesses shall be borne equally by the parties.   within 14 days thereafter, the shall each sign and send letters of instruction to each single expert witness. (f) that the cost of each single expert witnesses shall be borne equally by the parties.   that the cost of each single expert witnesses shall be borne equally by the parties.
9. that the matter be listed for further directions at a time convenient to the court.
application for final ordersproposals  the listing price for the real property shall be as agreed between the parties and if there is no agreement then the listing price shall be as advised by a valuer nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (b) the real property shall be listed for sale by private treaty with estate agents as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the estate agent shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (c) in the event that the real property has not been sold by or before a date three (3) months from the date of these orders, then the husband and wife shall make all such arrangements and do all such acts and things and sign all such documents and pay all moneys equally, necessary to procure a sale by public auction of the real property upon the following terms: (i) the auctioneer shall be as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the auctioneer shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (ii) the auction shall take place within three months after the deadline date for sale by private treaty. (iii) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the real property's auction. (d) in the event that the real property is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction, then the husband and wife shall do all such acts and sign all necessary documents and shall pay all moneys equally necessary to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise upon the same terms and conditions as apply to the first auction.   the real property shall be listed for sale by private treaty with estate agents as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the estate agent shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (c) in the event that the real property has not been sold by or before a date three (3) months from the date of these orders, then the husband and wife shall make all such arrangements and do all such acts and things and sign all such documents and pay all moneys equally, necessary to procure a sale by public auction of the real property upon the following terms: (i) the auctioneer shall be as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the auctioneer shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (ii) the auction shall take place within three months after the deadline date for sale by private treaty. (iii) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the real property's auction. (d) in the event that the real property is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction, then the husband and wife shall do all such acts and sign all necessary documents and shall pay all moneys equally necessary to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise upon the same terms and conditions as apply to the first auction.   in the event that the real property has not been sold by or before a date three (3) months from the date of these orders, then the husband and wife shall make all such arrangements and do all such acts and things and sign all such documents and pay all moneys equally, necessary to procure a sale by public auction of the real property upon the following terms: (i) the auctioneer shall be as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the auctioneer shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (ii) the auction shall take place within three months after the deadline date for sale by private treaty. (iii) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the real property's auction. (d) in the event that the real property is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction, then the husband and wife shall do all such acts and sign all necessary documents and shall pay all moneys equally necessary to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise upon the same terms and conditions as apply to the first auction.   the auctioneer shall be as agreed upon between the parties and if there is no agreement then the auctioneer shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of new south wales. (ii) the auction shall take place within three months after the deadline date for sale by private treaty. (iii) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the real property's auction.  ) the auction shall take place within three months after the deadline date for sale by private treaty. (iii) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the real property's auction.  i) the reserve price shall, unless agreed upon the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer. (iv) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the real property's auction.  ) the parties shall each pay and be responsible for payment of one half of the auction expenses payable before the real property's auction.   in the event that the real property is not sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction, then the husband and wife shall do all such acts and sign all necessary documents and shall pay all moneys equally necessary to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise upon the same terms and conditions as apply to the first auction.   to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale and to pay any council and water rates and maintenance levies outstanding in respect of the real property. (b) to discharge the mortgage affecting the real property. (c) the balance and remaining to be divided in the proportions of: (i) 50% therof to the husband. (ii) 50% thereof to the wife.   to discharge the mortgage affecting the real property. (c) the balance and remaining to be divided in the proportions of: (i) 50% therof to the husband. (ii) 50% thereof to the wife.   the balance and remaining to be divided in the proportions of: (i) 50% therof to the husband. (ii) 50% thereof to the wife.   50% therof to the husband. (ii) 50% thereof to the wife.  ) 50% thereof to the wife.
3. that pending payment or completion of the sale: (a) the wife shall have the sole right to occupy the real property and that during such right of occupation the wife shall pay all installments pursuant to the mortgage and all rates and taxes and like apportionable outgoings of the real property as they fall due. (b) the parties hold their respective interest in the real property upon trust pursuant to these orders. (c) neither party shall encumber or further encumber the real property without the consent in writing of the other party. 4. that unless otherwise specified in these orders: (a) each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property and chattels of whatsoever nature and kind in the possession of such parties at the date of the making of these orders and that for this purpose bank accounts are deemed to be in the possession of the person whose name appears on the bank's records thereof, insurance policies are deemed to be in the possession of the party named as the life insured, superannuation entitlements are deemed to be in the possession of the person who is named as the worker whose age or working future provides the conditions for payment out of such entitlement. (b) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. that both parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to give effect to these orders. that if either party refuses or neglects to sign, within 14 days of a written request to do so, any documents necessary to effect the terms of these orders, a registrar or such other officer or person as may be appointed by the family court of australia or federal circuit court of australia is hereby appointed pursuant to the provisions of section 106a of the family law act to execute such documents on behalf of such party.   the wife shall have the sole right to occupy the real property and that during such right of occupation the wife shall pay all installments pursuant to the mortgage and all rates and taxes and like apportionable outgoings of the real property as they fall due. (b) the parties hold their respective interest in the real property upon trust pursuant to these orders. (c) neither party shall encumber or further encumber the real property without the consent in writing of the other party.   the parties hold their respective interest in the real property upon trust pursuant to these orders. (c) neither party shall encumber or further encumber the real property without the consent in writing of the other party.   neither party shall encumber or further encumber the real property without the consent in writing of the other party.   the respondent wife do all acts and things and sign all necessary documents to discharge the mortgage secured over the [suburb c] property and refinance that mortgage in her sole name. (b) that the applicant husband do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to cause the transfer to the wife of all his right title and interest in the property situated at and known as [suburb c] (“the [suburb c] property”) being the whole of the land in folio identifier [...].   that the applicant husband do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to cause the transfer to the wife of all his right title and interest in the property situated at and known as [suburb c] (“the [suburb c] property”) being the whole of the land in folio identifier [...].
and that the respondent wife shall indemnify and keep indemnified the applicant husband in respect of all liabilities in relation to the property whenever and however arising. that pending transfer of the property provided for in paragraph 2 above, the respondent wife shall be responsible for all mortgage payments, statutory rates and charges, other utilities, insurance, outgoings, and expenses in relation to the property incurred prior to the date of the transfer and shall make all such payments as and when they fall due and hereby indemnifies the applicant husband in respect of all other liabilities incurred prior to the date of transfer.
default clause that in the event the respondent wife is unable to re-finance and re-mortgage the [suburb c] property pursuant to orders 2 and 3 above then, within a further 21 days, each party shall do all acts and things necessary to cause the [suburb c] property to be sold by private treaty at the earliest possible date at a price to be agreed between the parties and failing such agreement, to be determined by the president of the australian institute of valuers and land economists (nsw) or his/her nominee and that the proceeds of sale shall be disbursed as follows: (a) in payment of any fees incurred in the process of selling the [suburb c] property including real estate agent fees, advertising fees, conveyancing fees, and   in payment of any fees incurred in the process of selling the [suburb c] property including real estate agent fees, advertising fees, conveyancing fees, and   the remainder to the respondent wife. in the event the [suburb c] property is not sold by way of private treaty pursuant to order 5 above within 90 days of the date of these orders, then the parties shall do all things necessary to cause the property to be sold by public auction at the earliest possible date at ap rice to be agreed upon between the parties or failing nominated by the president of the australian institute of valuers and land economists (nsw). further that for the purpose of any auction conducted in relation to the [suburb c] property that any reserve price be agreed upon by the parties and failing agreement reserve price to be determined by the president of the australian institute of valuers and land economists (nsw) or his/her nominee. that in the event the [suburb c] property is successfully sold by way of public auction pursuant to order 5 above, the proceeds of such sale be disbursed as follows: (a) in payment of any fees associated with the auction of that property, (b) in payment of any fees associated with the advertisement and preparation of that property for inspection and sale, (c) in payment of any legal or conveyancing fees associated with the sale and transfer of that property, (d) the remainder to the respondent wife.   in payment of any fees associated with the advertisement and preparation of that property for inspection and sale, (c) in payment of any legal or conveyancing fees associated with the sale and transfer of that property,   in payment of any legal or conveyancing fees associated with the sale and transfer of that property,
superannuation that paragraphs 8 to 11 inclusive of these orders are binding on the trustee of [super fund 1] that the base amount of $100,000 is allocated, as required by s90xt of the family law act 1975 to the respondent wife out of the applicant husband's interest in his [super fund 1]. that in accordance with s90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975: (a) the respondent wife is entitled to be paid the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, (b) the applicant husband's entitlement to payments out of his [super fund 1], and the entitlements of such other person to which a splitable payment may be payable, is correspondingly reduced by force of this order. that the trustee of the [super fund 1] shall do all acts and things and sign all documents as may be necessary to: (a) calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975 and the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the entitlement created for the respondent wife by paragraph 9 of these orders, (b) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the applicant's interest in his [super fund 1] interest. that the orders have effect from the operative time and the operative time for this order is the seventh (7th) business day after service of a copy of this order on the trustee. ... declarations that unless otherwise provided in these orders, the respondent wife shall be declared the sole owner of and the applicant husband has no interest of any nature or kind in:   the respondent wife is entitled to be paid the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, (b) the applicant husband's entitlement to payments out of his [super fund 1], and the entitlements of such other person to which a splitable payment may be payable, is correspondingly reduced by force of this order.   the applicant husband's entitlement to payments out of his [super fund 1], and the entitlements of such other person to which a splitable payment may be payable, is correspondingly reduced by force of this order.   calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975 and the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the entitlement created for the respondent wife by paragraph 9 of these orders, (b) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the applicant's interest in his [super fund 1] interest.   pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the applicant's interest in his [super fund 1] interest.   any bank accounts in the respondent wife's name, (b) any superannuation entitlements in the respondent wife's name, (c) any shareholdings in the respondent wife's name, (d) any furniture, effects, home contents, art and jewellery in the respondent wife's possession and control, (e) any motor vehicle in the wife's name, and (f) all other property and financial resources in the respondent wife's possession or control or in her name as a t the date of the making of these orders and in the future. that unless otherwise provided in these orders, the applicant husband shall be declared the sole owner of and the respondent wife has no interest of any nature and kind in: (a) any bank accounts in the applicant husband's name, (b) any superannuation entitlements in the applicant husband's name, (c) any shareholdings in the applicant husband's name, (d) any furniture, effects, home contents, art and jewellery in the applicant husband's possession and control, (e) any motor vehicle in the applicant husband's, and (f) all other property and financial resources in the applicant husband's possession or control or in his name as at the date of the making of these orders and in the future. that pursuant to section 81 of the family law act these orders shall determine on a final basis all financial relationship between the parties with the view to avoiding further proceedings between them. that in the event either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed, document or instrument necessary to give effect to all or any of these orders, then the registrar of the court shall be appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 to execute such deed, document or instrument in the name of the said party and do all acts and things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed, document or instrument upon the registrar being provided with verification of such refusal or failure by way of affidavit that the applicant husband pay the respondent's wife's costs of and incidental to this applicant.   any furniture, effects, home contents, art and jewellery in the respondent wife's possession and control,   all other property and financial resources in the respondent wife's possession or control or in her name as a t the date of the making of these orders and in the future.   any bank accounts in the applicant husband's name, (b) any superannuation entitlements in the applicant husband's name, (c) any shareholdings in the applicant husband's name, (d) any furniture, effects, home contents, art and jewellery in the applicant husband's possession and control, (e) any motor vehicle in the applicant husband's, and (f) all other property and financial resources in the applicant husband's possession or control or in his name as at the date of the making of these orders and in the future.   any superannuation entitlements in the applicant husband's name, (c) any shareholdings in the applicant husband's name, (d) any furniture, effects, home contents, art and jewellery in the applicant husband's possession and control, (e) any motor vehicle in the applicant husband's, and (f) all other property and financial resources in the applicant husband's possession or control or in his name as at the date of the making of these orders and in the future.   any shareholdings in the applicant husband's name, (d) any furniture, effects, home contents, art and jewellery in the applicant husband's possession and control, (e) any motor vehicle in the applicant husband's, and (f) all other property and financial resources in the applicant husband's possession or control or in his name as at the date of the making of these orders and in the future.   any furniture, effects, home contents, art and jewellery in the applicant husband's possession and control, (e) any motor vehicle in the applicant husband's, and (f) all other property and financial resources in the applicant husband's possession or control or in his name as at the date of the making of these orders and in the future.   any motor vehicle in the applicant husband's, and (f) all other property and financial resources in the applicant husband's possession or control or in his name as at the date of the making of these orders and in the future.   all other property and financial resources in the applicant husband's possession or control or in his name as at the date of the making of these orders and in the future.
material relied upon  his case outline filed 23 july 2023, (b) his affidavits filed: (i) 7 march 2023, (ii) 17 july 2023, (c) his financial statement filed 27 june 2023, (d) affidavit of ms d filed 6 march 2023.   his affidavits filed: (i) 7 march 2023, (ii) 17 july 2023, (c) his financial statement filed 27 june 2023, (d) affidavit of ms d filed 6 march 2023.   7 march 2023, (ii) 17 july 2023,  ) 17 july 2023,   his financial statement filed 27 june 2023, (d) affidavit of ms d filed 6 march 2023.   affidavit of ms d filed 6 march 2023.   her case outline filed 21 july 2023, (b) her amended response filed 14 july 2023, (c) her affidavits filed: (i) 7 march 2023, (ii) 14 july 2023, (d) her financial statement filed 9 march 2023, (e) affidavit of ms h filed 10 march 2023,   her amended response filed 14 july 2023, (c) her affidavits filed: (i) 7 march 2023, (ii) 14 july 2023, (d) her financial statement filed 9 march 2023, (e) affidavit of ms h filed 10 march 2023,   her affidavits filed: (i) 7 march 2023, (ii) 14 july 2023, (d) her financial statement filed 9 march 2023, (e) affidavit of ms h filed 10 march 2023,   7 march 2023, (ii) 14 july 2023,  ) 14 july 2023,   her financial statement filed 9 march 2023, (e) affidavit of ms h filed 10 march 2023,   affidavit of ms h filed 10 march 2023,   exhibit a: 2022 tax return of the husband, (b) exhibit b: husband’s anz bank statements dated 5 july 2012 to 29 september 2014, (c) exhibit c: husband’s january 2022 j bank and k bank statements, (d) exhibit d: police records relating to the wife, (e) exhibit e: l hospital records relating to the wife, (f) exhibit f: financial statement of m pty ltd for year ending 30 june 2023, (g) exhibit g: permanent impairment certificate issued by n company dated september 2019, (h) exhibit h: o company account summary fy2021–2022 (annexure r9 to husband’s trial affidavit), (i) exhibit i: documents from p bank and pre-filing tax report of the husband, (j) exhibit j: joint balance sheet.   exhibit b: husband’s anz bank statements dated 5 july 2012 to 29 september 2014, (c) exhibit c: husband’s january 2022 j bank and k bank statements, (d) exhibit d: police records relating to the wife, (e) exhibit e: l hospital records relating to the wife, (f) exhibit f: financial statement of m pty ltd for year ending 30 june 2023, (g) exhibit g: permanent impairment certificate issued by n company dated september 2019, (h) exhibit h: o company account summary fy2021–2022 (annexure r9 to husband’s trial affidavit), (i) exhibit i: documents from p bank and pre-filing tax report of the husband, (j) exhibit j: joint balance sheet.   exhibit c: husband’s january 2022 j bank and k bank statements, (d) exhibit d: police records relating to the wife, (e) exhibit e: l hospital records relating to the wife, (f) exhibit f: financial statement of m pty ltd for year ending 30 june 2023, (g) exhibit g: permanent impairment certificate issued by n company dated september 2019, (h) exhibit h: o company account summary fy2021–2022 (annexure r9 to husband’s trial affidavit), (i) exhibit i: documents from p bank and pre-filing tax report of the husband, (j) exhibit j: joint balance sheet.   exhibit d: police records relating to the wife, (e) exhibit e: l hospital records relating to the wife, (f) exhibit f: financial statement of m pty ltd for year ending 30 june 2023, (g) exhibit g: permanent impairment certificate issued by n company dated september 2019, (h) exhibit h: o company account summary fy2021–2022 (annexure r9 to husband’s trial affidavit), (i) exhibit i: documents from p bank and pre-filing tax report of the husband, (j) exhibit j: joint balance sheet.   exhibit e: l hospital records relating to the wife, (f) exhibit f: financial statement of m pty ltd for year ending 30 june 2023, (g) exhibit g: permanent impairment certificate issued by n company dated september 2019, (h) exhibit h: o company account summary fy2021–2022 (annexure r9 to husband’s trial affidavit), (i) exhibit i: documents from p bank and pre-filing tax report of the husband, (j) exhibit j: joint balance sheet.   exhibit f: financial statement of m pty ltd for year ending 30 june 2023, (g) exhibit g: permanent impairment certificate issued by n company dated september 2019, (h) exhibit h: o company account summary fy2021–2022 (annexure r9 to husband’s trial affidavit), (i) exhibit i: documents from p bank and pre-filing tax report of the husband, (j) exhibit j: joint balance sheet.   exhibit g: permanent impairment certificate issued by n company dated september 2019, (h) exhibit h: o company account summary fy2021–2022 (annexure r9 to husband’s trial affidavit), (i) exhibit i: documents from p bank and pre-filing tax report of the husband, (j) exhibit j: joint balance sheet.   exhibit h: o company account summary fy2021–2022 (annexure r9 to husband’s trial affidavit), (i) exhibit i: documents from p bank and pre-filing tax report of the husband, (j) exhibit j: joint balance sheet.   exhibit i: documents from p bank and pre-filing tax report of the husband, (j) exhibit j: joint balance sheet.   exhibit j: joint balance sheet.
evidence
legal principles
balance sheet  per the original)
section 79(2) of the act
contributions
section 75(2) of the act
justice and equity
associate: dated: 11 august 2023
dated: 11 august 2023
[1] federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 r 7.21.