last updated: 7 march 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sardo & sardo [2023] fedcfamc2f 1015
orders
the court orders that:
suburb c property
the payment  the wife do all such acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to transfer to the husband at the expense of the husband (“the transfer”) all of her right title and interest in the real property situate at and known as b street, suburb c, in the state of victoria, being the whole of the land better particularised in certificate of title volume ... folio ... (“the suburb c property”), and (b) the husband do all such acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to pay out the joint home loan owing to westpac banking corporation and discharge the mortgage (dealing ...) registered against the title of the suburb c property (“the suburb c mortgage”).   the husband do all such acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to pay out the joint home loan owing to westpac banking corporation and discharge the mortgage (dealing ...) registered against the title of the suburb c property (“the suburb c mortgage”).
election to sell
the sale  within 14 days, the wife nominate three potential selling agents and three potential conveyancers, and the husband select the agent (“the selling agent”) and the conveyancer (“the conveyancer”) from the list provided within seven days of the wife’s nominations, (b) if the wife fails to provide nominations in accordance with order 4(a), the husband select the selling agent and the conveyancer, (c) if the husband fails to comply with order 4(a), the wife select the selling agent and the conveyancer from the list she has provided, (d) the sale be by way of public auction and if passed in at auction, as otherwise recommended by the selling agent, (e) the reserve price be as recommended by the selling agent, (f) the husband or his nominee be at liberty to bid to purchase the suburb c property at auction, (g) the husband comply with all reasonable recommendations of the selling agent as to the presentation of the suburb c property, including keeping the property clean and neat and maintaining it in good order and repair, (h) the husband make the suburb c property available for inspection at times reasonably requested by the selling agent, and (i) the parties otherwise have liberty to apply in relation to the terms and conditions of the sale.   if the wife fails to provide nominations in accordance with order 4(a), the husband select the selling agent and the conveyancer, (c) if the husband fails to comply with order 4(a), the wife select the selling agent and the conveyancer from the list she has provided, (d) the sale be by way of public auction and if passed in at auction, as otherwise recommended by the selling agent, (e) the reserve price be as recommended by the selling agent, (f) the husband or his nominee be at liberty to bid to purchase the suburb c property at auction, (g) the husband comply with all reasonable recommendations of the selling agent as to the presentation of the suburb c property, including keeping the property clean and neat and maintaining it in good order and repair, (h) the husband make the suburb c property available for inspection at times reasonably requested by the selling agent, and (i) the parties otherwise have liberty to apply in relation to the terms and conditions of the sale.   if the husband fails to comply with order 4(a), the wife select the selling agent and the conveyancer from the list she has provided, (d) the sale be by way of public auction and if passed in at auction, as otherwise recommended by the selling agent, (e) the reserve price be as recommended by the selling agent, (f) the husband or his nominee be at liberty to bid to purchase the suburb c property at auction, (g) the husband comply with all reasonable recommendations of the selling agent as to the presentation of the suburb c property, including keeping the property clean and neat and maintaining it in good order and repair, (h) the husband make the suburb c property available for inspection at times reasonably requested by the selling agent, and (i) the parties otherwise have liberty to apply in relation to the terms and conditions of the sale.   the sale be by way of public auction and if passed in at auction, as otherwise recommended by the selling agent, (e) the reserve price be as recommended by the selling agent, (f) the husband or his nominee be at liberty to bid to purchase the suburb c property at auction, (g) the husband comply with all reasonable recommendations of the selling agent as to the presentation of the suburb c property, including keeping the property clean and neat and maintaining it in good order and repair, (h) the husband make the suburb c property available for inspection at times reasonably requested by the selling agent, and (i) the parties otherwise have liberty to apply in relation to the terms and conditions of the sale.   the reserve price be as recommended by the selling agent, (f) the husband or his nominee be at liberty to bid to purchase the suburb c property at auction, (g) the husband comply with all reasonable recommendations of the selling agent as to the presentation of the suburb c property, including keeping the property clean and neat and maintaining it in good order and repair, (h) the husband make the suburb c property available for inspection at times reasonably requested by the selling agent, and (i) the parties otherwise have liberty to apply in relation to the terms and conditions of the sale.   the husband or his nominee be at liberty to bid to purchase the suburb c property at auction, (g) the husband comply with all reasonable recommendations of the selling agent as to the presentation of the suburb c property, including keeping the property clean and neat and maintaining it in good order and repair, (h) the husband make the suburb c property available for inspection at times reasonably requested by the selling agent, and (i) the parties otherwise have liberty to apply in relation to the terms and conditions of the sale.   the husband comply with all reasonable recommendations of the selling agent as to the presentation of the suburb c property, including keeping the property clean and neat and maintaining it in good order and repair, (h) the husband make the suburb c property available for inspection at times reasonably requested by the selling agent, and (i) the parties otherwise have liberty to apply in relation to the terms and conditions of the sale.   the husband make the suburb c property available for inspection at times reasonably requested by the selling agent, and (i) the parties otherwise have liberty to apply in relation to the terms and conditions of the sale.   the parties otherwise have liberty to apply in relation to the terms and conditions of the sale.   first, to pay all costs associated with the sale including the conveyancer’s fees and disbursements and the selling agent’s costs and commission (“the sale costs”) but not the parties’ independent legal costs, (b) secondly, to discharge the suburb c mortgage, and (c) third, to pay an amount to the wife being the dollar equivalent of “x” in the following equation:   secondly, to discharge the suburb c mortgage, and (c) third, to pay an amount to the wife being the dollar equivalent of “x” in the following equation:   third, to pay an amount to the wife being the dollar equivalent of “x” in the following equation:
x = [67.5% of (a + w + h)] – w where: “a” is the net proceeds remaining from the sale after the payments made pursuant to each of orders 5(a) and 5(b) “w” is the value of property retained by the wife pursuant to these orders fixed in the sum of $1,633,103 “h” is the value of property retained by the husband pursuant to these orders fixed in the sum of $29,520, and   finally, the balance then remaining to the husband.
husband successfully bidding at auction  the husband makes the election to sell the suburb c property, and (b) the husband is the highest bidder at the conclusion of the auction, and (c) the suburb c property has reached the reserve price recommended by the selling agent,   the husband is the highest bidder at the conclusion of the auction, and (c) the suburb c property has reached the reserve price recommended by the selling agent,   the suburb c property has reached the reserve price recommended by the selling agent,
the parties do all such acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to remove the suburb c property from the market for sale and within 30 days of the date of the auction (“the second date”) the husband pay to the wife the dollar equivalent of “y” in the following equation (“the adjusting payment”) being:
y = [67.5% of (b - m + w + h)] – w where: “b” is the husband’s successful bid at auction “m” is the balance of the home loan(s) secured by the suburb c mortgage at that date “w” is the value of property retained by the wife pursuant to these orders fixed in the sum of $1,633,103 “h” is the value of property retained by the husband pursuant to these orders fixed in the sum of $29,520
and the husband be responsible for and indemnify the wife in respect of the sale costs as defined in order 5(a) as may be incurred by the parties, including in respect of the auction.  the wife do all such acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to transfer to the husband at the expense of the husband (“the transfer”) all of her right title and interest in the suburb c property, and (b) the husband do all such acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to refinance into his sole name or pay out the joint home loan owing to westpac banking corporation and discharge the suburb c mortgage.   the husband do all such acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to refinance into his sole name or pay out the joint home loan owing to westpac banking corporation and discharge the suburb c mortgage.
pending the transfer or sale  the husband have sole use and occupation of the suburb c property, (b) the husband and the wife each be restrained by injunction from selling, transferring, further encumbering (including by drawing against the loan(s) secured by the suburb c mortgage) or otherwise dealing in any way with their interest in the suburb c property without the consent in writing of the other, (c) the parties hold their respective interests in the suburb c property upon trust pursuant to these orders, (d) the husband pay as and when they fall due and indemnify the wife in respect of: (i) all home loan repayments (principal and interest) in respect of the loan(s) secured by the suburb c mortgage, (ii) property and water rates, (iii) home insurance, and (iv) all taxes and other outgoings with respect to the suburb c property including but not limited to telephone, internet, gas, water and electricity.   the husband and the wife each be restrained by injunction from selling, transferring, further encumbering (including by drawing against the loan(s) secured by the suburb c mortgage) or otherwise dealing in any way with their interest in the suburb c property without the consent in writing of the other, (c) the parties hold their respective interests in the suburb c property upon trust pursuant to these orders, (d) the husband pay as and when they fall due and indemnify the wife in respect of: (i) all home loan repayments (principal and interest) in respect of the loan(s) secured by the suburb c mortgage, (ii) property and water rates, (iii) home insurance, and (iv) all taxes and other outgoings with respect to the suburb c property including but not limited to telephone, internet, gas, water and electricity.   the parties hold their respective interests in the suburb c property upon trust pursuant to these orders, (d) the husband pay as and when they fall due and indemnify the wife in respect of: (i) all home loan repayments (principal and interest) in respect of the loan(s) secured by the suburb c mortgage, (ii) property and water rates, (iii) home insurance, and (iv) all taxes and other outgoings with respect to the suburb c property including but not limited to telephone, internet, gas, water and electricity.   the husband pay as and when they fall due and indemnify the wife in respect of: (i) all home loan repayments (principal and interest) in respect of the loan(s) secured by the suburb c mortgage, (ii) property and water rates, (iii) home insurance, and (iv) all taxes and other outgoings with respect to the suburb c property including but not limited to telephone, internet, gas, water and electricity.   all home loan repayments (principal and interest) in respect of the loan(s) secured by the suburb c mortgage, (ii) property and water rates, (iii) home insurance, and (iv) all taxes and other outgoings with respect to the suburb c property including but not limited to telephone, internet, gas, water and electricity.  ) property and water rates, (iii) home insurance, and (iv) all taxes and other outgoings with respect to the suburb c property including but not limited to telephone, internet, gas, water and electricity.  i) home insurance, and (iv) all taxes and other outgoings with respect to the suburb c property including but not limited to telephone, internet, gas, water and electricity.  ) all taxes and other outgoings with respect to the suburb c property including but not limited to telephone, internet, gas, water and electricity.
chattels  table from upstairs on which a statute from the wife’s great grandmother previously sat, and (b) ornament that previously sat on the occasional table.   ornament that previously sat on the occasional table.
motor vehicle 1
assets to be retained by the wife  her interest in the ms sardo testamentary trust and the estate of her late father, mr d, (b) all funds standing in any bank account in her sole name, (c) her personal effects, furniture and contents in her possession, (d) her shareholdings, (e) her superannuation entitlements, subject to these orders.   all funds standing in any bank account in her sole name, (c) her personal effects, furniture and contents in her possession, (d) her shareholdings, (e) her superannuation entitlements, subject to these orders.   her personal effects, furniture and contents in her possession, (d) her shareholdings, (e) her superannuation entitlements, subject to these orders.   her shareholdings, (e) her superannuation entitlements, subject to these orders.   her superannuation entitlements, subject to these orders.
assets to be retained by the husband  all funds standing in any bank account in his sole name, (b) his personal effects, furniture and contents in his possession save for such items to be retained by the wife pursuant to order 10, (c) his shareholdings, (d) the motor vehicle 2, and (e) his superannuation entitlements subject to these orders.   his personal effects, furniture and contents in his possession save for such items to be retained by the wife pursuant to order 10, (c) his shareholdings, (d) the motor vehicle 2, and (e) his superannuation entitlements subject to these orders.   his shareholdings, (d) the motor vehicle 2, and (e) his superannuation entitlements subject to these orders.   the motor vehicle 2, and (e) his superannuation entitlements subject to these orders.   his superannuation entitlements subject to these orders.
superannuation
split of husband’s superannuation interest  the wife (or her administrators, executors, beneficiaries, heirs or assigns) is entitled to be paid the specified percentage out of the husband’s interest in the husband’s fund, (b) the husband’s entitlement in the husband’s fund is correspondingly reduced by force of this order, and (c) the percentage specified for the purposes of this order is 50%.   the husband’s entitlement in the husband’s fund is correspondingly reduced by force of this order, and (c) the percentage specified for the purposes of this order is 50%.   the percentage specified for the purposes of this order is 50%.   calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the act and part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 the entitlement awarded to the wife in the immediately preceding clause of this order, (b) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splittable payment from the husband’s interest in the husband’s fund.   pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splittable payment from the husband’s interest in the husband’s fund.
split of wife’s superannuation interest  the husband (or his administrators, executors, beneficiaries, heirs or assigns) is entitled to be paid the specified percentage out of the wife’s interest in the wife’s fund, (b) the wife’s entitlement in the wife’s fund is correspondingly reduced by force of this order, and (c) the percentage specified for the purposes of this order is 50%.   the wife’s entitlement in the wife’s fund is correspondingly reduced by force of this order, and (c) the percentage specified for the purposes of this order is 50%.   calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the act and the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 the entitlement awarded to the husband in the immediately preceding clause of this order, (b) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splittable payment from the wife’s interest in the wife’s fund.   pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splittable payment from the wife’s interest in the wife’s fund.
other property, liabilities and superannuation  each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other real and personal property (including choses-in-action) in the ownership or possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) the parties forthwith do all such acts and things necessary and sign all documents as may be required to close the joint xx...23 account, with any balance remaining to be retained by the husband, (c) insurance policies and income protection policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (d) each party hereby foregoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefit or other employment-based entitlements belonging to or owned by the other, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   the parties forthwith do all such acts and things necessary and sign all documents as may be required to close the joint xx...23 account, with any balance remaining to be retained by the husband, (c) insurance policies and income protection policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (d) each party hereby foregoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefit or other employment-based entitlements belonging to or owned by the other, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies and income protection policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (d) each party hereby foregoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefit or other employment-based entitlements belonging to or owned by the other, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party hereby foregoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefit or other employment-based entitlements belonging to or owned by the other, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
procedural
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge a. humphreys
background  mr e, is now an adult, aged 19. he completed a certificate of study and has this year commenced graduate studies. mr e has experienced mental health issues, attends upon a psychologist and is prescribed anti-depressant medication. he does not have a job and does not yet have a driver licence. (b) x, is aged 15. she is in year 9 at f school. x has been diagnosed with a sensory processing disorder. the wife contended x has learning difficulties as a result of her sensory processing disorder which was denied by the husband. he deposed she is doing well at school. x has previously experienced anxiety and attends upon a psychologist.   x, is aged 15. she is in year 9 at f school. x has been diagnosed with a sensory processing disorder. the wife contended x has learning difficulties as a result of her sensory processing disorder which was denied by the husband. he deposed she is doing well at school. x has previously experienced anxiety and attends upon a psychologist.
parties’ positions
two pool approach
superannuation
non-superannuation assets
the wife
the husband
the issues  the value to be attributed to the suburb c property, (b) assessment of contributions, with particular consideration as to the weight to be given to the husband’s initial contributions, gifts received by the wife from her family during the relationship and the wife’s inheritance, in the context of all other contributions made by the parties during a long marriage, (c) assessment of relevant section 75(2) factors, (d) a minor dispute in respect of chattels from the suburb c property, and (e) minor issues in respect of the terms of sale in the event the suburb c property is sold.   assessment of contributions, with particular consideration as to the weight to be given to the husband’s initial contributions, gifts received by the wife from her family during the relationship and the wife’s inheritance, in the context of all other contributions made by the parties during a long marriage, (c) assessment of relevant section 75(2) factors, (d) a minor dispute in respect of chattels from the suburb c property, and (e) minor issues in respect of the terms of sale in the event the suburb c property is sold.   assessment of relevant section 75(2) factors, (d) a minor dispute in respect of chattels from the suburb c property, and (e) minor issues in respect of the terms of sale in the event the suburb c property is sold.   a minor dispute in respect of chattels from the suburb c property, and (e) minor issues in respect of the terms of sale in the event the suburb c property is sold.   minor issues in respect of the terms of sale in the event the suburb c property is sold.
application to adduce evidence from another expert
background to adversarial expert application
9.1.1 market approach (comparable transactions method) ... recent comparable sales considered within the immediate area range between $1,320,000 and $1,850,000, depending on factors such as, the size, condition, and appeal of the dwelling, the size, shape and contour of the allotment, the level of ancillary improvements, the location and date of the sale. we have also considered common units of comparison with the most comparable sales within the immediate area showing an improved land rate range of between $1,265/m2 and $1,850 m2, depending upon factors such as, the size, condition and appeal of the improvements, the size, shape and contour of the property, the level of ancillary improvements, the location and the date of the sale. the assessed value of $1,600/m2 lies within this range.
valuation summary – direct comparison after analysis of the sales evidence together with the positive and negative attributes of the property and in particular the current state of the dwelling and current market conditions, we consider an appropriate value range for the property to be $1,275,000 to $1,325,000. in assessing value, we have adopted the midpoint of the value range, $1,300,000. additionally, the sales evidence indicates a value rate range of $1,264 to $1,850 psm of land (as improved). our assessment of value indicates a value rate of $1,300 psm of land (as improved). this is at the lower end of the range, however, is considered appropriate having regard to the sloping and irregular shaped nature of the land, current state of the dwelling and current market conditions.
husband’s position
i dispute the valuation of the [suburb c] property. i do not believe this valuation appropriately reflects comparable sales. i have numerous further concerns going to the integrity of the valuation. for example, it is entirely unclear why the valuer uses an improved land value higher significantly higher than the average in the local area. further, the report contains reference to two laundry areas, but the home has only one laundry. further again the report contains reference to a tiled lounge area, but the only lounge room is carpeted. i am concerned the report contains fundamental errors of fact and is unsafe. if the house were to be sold, i anticipate the following repairs would be required prior to sale: repair retaining wall and landscaping with mulch, top soil, planting, drainage as so on, repair cracks to external render, repair loose paving around the swimming pool and repair pool interior finish which is missing in patches (this requires the pool to be drained and re-filled), the pergola support beam is rotten and needs to be replaced and then painted, replace window and door frames. they have extensive damage, replace two of the boundary fences. i have repaired them to the best of ability and they are now beyond repair, repaint interior and exterior, including repainting external rendered walls, window frames and doors, garage door and so on, replace faulty downlights and transformers, replace cracked tiles in bathroom shower, attention required to damaged joinery in the kitchen. carpet in the lounge room needs to be replaced as it has deteriorated, particularly from sun exposure, steam clean carpet in the other carpeted rooms, ensuite shower window to be replaced with aluminium due to damage and prevention of mould, will also require re-tiling and waterproofing. general caulking throughout the property.
concerns as to potential injustice if parties are confined to a single expert witness, where there were considerable differences in the amounts in relevant valuations, were the basis of decisions permitting evidence from another expert in pitt & pitt [2009] famca 620, verdon & verdon [2020] famca 824, (2020) 62 fam lr 573, jess & garvey [2021] fedcfamc1f 189, and carolan & lawler [2021] fedcfamc1f 239. although, in other decisions, even large differences in the valuation amounts have not been sufficient, on their own, to persuade the court to permit evidence from another expert: see, for example, keevers & keevers [2021] fedcfamc1f 338, and padnall & padnall (no 3) [2014] famca 904. however, as the full court noted in neales & neales [2022] fedcfamc1a 41 that it is erroneous to refuse leave when focusing only upon the difference in values: at [42]. whilst these cases appear to indicate a diversity of judicial opinion, they may be better explained by reference to the reasons of watts j in hrbh & iabh [2009] famca 1131, where his honour noted the potential practical difficulty that may arise where the single expert’s evidence on an important factor is so undermined by cross-examination that there would then be “a vacuum in the evidence”: at [8]. an evidential “vacuum” is to be avoided, if possible, particularly in valuation cases where the effective alternative of forcing a sale, even if it is open to the court, is a far from desirable option if one party wishes to retain a property. [...]
in cases where the valuation is based upon the comparable sales method this distinction can be a fine one, however it must be recalled that the expertise of the valuer (which goes beyond a non-expert or real estate agent providing an appraisal) is in making a nuanced assessment of which sales are truly comparable and then forming a view as to a valuation after weighing the different comparable sale prices. where the values for which each of the parties contend fall within the ambit of a broad range that the single expert identifies, cross-examination would ordinarily be a sufficient tool to avoid injustice. where the value contended by the party challenging the single expert is outside of the range identified by the single expert (after making use of the right to send questions to the expert and a conference between experts) the interests of justice would tend to weigh in favour of allowing evidence from the other expert, provided that such evidence is not obviously flawed and the difference involved is not out of proportion to the likely additional costs of permitting the evidence to be adduced.
wife’s position
rules applying to the appointment of adversarial experts  if a single expert witness has been appointed to prepare a report or give evidence in relation to an issue, a party must not tender a report or adduce evidence from another expert witness on the same issue without the court’s permission. (2) the court may allow a party to tender a report or adduce evidence from another expert witness on the same issue if it is satisfied that: (a) there is a substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinion given by the single expert witness and the contrary opinion is or may be necessary for determining the issue, or (b) another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   the court may allow a party to tender a report or adduce evidence from another expert witness on the same issue if it is satisfied that: (a) there is a substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinion given by the single expert witness and the contrary opinion is or may be necessary for determining the issue, or (b) another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   there is a substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinion given by the single expert witness and the contrary opinion is or may be necessary for determining the issue, or (b) another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   the purpose of this part (see rule 7.02),   the impact of the appointment of an expert witness on the costs of the proceeding,   the likelihood of the appointment expediting or delaying the proceeding, (d) the complexity of the issues in the proceeding,   whether the evidence should be given by a single expert witness rather than an expert witness appointed by one party only, (f) whether the expert witness has specialised knowledge, based on the person’s training, study or experience:   whether the expert witness has specialised knowledge, based on the person’s training, study or experience:   relevant to the issue on which evidence is to be given, and (ii) appropriate to the value, complexity and importance of the proceeding   to ensure that parties obtain expert evidence only in relation to a significant issue in dispute, (b) to restrict expert evidence to that which is necessary to resolve or determine a proceeding, (c) to ensure that, if practicable and without compromising the interests of justice, expert evidence is given on an issue by a single expert witness, (d) to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.   to restrict expert evidence to that which is necessary to resolve or determine a proceeding, (c) to ensure that, if practicable and without compromising the interests of justice, expert evidence is given on an issue by a single expert witness, (d) to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.   to ensure that, if practicable and without compromising the interests of justice, expert evidence is given on an issue by a single expert witness, (d) to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.   to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.   to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.
consideration of adversarial expert application
rules 7.08(2)(a) and (b)
rule 7.08(2)(c)
other considerations  the property had been the subject of two single expert witness valuations undertaken by two valuers at m group, in mid-2022 and early 2023. there was not a significant difference in the values attributed to the suburb c property in the two single expert valuations, (b) the husband’s engagement of mr k in late 2022 indicated there was a potential issue in relation to the valuation of the suburb c property in his mind, yet he did not seek permission to adduce evidence from mr k at that time, (c) the initial letter of instruction provided to mr k and his first valuation report were not put in evidence by the husband, (d) a potential valuation dispute was not flagged with the court when the matter was prepared for trial, including in the husband’s certificate of readiness, (e) the husband consented to an order for m group to be re-engaged as a single expert to provide an updated valuation. m group was jointly instructed by both parties’ lawyers, (f) in her affidavit filed on 17 april 2023, the wife deposed the husband disputed the value ascribed to the suburb c property by the single expert. she noted he had not made any application to seek to adduce adversarial evidence in relation to the value of the suburb c property and that she would oppose any late application made by him to do so, (g) questions were put to mr l on behalf of the husband on 20 april 2023, including in respect of errors identified in his report, and were answered by mr l on 28 april 2023, (h) matters raised by counsel for the husband not canvassed in those questions, including errors identified in mr l’s valuation report, to the extent not already addressed in the answers provided by mr l, could be put to him in cross-examination. (i also observed apparent errors in mr k’s report which i brought to the attention of counsel for the husband, including an outdated market commentary, for example, referring to market figures from august and to the approaching spring selling season.), (i) the husband indicated he did not agree with the single expert valuation in his affidavit filed on 24 april 2023, yet his application to adduce evidence from mr k was filed on 3 may 2023, only three business days before the final hearing, (j) neither party sought the final hearing be adjourned, (k) one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   the husband’s engagement of mr k in late 2022 indicated there was a potential issue in relation to the valuation of the suburb c property in his mind, yet he did not seek permission to adduce evidence from mr k at that time, (c) the initial letter of instruction provided to mr k and his first valuation report were not put in evidence by the husband, (d) a potential valuation dispute was not flagged with the court when the matter was prepared for trial, including in the husband’s certificate of readiness, (e) the husband consented to an order for m group to be re-engaged as a single expert to provide an updated valuation. m group was jointly instructed by both parties’ lawyers, (f) in her affidavit filed on 17 april 2023, the wife deposed the husband disputed the value ascribed to the suburb c property by the single expert. she noted he had not made any application to seek to adduce adversarial evidence in relation to the value of the suburb c property and that she would oppose any late application made by him to do so, (g) questions were put to mr l on behalf of the husband on 20 april 2023, including in respect of errors identified in his report, and were answered by mr l on 28 april 2023, (h) matters raised by counsel for the husband not canvassed in those questions, including errors identified in mr l’s valuation report, to the extent not already addressed in the answers provided by mr l, could be put to him in cross-examination. (i also observed apparent errors in mr k’s report which i brought to the attention of counsel for the husband, including an outdated market commentary, for example, referring to market figures from august and to the approaching spring selling season.), (i) the husband indicated he did not agree with the single expert valuation in his affidavit filed on 24 april 2023, yet his application to adduce evidence from mr k was filed on 3 may 2023, only three business days before the final hearing, (j) neither party sought the final hearing be adjourned, (k) one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   the initial letter of instruction provided to mr k and his first valuation report were not put in evidence by the husband, (d) a potential valuation dispute was not flagged with the court when the matter was prepared for trial, including in the husband’s certificate of readiness, (e) the husband consented to an order for m group to be re-engaged as a single expert to provide an updated valuation. m group was jointly instructed by both parties’ lawyers, (f) in her affidavit filed on 17 april 2023, the wife deposed the husband disputed the value ascribed to the suburb c property by the single expert. she noted he had not made any application to seek to adduce adversarial evidence in relation to the value of the suburb c property and that she would oppose any late application made by him to do so, (g) questions were put to mr l on behalf of the husband on 20 april 2023, including in respect of errors identified in his report, and were answered by mr l on 28 april 2023, (h) matters raised by counsel for the husband not canvassed in those questions, including errors identified in mr l’s valuation report, to the extent not already addressed in the answers provided by mr l, could be put to him in cross-examination. (i also observed apparent errors in mr k’s report which i brought to the attention of counsel for the husband, including an outdated market commentary, for example, referring to market figures from august and to the approaching spring selling season.), (i) the husband indicated he did not agree with the single expert valuation in his affidavit filed on 24 april 2023, yet his application to adduce evidence from mr k was filed on 3 may 2023, only three business days before the final hearing, (j) neither party sought the final hearing be adjourned, (k) one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   a potential valuation dispute was not flagged with the court when the matter was prepared for trial, including in the husband’s certificate of readiness, (e) the husband consented to an order for m group to be re-engaged as a single expert to provide an updated valuation. m group was jointly instructed by both parties’ lawyers, (f) in her affidavit filed on 17 april 2023, the wife deposed the husband disputed the value ascribed to the suburb c property by the single expert. she noted he had not made any application to seek to adduce adversarial evidence in relation to the value of the suburb c property and that she would oppose any late application made by him to do so, (g) questions were put to mr l on behalf of the husband on 20 april 2023, including in respect of errors identified in his report, and were answered by mr l on 28 april 2023, (h) matters raised by counsel for the husband not canvassed in those questions, including errors identified in mr l’s valuation report, to the extent not already addressed in the answers provided by mr l, could be put to him in cross-examination. (i also observed apparent errors in mr k’s report which i brought to the attention of counsel for the husband, including an outdated market commentary, for example, referring to market figures from august and to the approaching spring selling season.), (i) the husband indicated he did not agree with the single expert valuation in his affidavit filed on 24 april 2023, yet his application to adduce evidence from mr k was filed on 3 may 2023, only three business days before the final hearing, (j) neither party sought the final hearing be adjourned, (k) one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   the husband consented to an order for m group to be re-engaged as a single expert to provide an updated valuation. m group was jointly instructed by both parties’ lawyers, (f) in her affidavit filed on 17 april 2023, the wife deposed the husband disputed the value ascribed to the suburb c property by the single expert. she noted he had not made any application to seek to adduce adversarial evidence in relation to the value of the suburb c property and that she would oppose any late application made by him to do so, (g) questions were put to mr l on behalf of the husband on 20 april 2023, including in respect of errors identified in his report, and were answered by mr l on 28 april 2023, (h) matters raised by counsel for the husband not canvassed in those questions, including errors identified in mr l’s valuation report, to the extent not already addressed in the answers provided by mr l, could be put to him in cross-examination. (i also observed apparent errors in mr k’s report which i brought to the attention of counsel for the husband, including an outdated market commentary, for example, referring to market figures from august and to the approaching spring selling season.), (i) the husband indicated he did not agree with the single expert valuation in his affidavit filed on 24 april 2023, yet his application to adduce evidence from mr k was filed on 3 may 2023, only three business days before the final hearing, (j) neither party sought the final hearing be adjourned, (k) one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   in her affidavit filed on 17 april 2023, the wife deposed the husband disputed the value ascribed to the suburb c property by the single expert. she noted he had not made any application to seek to adduce adversarial evidence in relation to the value of the suburb c property and that she would oppose any late application made by him to do so, (g) questions were put to mr l on behalf of the husband on 20 april 2023, including in respect of errors identified in his report, and were answered by mr l on 28 april 2023, (h) matters raised by counsel for the husband not canvassed in those questions, including errors identified in mr l’s valuation report, to the extent not already addressed in the answers provided by mr l, could be put to him in cross-examination. (i also observed apparent errors in mr k’s report which i brought to the attention of counsel for the husband, including an outdated market commentary, for example, referring to market figures from august and to the approaching spring selling season.), (i) the husband indicated he did not agree with the single expert valuation in his affidavit filed on 24 april 2023, yet his application to adduce evidence from mr k was filed on 3 may 2023, only three business days before the final hearing, (j) neither party sought the final hearing be adjourned, (k) one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   questions were put to mr l on behalf of the husband on 20 april 2023, including in respect of errors identified in his report, and were answered by mr l on 28 april 2023, (h) matters raised by counsel for the husband not canvassed in those questions, including errors identified in mr l’s valuation report, to the extent not already addressed in the answers provided by mr l, could be put to him in cross-examination. (i also observed apparent errors in mr k’s report which i brought to the attention of counsel for the husband, including an outdated market commentary, for example, referring to market figures from august and to the approaching spring selling season.), (i) the husband indicated he did not agree with the single expert valuation in his affidavit filed on 24 april 2023, yet his application to adduce evidence from mr k was filed on 3 may 2023, only three business days before the final hearing, (j) neither party sought the final hearing be adjourned, (k) one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   matters raised by counsel for the husband not canvassed in those questions, including errors identified in mr l’s valuation report, to the extent not already addressed in the answers provided by mr l, could be put to him in cross-examination. (i also observed apparent errors in mr k’s report which i brought to the attention of counsel for the husband, including an outdated market commentary, for example, referring to market figures from august and to the approaching spring selling season.), (i) the husband indicated he did not agree with the single expert valuation in his affidavit filed on 24 april 2023, yet his application to adduce evidence from mr k was filed on 3 may 2023, only three business days before the final hearing, (j) neither party sought the final hearing be adjourned, (k) one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   the husband indicated he did not agree with the single expert valuation in his affidavit filed on 24 april 2023, yet his application to adduce evidence from mr k was filed on 3 may 2023, only three business days before the final hearing, (j) neither party sought the final hearing be adjourned, (k) one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   neither party sought the final hearing be adjourned, (k) one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   one of the expressed purposes of the rules is to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (l) a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   a large part of the first day of the hearing was taken up dealing with the husband’s application in a proceeding. if permission was granted to the husband to adduce adversarial evidence from mr k, further time would be taken up with evidence from two experts rather than one. if the matter took longer than the two days it was listed, there would be an impact on other litigants awaiting hearing, (m) the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   the prejudice to the wife at that very late stage that if permission was granted for the husband to adduce evidence from mr k, as she would be without the opportunity to engage another expert to assist her. she would be left only with the single expert, and (n) the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.   the single expert, mr l, had informed the parties he was on annual leave and his availability was already problematic, including to attend the final hearing, and had not yet been resolved. his availability to review mr k’s evidence and/or confer with mr k was not known.
the evidence  a jointly prepared, combined balance sheet (exhibit j-1), (b) a minute of final orders sought by the wife (exhibit w-2), (c) a minute of final orders sought by the husband (exhibit h-4), (d) questions put on behalf of the husband to mr l, by way of a letter from his lawyers dated 20 april 2023, and mr l’s answers to those questions by way a letter in reply dated 28 april 2023 (exhibit h-2), (e) o bank loan application signed by the parties in 2002 (exhibit h-3), and (f) correspondence confirming procedural fairness had been afforded to the trustees of the parties’ superannuation funds, in respect of the superannuation splitting orders sought (exhibit w-1).   a minute of final orders sought by the wife (exhibit w-2), (c) a minute of final orders sought by the husband (exhibit h-4), (d) questions put on behalf of the husband to mr l, by way of a letter from his lawyers dated 20 april 2023, and mr l’s answers to those questions by way a letter in reply dated 28 april 2023 (exhibit h-2), (e) o bank loan application signed by the parties in 2002 (exhibit h-3), and (f) correspondence confirming procedural fairness had been afforded to the trustees of the parties’ superannuation funds, in respect of the superannuation splitting orders sought (exhibit w-1).   a minute of final orders sought by the husband (exhibit h-4), (d) questions put on behalf of the husband to mr l, by way of a letter from his lawyers dated 20 april 2023, and mr l’s answers to those questions by way a letter in reply dated 28 april 2023 (exhibit h-2), (e) o bank loan application signed by the parties in 2002 (exhibit h-3), and (f) correspondence confirming procedural fairness had been afforded to the trustees of the parties’ superannuation funds, in respect of the superannuation splitting orders sought (exhibit w-1).   questions put on behalf of the husband to mr l, by way of a letter from his lawyers dated 20 april 2023, and mr l’s answers to those questions by way a letter in reply dated 28 april 2023 (exhibit h-2), (e) o bank loan application signed by the parties in 2002 (exhibit h-3), and (f) correspondence confirming procedural fairness had been afforded to the trustees of the parties’ superannuation funds, in respect of the superannuation splitting orders sought (exhibit w-1).   o bank loan application signed by the parties in 2002 (exhibit h-3), and (f) correspondence confirming procedural fairness had been afforded to the trustees of the parties’ superannuation funds, in respect of the superannuation splitting orders sought (exhibit w-1).   correspondence confirming procedural fairness had been afforded to the trustees of the parties’ superannuation funds, in respect of the superannuation splitting orders sought (exhibit w-1).
the wife
mr l
legal principles
parties’ property interests
assets and liabilities
value of the suburb c property  he acknowledged the q street property had superior external appeal, superior street appeal, had a larger garage and was a newer build. however, he maintained his opinion that the smaller overall living area and the inferior land composition and ancillary improvements made the q street property inferior to the suburb c property, (b) he acknowledged both blocks were irregular in shape and topography but explained his opinion that the shape of the q street property made it more difficult to design a dwelling and as a result there was a lot of “dead space” which could not be utilised for ancillary improvements and outdoor areas that were unusable. he explained this is undesirable to families for example, who prefer to be able to see their children outside from the kitchen window. in this regard, he considered the suburb c property superior, (c) he gave evidence that whilst he had not inspected the q street property personally, he had relied on photographs available online, subscription data bases and aerial imagery of the allotment. he also emphasised that looking at the floor plan, the q street property was two thirds smaller and whilst it had four designated bedrooms, they were smaller than those in the suburb c property, (d) counsel for the husband put to mr l that given recent interest rises and escalating costs of construction (both factors accepted by mr l) that purchasers will pay more for a smaller, superior, newer, “turnkey” home that does not require renovating or updating, such as the q street property compared with the suburb c property. mr l agreed that q street was a well presented newer home but was also of the view that the suburb c property was well presented and would not require significant updating works before moving in. he maintained his opinion the suburb c property was overall superior to the q street property, supporting his opinion of the value of the suburb c property.   he acknowledged both blocks were irregular in shape and topography but explained his opinion that the shape of the q street property made it more difficult to design a dwelling and as a result there was a lot of “dead space” which could not be utilised for ancillary improvements and outdoor areas that were unusable. he explained this is undesirable to families for example, who prefer to be able to see their children outside from the kitchen window. in this regard, he considered the suburb c property superior, (c) he gave evidence that whilst he had not inspected the q street property personally, he had relied on photographs available online, subscription data bases and aerial imagery of the allotment. he also emphasised that looking at the floor plan, the q street property was two thirds smaller and whilst it had four designated bedrooms, they were smaller than those in the suburb c property, (d) counsel for the husband put to mr l that given recent interest rises and escalating costs of construction (both factors accepted by mr l) that purchasers will pay more for a smaller, superior, newer, “turnkey” home that does not require renovating or updating, such as the q street property compared with the suburb c property. mr l agreed that q street was a well presented newer home but was also of the view that the suburb c property was well presented and would not require significant updating works before moving in. he maintained his opinion the suburb c property was overall superior to the q street property, supporting his opinion of the value of the suburb c property.   he gave evidence that whilst he had not inspected the q street property personally, he had relied on photographs available online, subscription data bases and aerial imagery of the allotment. he also emphasised that looking at the floor plan, the q street property was two thirds smaller and whilst it had four designated bedrooms, they were smaller than those in the suburb c property, (d) counsel for the husband put to mr l that given recent interest rises and escalating costs of construction (both factors accepted by mr l) that purchasers will pay more for a smaller, superior, newer, “turnkey” home that does not require renovating or updating, such as the q street property compared with the suburb c property. mr l agreed that q street was a well presented newer home but was also of the view that the suburb c property was well presented and would not require significant updating works before moving in. he maintained his opinion the suburb c property was overall superior to the q street property, supporting his opinion of the value of the suburb c property.   counsel for the husband put to mr l that given recent interest rises and escalating costs of construction (both factors accepted by mr l) that purchasers will pay more for a smaller, superior, newer, “turnkey” home that does not require renovating or updating, such as the q street property compared with the suburb c property. mr l agreed that q street was a well presented newer home but was also of the view that the suburb c property was well presented and would not require significant updating works before moving in. he maintained his opinion the suburb c property was overall superior to the q street property, supporting his opinion of the value of the suburb c property.
if the house were to be sold, i anticipate the following repairs would be required prior to sale: repair retaining wall and landscaping with mulch, top soil, planting, drainage as so on,
... repair loose paving around the swimming pool and repair pool interior finish which is missing in patches (this requires the pool to be drained and re-filled),
add-back
financial resources
adjusted balance sheet
is it just and equitable to make an order?
non-superannuaton assets
contributions  the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage ... to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage ... to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ..., including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker ...   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage ... to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ..., including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker ...   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ..., including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker ...   the husband: (i) savings: $87,000, and (ii) superannuation: $19,810, (b) the wife: (i) savings: $10,000, (ii) motor vehicle: $9,000, and (iii) superannuation: $9,500.   savings: $87,000, and (ii) superannuation: $19,810,  ) superannuation: $19,810,   the wife: (i) savings: $10,000, (ii) motor vehicle: $9,000, and (iii) superannuation: $9,500.   savings: $10,000, (ii) motor vehicle: $9,000, and (iii) superannuation: $9,500.  ) motor vehicle: $9,000, and (iii) superannuation: $9,500.  i) superannuation: $9,500.   $40,000 in late 2022, (b) $15,000 in late 2022, (c) $35,000 in early 2022, (d) $35,000 in early 2023, and (e) $20,000 in early 2023.   $15,000 in late 2022, (c) $35,000 in early 2022, (d) $35,000 in early 2023, and (e) $20,000 in early 2023.   $35,000 in early 2022, (d) $35,000 in early 2023, and (e) $20,000 in early 2023.   $35,000 in early 2023, and (e) $20,000 in early 2023.   $20,000 in early 2023.
impact on earning capacity
matters relevant pursuant to section 75(2)
superannuation
conclusion
just and equitable order
option for husband to retain the suburb c property
default provisions  [the wife’s] chest of drawers from the master bedroom, (b) table from upstairs on which a statute from [the wife’s] great grandmother previously sat, (c) [ornament] that previously sat on the table.   table from upstairs on which a statute from [the wife’s] great grandmother previously sat, (c) [ornament] that previously sat on the table.   [ornament] that previously sat on the table.
within 14 days of the sale of the [suburb c property], the parties will each provide to the other a list of chattels that they wish to retain from the [suburb c property] and for the purpose of this order, on 48 hours written notice from the wife, the husband will grant the wife access to the [suburb c property] to nominate any items that she may seek to retain.
other matters
order
associate: dated: 14 august 2023
dated: 14 august 2023
[1] in the marriage of c & c [2005] famca 429.[2] [2020] famcafc 134.[3] at [38].[4] [2022] fedcfamc1f 433 at [10]–[11].[5] at [15].[6] salmon and ors & salmon [2020] famcafc 134 at [35]; neales & neales [2022] fedcfamc1a 41.[7] neales & neales [2022] fedcfamc1a 41.[8] neales & neales [2022] fedcfamc1a 41.[9] stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52.[10] babett & falconer [2015] famcafc 124; (2015) flc 98-067 at [44]; cited with approval in perrin & perrin (no 2) [2018] famcafc 122 at [57]–[58] referring in turn to dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154. [11] stanford v stanford at [37].[12] ajo & gro (2005) flc 932-218; [2005] famca 195 at [30].[13] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154 at [21].[14] norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17 at [17].[15] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154 at [25].[16] jabour & jabour [2019] famfafc 78 at [73]–[87]; benson & drury [2020] famfafc 303 at [35].[17] it appears from the wife’s submissions and the chronological listing of these payments, this date should be late 2021.[18] [2017] famcafc 14; (2017) flc 93-759 at [20].[19] being $215,000 identified in her affidavit, less the error she acknowledged when cross-examined of $15,000.[20] gosper & gosper [1987] famca 43; (1987) flc 91–818 at [76,168].[21] [2019] famcafc 228 at [54]–[62].[22] the values identified in bold are values correspond with the value of assets retained by each of the husband and the wife in the orders i make.