last updated: 13 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hall & neuman [2023] fedcfamc2f 1088
orders
the courts orders by consent that, until further order:  in australia: (i) from 9am 22 september 2023 until 3pm 15 october 2023, (ii) during school terms in 2023, if the mother travels to australia provided that she gives the father 14 days’ notice, as agreed but failing agreement for up to 14 consecutive nights commencing at 4pm on the date that the mother arrives in australia and concluding at 4pm 15 days later,   from 9am 22 september 2023 until 3pm 15 october 2023, (ii) during school terms in 2023, if the mother travels to australia provided that she gives the father 14 days’ notice, as agreed but failing agreement for up to 14 consecutive nights commencing at 4pm on the date that the mother arrives in australia and concluding at 4pm 15 days later,  ) during school terms in 2023, if the mother travels to australia provided that she gives the father 14 days’ notice, as agreed but failing agreement for up to 14 consecutive nights commencing at 4pm on the date that the mother arrives in australia and concluding at 4pm 15 days later,
and the courts orders that, until further order: i) during school term by video each school day for a period of up to 30 minutes and for a period of up to 60 minutes each sunday and each alternate saturday.  ) at all other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   in country b: (i) from december 2023 (departure in december 2023) until january 2024, (ii) x shall travel with ms c from melbourne to country d and changeover between the father and ms c shall occur at 11am in december 2023 at e street, suburb f, victoria, and (iii) changeover in january 2023 shall occur at g street, suburb h. (iv) at all other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   from december 2023 (departure in december 2023) until january 2024, (ii) x shall travel with ms c from melbourne to country d and changeover between the father and ms c shall occur at 11am in december 2023 at e street, suburb f, victoria, and (iii) changeover in january 2023 shall occur at g street, suburb h. (iv) at all other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  ) x shall travel with ms c from melbourne to country d and changeover between the father and ms c shall occur at 11am in december 2023 at e street, suburb f, victoria, and (iii) changeover in january 2023 shall occur at g street, suburb h. (iv) at all other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  i) changeover in january 2023 shall occur at g street, suburb h. (iv) at all other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   the applicant will arrange for and book x’s economy airline travel to country b departing december 2023 and airline travel scheduled to arrive in australia in january 2024. (b) within 7 days of the applicant providing to the respondent written confirmation of the payment of airline travel pursuant to order 3(a) hereof, the respondent shall reimburse the applicant the return airline travel costs from australia to country b associated with x’s travel only. (c) the respondent provide the child’s australian and country d passports to ms c in december 2023 and the applicant shall provide them to the respondent at changeover in january 2024.   within 7 days of the applicant providing to the respondent written confirmation of the payment of airline travel pursuant to order 3(a) hereof, the respondent shall reimburse the applicant the return airline travel costs from australia to country b associated with x’s travel only. (c) the respondent provide the child’s australian and country d passports to ms c in december 2023 and the applicant shall provide them to the respondent at changeover in january 2024.   the respondent provide the child’s australian and country d passports to ms c in december 2023 and the applicant shall provide them to the respondent at changeover in january 2024.   the applicant is at liberty to travel within country b and country j (to hague convention countries only) with the child during this period of time.
specific issues  residential address, (b) mobile telephone number, and (c) private email address.   mobile telephone number, and (c) private email address.   private email address.   denigrating the other parent and/or their family members or friends to x or within the presence and/or hearing of x, (b) showing x any communication between the parents, and (c) showing x any court documents, copies of reports, subpoenaed material or any other matter or material in these proceedings and from discussing the subject matter of the proceedings in the presence or hearing of x.   showing x any communication between the parents, and (c) showing x any court documents, copies of reports, subpoenaed material or any other matter or material in these proceedings and from discussing the subject matter of the proceedings in the presence or hearing of x.   showing x any court documents, copies of reports, subpoenaed material or any other matter or material in these proceedings and from discussing the subject matter of the proceedings in the presence or hearing of x.   appoint ms k of l psychology, m street, suburb n to undertake non-reportable counselling for x, and (b) obtain an educational assessment for x with ms o of p psychology, q street, suburb r,   obtain an educational assessment for x with ms o of p psychology, q street, suburb r,
and the cost of same be shared equally by the father and the mother.
disclosure
smsf
and the courts orders that,
directions   the respondent shall draft the joint letter of instruction, and (b) the applicant and respondent shall pay the costs of the engagement and preparation of the opinion equally.   the applicant and respondent shall pay the costs of the engagement and preparation of the opinion equally.   a brief chronology, (b) contentions as to the relevant best interest considerations and relevant legislative provisions concerning parenting orders sought, (c) if property adjustment applications remain extant: (i) a table detailing the parties’ property interests, liabilities and resources, (ii) contentions as to relevant s.79(4) and s.75(2) issues, (iii) contentions as to justice and equity underlying their proposed final orders. (d) a minute of proposed final orders sought.   contentions as to the relevant best interest considerations and relevant legislative provisions concerning parenting orders sought, (c) if property adjustment applications remain extant: (i) a table detailing the parties’ property interests, liabilities and resources, (ii) contentions as to relevant s.79(4) and s.75(2) issues, (iii) contentions as to justice and equity underlying their proposed final orders. (d) a minute of proposed final orders sought.   if property adjustment applications remain extant: (i) a table detailing the parties’ property interests, liabilities and resources, (ii) contentions as to relevant s.79(4) and s.75(2) issues, (iii) contentions as to justice and equity underlying their proposed final orders. (d) a minute of proposed final orders sought.   a table detailing the parties’ property interests, liabilities and resources, (ii) contentions as to relevant s.79(4) and s.75(2) issues, (iii) contentions as to justice and equity underlying their proposed final orders.  ) contentions as to relevant s.79(4) and s.75(2) issues, (iii) contentions as to justice and equity underlying their proposed final orders.  i) contentions as to justice and equity underlying their proposed final orders.   a minute of proposed final orders sought.   any further amended initiating application setting out the final orders she seeks, if different to her extant application for final orders, (b) an affidavit of evidence in chief of all witnesses, including the applicant, and (c) an updated financial statement, if property adjustment applications remain extant.   an affidavit of evidence in chief of all witnesses, including the applicant, and (c) an updated financial statement, if property adjustment applications remain extant.   an updated financial statement, if property adjustment applications remain extant.   any further amended response to initiating application setting out the final orders he seeks, if different to his extant application for final orders, (b) an affidavit of evidence in chief of all witnesses, including the respondent, and (c) an updated financial statement, if property adjustment applications remain extant.   an affidavit of evidence in chief of all witnesses, including the respondent, and (c) an updated financial statement, if property adjustment applications remain extant.   a brief chronology, (b) contentions as to the relevant best interest considerations and relevant legislative provisions concerning parenting orders sought, (c) if property adjustment applications remain extant: (i) a table details the parties’ property interests, liabilities and resources, (ii) contentions as to relevant s.79(4) and s.75(2) issues, (iii) contentions as to justice and equity underlying their proposed final orders. (d) a minute of proposed final orders sought.   contentions as to the relevant best interest considerations and relevant legislative provisions concerning parenting orders sought, (c) if property adjustment applications remain extant: (i) a table details the parties’ property interests, liabilities and resources, (ii) contentions as to relevant s.79(4) and s.75(2) issues, (iii) contentions as to justice and equity underlying their proposed final orders. (d) a minute of proposed final orders sought.   if property adjustment applications remain extant: (i) a table details the parties’ property interests, liabilities and resources, (ii) contentions as to relevant s.79(4) and s.75(2) issues, (iii) contentions as to justice and equity underlying their proposed final orders. (d) a minute of proposed final orders sought.   a table details the parties’ property interests, liabilities and resources, (ii) contentions as to relevant s.79(4) and s.75(2) issues, (iii) contentions as to justice and equity underlying their proposed final orders.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy  how often x and her mother should communicate between now and the final hearing, (2) the date that x is to return from time with her mother in country b back to melbourne during the long summer school holidays, and (3) whether agreed and recommended counselling should be reportable or non-reportable.   the date that x is to return from time with her mother in country b back to melbourne during the long summer school holidays, and (3) whether agreed and recommended counselling should be reportable or non-reportable.   whether agreed and recommended counselling should be reportable or non-reportable.
communication
return from country b
counselling
case management
associate: dated: 23 august 2023
dated: 23 august 2023