last updated: 23 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bryson & bryson [2023] fedcfamc2f 997
orders
pursuant to pt viii of the family law act 1975 (cth), it is ordered that:
transfer of the suburb d property  the applicant to transfer to the respondent, at the expense of the respondent (excluding the applicant’s own incurred professional fees and disbursements associated with the transfer, including any pexa fees), all of his right, title and interest in the property known as b street, suburb d in the city e, more particularly described as block ... section ... in certificate of title volume ... folio ... (‘the property’), and for this purpose: (i) the respondent shall engage a conveyancing solicitor for the purpose of effecting this transfer within 14 days of the date of these orders and provide a copy of these orders to the conveyancing solicitors. (b) the respondent shall refinance the joint bank f mortgage into her sole name, and discharge the joint mortgage secured against the property (dealing number ...) (“the mortgage”), (c) the applicant and respondent shall sign any such document as may be required to facilitate compliance with the above orders, including but not limited to any transfer form or mortgage discharge form,   the respondent shall engage a conveyancing solicitor for the purpose of effecting this transfer within 14 days of the date of these orders and provide a copy of these orders to the conveyancing solicitors.   the respondent shall refinance the joint bank f mortgage into her sole name, and discharge the joint mortgage secured against the property (dealing number ...) (“the mortgage”), (c) the applicant and respondent shall sign any such document as may be required to facilitate compliance with the above orders, including but not limited to any transfer form or mortgage discharge form,   the applicant and respondent shall sign any such document as may be required to facilitate compliance with the above orders, including but not limited to any transfer form or mortgage discharge form,
default sale orders  the applicant is appointed as trustee for the sale, (b) the applicant shall be solely responsible for the conduct of the sale of the suburb d property up to and including settlement and is hereby authorised to sign any such documents that would usually be required to be signed by both parties, (c) the respondent shall vacate the suburb d property within 30 days from the date of default and the respondent shall leave the property in a clean and tidy fashion and in a good state of repair, (d) from the date the respondent is required to vacate the property the respondent, her servants or agents, be and are hereby restrained from attending upon the property, (e) the applicant is at liberty to engage services required to clean and repair the property if required, so that it is presentable for sale, and any costs to do so shall be paid by the applicant in the first instance, and then reimbursed to the applicant from the proceeds of sale prior to any distribution of the residual funds, (f) the parties are to enter into an agency agreement with ms g of h company, within 14 days of default, and the property is to be listed for auction within 60 days of entering the agency agreement, (g) the parties shall engage a conveyancing solicitor as recommended by ms g within 7 days of entering the agency agreement to act on the parties’ behalf in respect to the sale, (h) the listing or reserve price shall be agreed in writing, failing agreement the listing or reserve price shall be nominated by the applicant in consultation with ms g, (i) the sale price is to be agreed between the parties, failing agreement, as nominated by the applicant, (j) upon settlement of the sale of the property, the proceeds of sale are to be distributed, in the following manner and priority: (i) firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   the applicant shall be solely responsible for the conduct of the sale of the suburb d property up to and including settlement and is hereby authorised to sign any such documents that would usually be required to be signed by both parties, (c) the respondent shall vacate the suburb d property within 30 days from the date of default and the respondent shall leave the property in a clean and tidy fashion and in a good state of repair, (d) from the date the respondent is required to vacate the property the respondent, her servants or agents, be and are hereby restrained from attending upon the property, (e) the applicant is at liberty to engage services required to clean and repair the property if required, so that it is presentable for sale, and any costs to do so shall be paid by the applicant in the first instance, and then reimbursed to the applicant from the proceeds of sale prior to any distribution of the residual funds, (f) the parties are to enter into an agency agreement with ms g of h company, within 14 days of default, and the property is to be listed for auction within 60 days of entering the agency agreement, (g) the parties shall engage a conveyancing solicitor as recommended by ms g within 7 days of entering the agency agreement to act on the parties’ behalf in respect to the sale, (h) the listing or reserve price shall be agreed in writing, failing agreement the listing or reserve price shall be nominated by the applicant in consultation with ms g, (i) the sale price is to be agreed between the parties, failing agreement, as nominated by the applicant, (j) upon settlement of the sale of the property, the proceeds of sale are to be distributed, in the following manner and priority: (i) firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   the respondent shall vacate the suburb d property within 30 days from the date of default and the respondent shall leave the property in a clean and tidy fashion and in a good state of repair, (d) from the date the respondent is required to vacate the property the respondent, her servants or agents, be and are hereby restrained from attending upon the property, (e) the applicant is at liberty to engage services required to clean and repair the property if required, so that it is presentable for sale, and any costs to do so shall be paid by the applicant in the first instance, and then reimbursed to the applicant from the proceeds of sale prior to any distribution of the residual funds, (f) the parties are to enter into an agency agreement with ms g of h company, within 14 days of default, and the property is to be listed for auction within 60 days of entering the agency agreement, (g) the parties shall engage a conveyancing solicitor as recommended by ms g within 7 days of entering the agency agreement to act on the parties’ behalf in respect to the sale, (h) the listing or reserve price shall be agreed in writing, failing agreement the listing or reserve price shall be nominated by the applicant in consultation with ms g, (i) the sale price is to be agreed between the parties, failing agreement, as nominated by the applicant, (j) upon settlement of the sale of the property, the proceeds of sale are to be distributed, in the following manner and priority: (i) firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   from the date the respondent is required to vacate the property the respondent, her servants or agents, be and are hereby restrained from attending upon the property, (e) the applicant is at liberty to engage services required to clean and repair the property if required, so that it is presentable for sale, and any costs to do so shall be paid by the applicant in the first instance, and then reimbursed to the applicant from the proceeds of sale prior to any distribution of the residual funds, (f) the parties are to enter into an agency agreement with ms g of h company, within 14 days of default, and the property is to be listed for auction within 60 days of entering the agency agreement, (g) the parties shall engage a conveyancing solicitor as recommended by ms g within 7 days of entering the agency agreement to act on the parties’ behalf in respect to the sale, (h) the listing or reserve price shall be agreed in writing, failing agreement the listing or reserve price shall be nominated by the applicant in consultation with ms g, (i) the sale price is to be agreed between the parties, failing agreement, as nominated by the applicant, (j) upon settlement of the sale of the property, the proceeds of sale are to be distributed, in the following manner and priority: (i) firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   the applicant is at liberty to engage services required to clean and repair the property if required, so that it is presentable for sale, and any costs to do so shall be paid by the applicant in the first instance, and then reimbursed to the applicant from the proceeds of sale prior to any distribution of the residual funds, (f) the parties are to enter into an agency agreement with ms g of h company, within 14 days of default, and the property is to be listed for auction within 60 days of entering the agency agreement, (g) the parties shall engage a conveyancing solicitor as recommended by ms g within 7 days of entering the agency agreement to act on the parties’ behalf in respect to the sale, (h) the listing or reserve price shall be agreed in writing, failing agreement the listing or reserve price shall be nominated by the applicant in consultation with ms g, (i) the sale price is to be agreed between the parties, failing agreement, as nominated by the applicant, (j) upon settlement of the sale of the property, the proceeds of sale are to be distributed, in the following manner and priority: (i) firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   the parties are to enter into an agency agreement with ms g of h company, within 14 days of default, and the property is to be listed for auction within 60 days of entering the agency agreement, (g) the parties shall engage a conveyancing solicitor as recommended by ms g within 7 days of entering the agency agreement to act on the parties’ behalf in respect to the sale, (h) the listing or reserve price shall be agreed in writing, failing agreement the listing or reserve price shall be nominated by the applicant in consultation with ms g, (i) the sale price is to be agreed between the parties, failing agreement, as nominated by the applicant, (j) upon settlement of the sale of the property, the proceeds of sale are to be distributed, in the following manner and priority: (i) firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   the parties shall engage a conveyancing solicitor as recommended by ms g within 7 days of entering the agency agreement to act on the parties’ behalf in respect to the sale, (h) the listing or reserve price shall be agreed in writing, failing agreement the listing or reserve price shall be nominated by the applicant in consultation with ms g, (i) the sale price is to be agreed between the parties, failing agreement, as nominated by the applicant, (j) upon settlement of the sale of the property, the proceeds of sale are to be distributed, in the following manner and priority: (i) firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   the listing or reserve price shall be agreed in writing, failing agreement the listing or reserve price shall be nominated by the applicant in consultation with ms g, (i) the sale price is to be agreed between the parties, failing agreement, as nominated by the applicant, (j) upon settlement of the sale of the property, the proceeds of sale are to be distributed, in the following manner and priority: (i) firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   the sale price is to be agreed between the parties, failing agreement, as nominated by the applicant, (j) upon settlement of the sale of the property, the proceeds of sale are to be distributed, in the following manner and priority: (i) firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   upon settlement of the sale of the property, the proceeds of sale are to be distributed, in the following manner and priority: (i) firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   firstly, to pay all costs and commissions of the sale, including marketing costs, auction fees and conveyancing solicitor fees, (ii) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.  ) secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes, (iii) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.  i) thirdly, to pay all monies necessary to discharge the bank f loan secured by way of mortgage dealing number ... over the suburb d property, (iv) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.  ) fourthly, to reimburse the applicant any costs/monies paid by him in cleaning and preparing the property for sale, (v) fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.   fifthly, to reimburse the applicant the respondent’s half share of costs associated with the first j company valuation ordered by the court, (vi) lastly, the balance to the respondent.  ) lastly, the balance to the respondent.
other assets & liabilities  the jewellery that the applicant’s late mother left to him, (b) the framed pictures of the applicant’s family, (c) the applicant’s photo albums, (d) copies of the marriage certificates of the applicant and other important documents (e) the applicant’s camera and its charger, (f) the binoculars given to the applicant, (g) crockery given to the applicant as a present, (h) the applicant’s new shirt, and (i) the applicant’s silk tie.   the framed pictures of the applicant’s family, (c) the applicant’s photo albums, (d) copies of the marriage certificates of the applicant and other important documents (e) the applicant’s camera and its charger, (f) the binoculars given to the applicant, (g) crockery given to the applicant as a present, (h) the applicant’s new shirt, and (i) the applicant’s silk tie.   the applicant’s photo albums, (d) copies of the marriage certificates of the applicant and other important documents (e) the applicant’s camera and its charger, (f) the binoculars given to the applicant, (g) crockery given to the applicant as a present, (h) the applicant’s new shirt, and (i) the applicant’s silk tie.   copies of the marriage certificates of the applicant and other important documents (e) the applicant’s camera and its charger, (f) the binoculars given to the applicant, (g) crockery given to the applicant as a present, (h) the applicant’s new shirt, and (i) the applicant’s silk tie.   the applicant’s camera and its charger, (f) the binoculars given to the applicant, (g) crockery given to the applicant as a present, (h) the applicant’s new shirt, and (i) the applicant’s silk tie.   the binoculars given to the applicant, (g) crockery given to the applicant as a present, (h) the applicant’s new shirt, and (i) the applicant’s silk tie.   crockery given to the applicant as a present, (h) the applicant’s new shirt, and (i) the applicant’s silk tie.   the applicant’s new shirt, and (i) the applicant’s silk tie.   the applicant’s silk tie.   any property/resource located in country c in which he holds an interest, (b) the balance of any funds held in any bank account in his sole name, (c) motor vehicle 2, (d) furniture and contents in his name possession or control, (e) his superannuation entitlements, (f) any other item in his name, possession or control.   the balance of any funds held in any bank account in his sole name, (c) motor vehicle 2, (d) furniture and contents in his name possession or control, (e) his superannuation entitlements, (f) any other item in his name, possession or control.   motor vehicle 2, (d) furniture and contents in his name possession or control, (e) his superannuation entitlements, (f) any other item in his name, possession or control.   furniture and contents in his name possession or control, (e) his superannuation entitlements, (f) any other item in his name, possession or control.   his superannuation entitlements, (f) any other item in his name, possession or control.   any other item in his name, possession or control.   any property/resource located in country c in which she holds an interest, (b) the balance of any funds held in any bank account in her sole name, (c) motor vehicle 2 purchased by the respondent post separation, (d) her superannuation entitlements, (e) furniture, contents or jewellery in her name, possession or control.   the balance of any funds held in any bank account in her sole name, (c) motor vehicle 2 purchased by the respondent post separation, (d) her superannuation entitlements, (e) furniture, contents or jewellery in her name, possession or control.   motor vehicle 2 purchased by the respondent post separation, (d) her superannuation entitlements, (e) furniture, contents or jewellery in her name, possession or control.   her superannuation entitlements, (e) furniture, contents or jewellery in her name, possession or control.   furniture, contents or jewellery in her name, possession or control.
reasons for judgment
judge mansfield:
introduction
orders sought  the wife obtain sole title to the suburb d property, (b) the husband pay to the wife $512,000 (which includes discharge of the loan secured by mortgage over the suburb d property), (c) the husband deliver up a long list of variously described chattels, (d) the husband transfer title to two real properties situate in country c (and the husband retain title to four real properties situate in country c), (e) the wife retain all of her superannuation interests and obtain all of the husband’s superannuation interests.   the husband pay to the wife $512,000 (which includes discharge of the loan secured by mortgage over the suburb d property), (c) the husband deliver up a long list of variously described chattels, (d) the husband transfer title to two real properties situate in country c (and the husband retain title to four real properties situate in country c), (e) the wife retain all of her superannuation interests and obtain all of the husband’s superannuation interests.   the husband deliver up a long list of variously described chattels, (d) the husband transfer title to two real properties situate in country c (and the husband retain title to four real properties situate in country c), (e) the wife retain all of her superannuation interests and obtain all of the husband’s superannuation interests.   the husband transfer title to two real properties situate in country c (and the husband retain title to four real properties situate in country c), (e) the wife retain all of her superannuation interests and obtain all of the husband’s superannuation interests.   the wife retain all of her superannuation interests and obtain all of the husband’s superannuation interests.   the wife obtain sole title to the suburb d property, (b) the wife refinance the existing loan that is in joint names secured by mortgage over the suburb d property, (c) the wife indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in relation to the suburb d property, (d) in default of refinancing, the suburb d property be sold and the net sale proceeds be disbursed to the wife, (e) the wife retain a vehicle, the husband retain a vehicle and the wife obtain a third vehicle, (f) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels, (g) each party retains their own superannuation interests.   the wife refinance the existing loan that is in joint names secured by mortgage over the suburb d property, (c) the wife indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in relation to the suburb d property, (d) in default of refinancing, the suburb d property be sold and the net sale proceeds be disbursed to the wife, (e) the wife retain a vehicle, the husband retain a vehicle and the wife obtain a third vehicle, (f) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels, (g) each party retains their own superannuation interests.   the wife indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in relation to the suburb d property, (d) in default of refinancing, the suburb d property be sold and the net sale proceeds be disbursed to the wife, (e) the wife retain a vehicle, the husband retain a vehicle and the wife obtain a third vehicle, (f) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels, (g) each party retains their own superannuation interests.   in default of refinancing, the suburb d property be sold and the net sale proceeds be disbursed to the wife, (e) the wife retain a vehicle, the husband retain a vehicle and the wife obtain a third vehicle, (f) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels, (g) each party retains their own superannuation interests.   the wife retain a vehicle, the husband retain a vehicle and the wife obtain a third vehicle, (f) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels, (g) each party retains their own superannuation interests.   the wife deliver up a long list of chattels, (g) each party retains their own superannuation interests.   each party retains their own superannuation interests.   the wife obtain sole title to the suburb d property, (b) the wife refinance the existing loan that is in joint names secured by mortgage over the suburb d property, (c) the wife pay to the husband $409,830, (d) the wife indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in relation to the suburb d property, (e) in default of refinancing, the suburb d property be sold and the net sale proceeds be divided equally between the parties, (f) there be a superannuation splitting order using a base amount of $297,193 in the favour of the wife, (g) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels.   the wife refinance the existing loan that is in joint names secured by mortgage over the suburb d property, (c) the wife pay to the husband $409,830, (d) the wife indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in relation to the suburb d property, (e) in default of refinancing, the suburb d property be sold and the net sale proceeds be divided equally between the parties, (f) there be a superannuation splitting order using a base amount of $297,193 in the favour of the wife, (g) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels.   the wife pay to the husband $409,830, (d) the wife indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in relation to the suburb d property, (e) in default of refinancing, the suburb d property be sold and the net sale proceeds be divided equally between the parties, (f) there be a superannuation splitting order using a base amount of $297,193 in the favour of the wife, (g) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels.   the wife indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in relation to the suburb d property, (e) in default of refinancing, the suburb d property be sold and the net sale proceeds be divided equally between the parties, (f) there be a superannuation splitting order using a base amount of $297,193 in the favour of the wife, (g) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels.   in default of refinancing, the suburb d property be sold and the net sale proceeds be divided equally between the parties, (f) there be a superannuation splitting order using a base amount of $297,193 in the favour of the wife, (g) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels.   there be a superannuation splitting order using a base amount of $297,193 in the favour of the wife, (g) the wife deliver up a long list of chattels.   the wife deliver up a long list of chattels.
issues  the value and treatment of real property situate in country c, (b) the value of the suburb d property, (c) other lesser items in the balance sheet, (d) assessment of contributions including consideration of family violence, (e) the matters referred to in sub-section 75(2) of the family law act 1975 (“the act”), (f) what alteration of the parties interests in the property of the marriage or either of them is just and equitable.   the value of the suburb d property, (c) other lesser items in the balance sheet, (d) assessment of contributions including consideration of family violence, (e) the matters referred to in sub-section 75(2) of the family law act 1975 (“the act”), (f) what alteration of the parties interests in the property of the marriage or either of them is just and equitable.   other lesser items in the balance sheet, (d) assessment of contributions including consideration of family violence, (e) the matters referred to in sub-section 75(2) of the family law act 1975 (“the act”), (f) what alteration of the parties interests in the property of the marriage or either of them is just and equitable.   assessment of contributions including consideration of family violence, (e) the matters referred to in sub-section 75(2) of the family law act 1975 (“the act”), (f) what alteration of the parties interests in the property of the marriage or either of them is just and equitable.   the matters referred to in sub-section 75(2) of the family law act 1975 (“the act”), (f) what alteration of the parties interests in the property of the marriage or either of them is just and equitable.   what alteration of the parties interests in the property of the marriage or either of them is just and equitable.
background  bryson] and i shared a loving relationship in the early years of our marriage. our relationship became more and more strained over time due to [ms bryson]'s behaviour. whilst [ms bryson] may be offended with this classification, she [has a mental health disorder], and her condition has worsened over time. i encouraged [ms bryson] to attend upon a psychologist on numerous occasions, however she refused. i attempted to emotionally and logistically manage this aspect of our lives over time, however, by the end of our relationship our home was near unliveable [due to her mental health disorder] and [ms bryson] would, without consulting with me, spend thousands of dollars on items we did not need, things that we did not have the room for.
i cannot believe i was married to that. i cannot believe 30 years of my life, and the rest, is gone because of that. i will speak up. i will not be scared. it doesn’t matter if i die today or tomorrow. he took the best years of my life and his own children’s life because of his violence.
the hearing  affidavit of mr bryson filed 17 april 2023 (‘exhibit a1’), (b) affidavit of mr bryson filed 14 april 2023 (‘exhibit a2’), (c) financial statement of the husband filed 17 april 2023 (‘exhibit a3’), (d) documents produced under subpoena by m authority totalling 11 pages (‘exhibit a4’), (e) super fund 1 statement at 21 december 2020 (‘exhibit a5’), (f) text messages from bank f dated 18 july 2023 (‘exhibit a6’), (g) payslip of the wife dated 29 march 2023 (‘exhibit a7’), (h) minute of orders sought by the husband dated 19 july 2023 (‘exhibit a8’), (i) affidavit of ms bryson filed 6 july 2023 (‘exhibit r1’) (j) financial statement of the wife filed 13 july 2023 (‘exhibit r2’), (k) bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   affidavit of mr bryson filed 14 april 2023 (‘exhibit a2’), (c) financial statement of the husband filed 17 april 2023 (‘exhibit a3’), (d) documents produced under subpoena by m authority totalling 11 pages (‘exhibit a4’), (e) super fund 1 statement at 21 december 2020 (‘exhibit a5’), (f) text messages from bank f dated 18 july 2023 (‘exhibit a6’), (g) payslip of the wife dated 29 march 2023 (‘exhibit a7’), (h) minute of orders sought by the husband dated 19 july 2023 (‘exhibit a8’), (i) affidavit of ms bryson filed 6 july 2023 (‘exhibit r1’) (j) financial statement of the wife filed 13 july 2023 (‘exhibit r2’), (k) bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   financial statement of the husband filed 17 april 2023 (‘exhibit a3’), (d) documents produced under subpoena by m authority totalling 11 pages (‘exhibit a4’), (e) super fund 1 statement at 21 december 2020 (‘exhibit a5’), (f) text messages from bank f dated 18 july 2023 (‘exhibit a6’), (g) payslip of the wife dated 29 march 2023 (‘exhibit a7’), (h) minute of orders sought by the husband dated 19 july 2023 (‘exhibit a8’), (i) affidavit of ms bryson filed 6 july 2023 (‘exhibit r1’) (j) financial statement of the wife filed 13 july 2023 (‘exhibit r2’), (k) bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   documents produced under subpoena by m authority totalling 11 pages (‘exhibit a4’), (e) super fund 1 statement at 21 december 2020 (‘exhibit a5’), (f) text messages from bank f dated 18 july 2023 (‘exhibit a6’), (g) payslip of the wife dated 29 march 2023 (‘exhibit a7’), (h) minute of orders sought by the husband dated 19 july 2023 (‘exhibit a8’), (i) affidavit of ms bryson filed 6 july 2023 (‘exhibit r1’) (j) financial statement of the wife filed 13 july 2023 (‘exhibit r2’), (k) bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   super fund 1 statement at 21 december 2020 (‘exhibit a5’), (f) text messages from bank f dated 18 july 2023 (‘exhibit a6’), (g) payslip of the wife dated 29 march 2023 (‘exhibit a7’), (h) minute of orders sought by the husband dated 19 july 2023 (‘exhibit a8’), (i) affidavit of ms bryson filed 6 july 2023 (‘exhibit r1’) (j) financial statement of the wife filed 13 july 2023 (‘exhibit r2’), (k) bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   text messages from bank f dated 18 july 2023 (‘exhibit a6’), (g) payslip of the wife dated 29 march 2023 (‘exhibit a7’), (h) minute of orders sought by the husband dated 19 july 2023 (‘exhibit a8’), (i) affidavit of ms bryson filed 6 july 2023 (‘exhibit r1’) (j) financial statement of the wife filed 13 july 2023 (‘exhibit r2’), (k) bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   payslip of the wife dated 29 march 2023 (‘exhibit a7’), (h) minute of orders sought by the husband dated 19 july 2023 (‘exhibit a8’), (i) affidavit of ms bryson filed 6 july 2023 (‘exhibit r1’) (j) financial statement of the wife filed 13 july 2023 (‘exhibit r2’), (k) bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   minute of orders sought by the husband dated 19 july 2023 (‘exhibit a8’), (i) affidavit of ms bryson filed 6 july 2023 (‘exhibit r1’) (j) financial statement of the wife filed 13 july 2023 (‘exhibit r2’), (k) bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   affidavit of ms bryson filed 6 july 2023 (‘exhibit r1’) (j) financial statement of the wife filed 13 july 2023 (‘exhibit r2’), (k) bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   financial statement of the wife filed 13 july 2023 (‘exhibit r2’), (k) bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   bundle of documents produced by m authority (‘exhibit r3’), (l) affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   affidavit of the single expert witness mr l 20 july 2023 (‘exhibit c1’), and (m) balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   balance sheet as settled in court (‘exhibit c2’).   case outline document filed 14 july 2023.   amended response to initiating application filed 6 july 2023.
the husband’s evidence generally  obtain the specified items of sentimental value to him, and (b) end the financial relationship between the parties by way of an equal division of the property of the marriage provided that he is indemnified by the wife in relation to all liabilities arising from the suburb d property if the wife can manage to refinance it.   end the financial relationship between the parties by way of an equal division of the property of the marriage provided that he is indemnified by the wife in relation to all liabilities arising from the suburb d property if the wife can manage to refinance it.
the wife’s evidence generally
my family contributed financially assisting [mr bryson] and me from 1994 to 2019. my family gave cash to [mr bryson] and me, and our sons and on numerous occasions, my father gave [mr bryson] large sums of money including to buy plane tickets so that we could move to australia. [mr bryson] never repaid any of these funds to my family. ... in total, the monies that were provided by my family to us are more than 300 million [country c currency]. that money spent in [country c] would be the equivalent of spending australian dollars in australia ... at no point was any money provided to my bank account. they instead gave the money directly to us.
legal principles
in every case in which a property settlement order under s 79 is sought, it is necessary to satisfy the court that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. three fundamental propositions must not be obscured. first, it is necessary to begin consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. second, although s 79 confers a broad power on a court exercising jurisdiction under the act to make a property settlement order, it is not a power that is to be exercised according to an unguided judicial discretion. third, whether making a property settlement order is "just and equitable" is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them or has the right to an interest in marital property which is fixed by reference to the various matters (including financial and other contributions) set out in s 79(4). the power to make a property settlement order must be exercised in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down.
in many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife. no less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. that is, any express or implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing arrangements of marital property interests were sufficient or appropriate during the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the ending of the marital relationship. and the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4).
how the court approaches allegations of family violence
a) had a significant adverse impact on that party’s contributions to the marriage or b) to have made that party’s contributions significantly more arduous that they ought to have been.
b) to have made that party’s contributions significantly more arduous that they ought to have been.   provide context to other evidence, (b) provide evidence as to the relationship in existence between the parties, which may explain other actions taken by the parties in their financial relationship or their relationship generally, (c) the credibility of each party, and (d) the fact that a party expresses a conclusion in an affidavit does not render that evidence inadmissible, but rather, it is relevant as to weight.   provide evidence as to the relationship in existence between the parties, which may explain other actions taken by the parties in their financial relationship or their relationship generally, (c) the credibility of each party, and (d) the fact that a party expresses a conclusion in an affidavit does not render that evidence inadmissible, but rather, it is relevant as to weight.   the credibility of each party, and (d) the fact that a party expresses a conclusion in an affidavit does not render that evidence inadmissible, but rather, it is relevant as to weight.   the fact that a party expresses a conclusion in an affidavit does not render that evidence inadmissible, but rather, it is relevant as to weight.
24. for the reasons given, the words “significantly” and “more arduous” are not to be read as coterminous with “exceptional”. rather, they arise from the basis of the principle itself which focuses on contributions. if the nature and extent of a person’s contributions are made more difficult or harder so that they should be accorded greater weight, such that they should be taken into account in the determining of the outcome, they have therefore been “significantly impacted” or made “more arduous”. the focus is not on the conduct per se, but on its effects on contributions. 25. the threshold for recognition is therefore met by conduct which has a discernible effect on the contributions of the other party such that it should be recognised in determining the respective contributions of the parties.
the balance sheet
real properties in country c
40. .... prior to our relationship and in approximately 1993, [i] inherited from my father an interest in land in [country c] along with my sisters. the land is held in my name, though my sisters hold an interest pursuant to [country c] customary law. 41. the land consists of separate small parcels of land. there is no road access to the land, except for one parcel, which has access but cannot be built on as it holds the graves of my parents. there is a dilapidated building on one of the parcels of land. 42. the blocks are rural, some have not been cleared, and i say that they hold little monetary value. my family in [country c] use the land for modest farming purposes. the land has sentimental value as historically the land has been held by my family for many years. the requirement in [country c], is that the land will be passed to the next generation of male descendants. i receive no income from the land nor am i able to sell the land. i say i effectively hold my interest 'on trust' for my siblings who live in [country c]. i will not receive any cash adjustment in exchange for my interest. 43. in the event of my passing, pursuant to customary law in [country c], the land will pass to my three children. however, if they do not want to hold this land, the land will pass to my older sister who married [a family member] and who continues to hold our family name. in the event of her passing, the land will then pass to her male children. the property will only pass to family that have the same last name. i am willing to bequeath my interest in this land to my three children in my will, if this assists with reaching an outcome. 44. i do not intend to return to [country c]. approximately two years ago, i published an article which was critical of the [country c] regime. the [country c] government does not support freedom of political speech. i am concerned that as a consequence of expressing this opinion publicly, i may be arrested by [country c] authorities if i returned. i understand the [country c] government have been made aware of this publication.
56. [ms bryson] also holds an interest in land in [country c]. this interest was inherited by her and her four siblings approximately [8] years ago. the property has a number of buildings including a house, is a functioning and profitable [farm]. 62. [ms bryson] also has a family home in [town n, country c] in a separate area, which she holds an interest in.
93. i do not own any property in [country c], nor have i received property from my father's inheritance. 94. i further deny that i receive $250,000 per annum from the [farm] that belonged to my late father and that my family deposits money into my overseas account.
53. on 19 april 2023, i am advised that [my] lawyers received a further email from the [ms bryson], which attached an email and letter that she had purportedly sent to various australian federal ministers as well as an [city e] minister. the subject line of the email was: " [mr bryson]- a dual australian [country c] citizen about to cause an international incident". i have read the letter and i note that the letter includes the following statement:
my brother has the authority to shoot anyone who gets near the [farm] like everyone who works there. it is a risky place. if anyone gets hurt, who is going to be responsible? definitely not my brother, things do not work like here. me? not at all. but i maybe blamed and so i will not engage in anything that is illegal in the first place, something that would cause issues to both countries and as such an international incident. the story may be published in the newspapers, complaints may go to the consular in [country o] that also deals with [country c], and the media here and there will be contacted. [emphasis added]
55. as a consequence of the contents of the correspondence from [ms bryson], referred to in the previous paragraphs, [p lawyers], on my instructions, did not send the joint letter of instructions to the [country c] valuer, due to having safety concerns for the valuer.   the husband’s considerable and exhaustive efforts to put credible evidence before the court, (b) the wife’s obstruction to the husband’s efforts, (c) the husband’s evidence, which i accept, that he has no intention or reason to return to country c.   the wife’s obstruction to the husband’s efforts, (c) the husband’s evidence, which i accept, that he has no intention or reason to return to country c.   the husband’s evidence, which i accept, that he has no intention or reason to return to country c.
the suburb d property  that ‘fair wear and tear’ meant taking into account the property was 14 years old and at various states of maintenance, (b) that his inspection encompassed observing the overall condition of the property and not a structural inspection, (c) about the sources of data he took into account, (d) why the decrease in value was only $10,000 in one year from $1,100,000 [in] 2022 (from a previous valuation) to $1,090,000 [in] 2023 to which the expert referred to section 3.2 of his report – local market overview, (e) the two holes in the walls that he saw and took into account.   that his inspection encompassed observing the overall condition of the property and not a structural inspection, (c) about the sources of data he took into account, (d) why the decrease in value was only $10,000 in one year from $1,100,000 [in] 2022 (from a previous valuation) to $1,090,000 [in] 2023 to which the expert referred to section 3.2 of his report – local market overview, (e) the two holes in the walls that he saw and took into account.   about the sources of data he took into account, (d) why the decrease in value was only $10,000 in one year from $1,100,000 [in] 2022 (from a previous valuation) to $1,090,000 [in] 2023 to which the expert referred to section 3.2 of his report – local market overview, (e) the two holes in the walls that he saw and took into account.   why the decrease in value was only $10,000 in one year from $1,100,000 [in] 2022 (from a previous valuation) to $1,090,000 [in] 2023 to which the expert referred to section 3.2 of his report – local market overview, (e) the two holes in the walls that he saw and took into account.   the two holes in the walls that he saw and took into account.
the motor vehicles
jewellery
home contents
bank accounts
items lost, stolen, damaged
mortgage
all other liabilities
superannuation
addback
83. a lawyer that was representing me after the separation, knowing that i was unwell and only had a casual job, suggested that i transfer money to help with my sons and to ensure that i was financially stable. as such, i transferred $39,000, which i used to buy some furniture. these funds assisted me in being able to provide for my sons and myself. i gave money to the boys even when they were with [mr bryson].
i have asked [ms bryson]'s former solicitors, via written correspondence from my lawyers on numerous occasions for evidence documenting that the $40,000 has been quarantined. [ms bryson] has failed to provide the relevant disclosure. [in early] 2023, [ms bryson] provided [bank f] statements for accounts #...61 and #...16. i understand she has numerous other accounts which she has failed to disclose, including accounts evidenced as linked or associated with #...61 and #...16 and accounts with anz.   where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.   where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.   the wife unilaterally reduced the value of the matrimonial assets by $39,906.53 to her sole benefit. (b) the wife has not provided any proper explanation to her use of those funds. she has not established that they were used on reasonably incurred necessary living expenses. (c) the transactions that she deposes to in relation to the expenditure of those funds would have yielded ample documentation in her support of her explanations. provision of a bank statement may well have been sufficient. (d) i am satisfied that the wife’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the husband on this issue.   the wife has not provided any proper explanation to her use of those funds. she has not established that they were used on reasonably incurred necessary living expenses. (c) the transactions that she deposes to in relation to the expenditure of those funds would have yielded ample documentation in her support of her explanations. provision of a bank statement may well have been sufficient. (d) i am satisfied that the wife’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the husband on this issue.   the transactions that she deposes to in relation to the expenditure of those funds would have yielded ample documentation in her support of her explanations. provision of a bank statement may well have been sufficient. (d) i am satisfied that the wife’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the husband on this issue.   i am satisfied that the wife’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the husband on this issue.
determinations
has the power to make a property settlement order been enlivened  the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property identified as property of the parties to a marriage or either of them, and (b) the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship, and (c) there is no longer the common use of property by the husband and wife, and (d) the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements, including the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired, have been brought to an end.   the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship, and (c) there is no longer the common use of property by the husband and wife, and (d) the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements, including the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired, have been brought to an end.   there is no longer the common use of property by the husband and wife, and (d) the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements, including the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired, have been brought to an end.   the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements, including the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired, have been brought to an end.
contributions
financial contributions
non-financial contributions
family violence
25. i have experienced physical, emotional, verbal, and sexual abuse from [mr bryson] throughout the course of our relationship. 26. this has caused me significant trauma and has impacted my mental health severely.   physical assaults from as far back as their first year of marriage, in or around 1997, 2011, 2013, early and mid-2017, (b) sexual assaults in 1996, many times in 2019 and countless other times, (c) property damage/disposal in 2013, 2014, 2019, mid-2020 and the event triggering separation on 3 october 2020, (d) controlling behaviour of various types at various times, (e) emotional and verbal abuse throughout the relationship.   sexual assaults in 1996, many times in 2019 and countless other times, (c) property damage/disposal in 2013, 2014, 2019, mid-2020 and the event triggering separation on 3 october 2020, (d) controlling behaviour of various types at various times, (e) emotional and verbal abuse throughout the relationship.   property damage/disposal in 2013, 2014, 2019, mid-2020 and the event triggering separation on 3 october 2020, (d) controlling behaviour of various types at various times, (e) emotional and verbal abuse throughout the relationship.   controlling behaviour of various types at various times, (e) emotional and verbal abuse throughout the relationship.   emotional and verbal abuse throughout the relationship.
14. despite [ms bryson] obtaining the ifvo, [ms bryson] wrote to me by email on approximately 63 occasions [in late] 2020 (8 weeks). i responded on approximately two or three occasions (as allowed by the ifvo) to try and advance our property settlement matter. annexed hereto and marked with the letter "b" are examples of the communications received from [ms bryson]. 15. despite final orders being made by consent without admission on 6 may 2021, from december 2020 to current date, [ms bryson] has emailed me approximately 270 times. the communications are rambling, insulting, often unclear and repetitive. i have not replied. 28. ... [ms bryson] sent an email to me [in early] 2023, where she called me a "cunt" and "filth". i provide the following extract from that email: you filth, cunt, you cheat and you use your son a name?!!! who does that?your son was harming himself at that time and you abuse day and night wasincreasing and you went and cheated and came to us and you never cared forhim.in fact, you were fighting with him and causing him to run away many times. it wasaround those times when you called him [an animal]maybe he is an [animal]. [animals] are respected. cunts are not. you are not justa cunt. you are a filthy cunt.[...] 33. [in early] 2023, [ms bryson] filed a further fvo application, seeking to extend the final order. the final order was scheduled to lapse [in mid-]2023. i opposed the fvo being extended, particularly in circumstances when [ms bryson] was continually contacting me, by sending volumes of abusive emails during the period when the existing final order was in place. to prevent that from continuing, i reluctantly decided to file my own fvo application, seeking final orders that would restrain [ms bryson] from approaching or contacting me. 34. both [ms bryson]'s fvo extension application and my fvo application were listed for a final hearing before [a magistrate] [in] 2023. at the conclusion of the final hearing, [the magistrate] made an order dismissing [ms bryson]'s application to extend the fvo and made a final order in my favour, restraining [ms bryson] from approaching or contacting me for a period of 24 months.
overall contributions
relevant section 75(2) factors pursuant to section 79(e) of the act
102. .... i lost my job [in] 2023. one reason is the health issues and weeks [of] sick leave, and hospitalisation. i am currently unemployed. i have no accumulated leave or sick leave.   bryson] has alleged i retain a pension from [country c]. i do not receive a pension, however, i would receive a very small pension only in circumstances where i returned to live in [country c]. [ms bryson] would also receive a pension if she returned to [country c].   u], born [in] 1996, aged 25 years. [mr u] is employed as a public servant and is independent, [mr v], born [in] 1999, aged 24 years. [mr v] lives with me full time. he works in casual employment on occasion. [mr v] suffers from mental health issues and is financially dependent. [mr v] does not financially contribute to outgoings, i pay all his costs including food, health insurance, medical expenses, phone, and internet. any monies received by him in his casual employment is retained by him, and [mr w], born [in] 2003, aged 19 years. [mr w] has transitioned into university studies. i also financially support [mr w]. [mr w] lives predominately with me and spends time with [ms bryson]. as with [mr v], i pay for all of [mr w]'s expenses. i also give [mr w] $200 per fortnight for him to use as spending money. i understand that when he spends time with his mother, he uses this money to buy food for himself.
overall consideration of future needs
other factors
justice and equity
trustee for sale of the suburb d property
approach to division of assets
the orders
associate: dated: 18 august 2023
dated: 18 august 2023
annexure a
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
j
k
asserted values
determined interests
effect of orders
husband
wife
pool
assets
husband's property interests in country c
0
2,453,666
wife's property interests in country c
1
b street, suburb d
1,090,000
850,000
545,000
2
wbc acc # ......27
3,000
n/k
3
wbc acc # ......14
192
4
bank f acc #...2 / # ...12
674
5
motor vehicle 2
15,000
20,000
17,500
6
motor vehicle 1
5,000
500
250
7
motor vehicle 3
w
35,150
30,000
8
jewellery
51,570
25,785
9
home and contents
10,000
10
bank f acc #...41 / ...2
11
bank f acc #...16 / ...2
58
12
anz bank acc #...02
closed
13
anz bank acc #...52
14
anz bank acc #...95
15
anz bank acc #...08
?
16
bank acc #...78
17
bank aa account #...90
nominal
18
bank account country c
19
account located in country c
20
account bb
21
items lost, stolen, damaged
total assets
1,220,586
3,359,240
1,209,570
598,535
611,035
28,000
1,181,570
22
funds removed from offset account by the wife at separation
40,000
spent on needs
39,906
total addbacks
liabilities
23
bank f #...83 / - suburb d
311,753
155,877
24
bank f #...33 / #...15 (home loan)
25
credit card
1,280
26
credit card #...08
514
27
bank f personal loan #...22
48,759
28
bank aa credit card
6,955
29
motor vehicle 3 loan (bank f #...04 / ...21
28,809
27,000
30
bank f credit card #...9
940
31
18,000
total liabilities
399,010
364,648
340,562
184,686
net non-superannuation
861,576
2,994,592
908,914
442,659
466,256
880,914
49%
51%
3%
94%
superannuation
33
super fund 1
969,904
34
super fund 2
177,699
total superannuation
1,147,603
85%
15%
combined total
2,009,179
4,142,195
2,056,517
1,412,563
643,955
997,904
1,058,613
69%
31%
48%