last updated: 13 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ying & qigang (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 1082
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
15.19 failure to attend a court event   if a party to a proceeding is absent from a court event (including a first court date), the court may do one or more of the following: (a) adjourn the court event to a specific date or generally, (b) order that there is not to be any court event, unless:   adjourn the court event to a specific date or generally, (b) order that there is not to be any court event, unless:   order that there is not to be any court event, unless:  a new date for the court event is fixed, or (ii) any other steps that the court directs are taken, (c) if the absent party is an applicant—dismiss the application, (d) if the absent party is a party who has made an interlocutory application—dismiss the interlocutory application, (e) proceed with the hearing generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceeding.   if the absent party is an applicant—dismiss the application, (d) if the absent party is a party who has made an interlocutory application—dismiss the interlocutory application, (e) proceed with the hearing generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceeding.   if the absent party is a party who has made an interlocutory application—dismiss the interlocutory application, (e) proceed with the hearing generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceeding.   proceed with the hearing generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceeding.   if a party to a proceeding is absent from a court event, the court may also make an order of the kind referred to in subrule 10.27(1) or (2) (orders on default), or any other order, or may give any directions, and specify any consequences for non‑compliance with the order, that the court thinks just.
i write to seek to obtain the urgent approval of refinance of our home loan regarding the property with the address of [d street, suburb c]. with another 2-year fixed interest term expiring soon, our home loan rates will jump from current 1.94% to something at 6.84%. we are definitely going to fall off the "mortgage cliff". with soaring costs of living, rising child care fees, and child support payments, the struggling financial situations are putting heavy pressure on our day-to-day life. i appreciate his honour's finding that [ms ying] has no caveat interests on our [suburb c] property. however, according to the interim order dated 20 january 2023, i need to obtain the approval or wait until the completion of these proceedings before i can sell the property or refinance. thankfully the hearings have been completed in may. while we are eagerly waiting for his honour's final judgement, i plead for the approval so i could be able to seek financial options to sort out our financial difficulties. with great appreciation! [mr qigang]
dear associate, i'm very sorry but i was in a meeting at work. i read the interim order dated 16/08/2023 stating no need to appear to the court. i don't want any more hearing or procedures. i just purely want the final judgement from the conclusion of 1 may 2023 trial hearing. if this simple refinance request is treated as an application, i withdraw the application. i don't want this delays the final judgement. i will wait until the final orders. thanks! yours sincerely, [mr qigang]
associate: dated: 22 august 2023
dated: 22 august 2023