last updated: 2 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
tavali & lomu [2023] fedcfamc2f 1042
orders
by consent of the parties (and with parties consent of the icl), the court makes final orders that:
parental responsibility
live with  x shall live with the mother on the making of these orders. (b) y and z shall live with the father on the making of these orders.   y and z shall live with the father on the making of these orders.   the twins shall live with the father, (b) the father shall have sole parental responsibility for the twins, (c) the twins shall recommence spending time with the mother pursuant to order (9)   the father shall have sole parental responsibility for the twins, (c) the twins shall recommence spending time with the mother pursuant to order (9)   the twins shall recommence spending time with the mother pursuant to order (9)
spend time with  from 9am saturday – 5pm sunday every alternate weekend.   for a period of 3 months after the making of these orders: (i) from 9am saturday to 5pm saturday, and (ii) from 9am sunday to 5pm sunday, every alternate weekend (b) thereafter: (i) from 9am saturday – 5pm sunday every alternate weekend.   from 9am saturday to 5pm saturday, and (ii) from 9am sunday to 5pm sunday, every alternate weekend  ) from 9am sunday to 5pm sunday, every alternate weekend   thereafter: (i) from 9am saturday – 5pm sunday every alternate weekend.   from 9am saturday – 5pm sunday every alternate weekend.
changeover
communication
ongoing therapy
restraints  denigrating the other parent, or speaking in a derogatory or insulting way about the other parent, or any member of the other parent’s family in the children’s hearing, (b) allowing the children to remain in the hearing of any third party who is denigrating the other parent, or speaking in a derogatory or insulting way about the other parent, or any member of the other parent’s family. (c) discussing the issues in these proceedings and any other aspect of these proceedings with the children. (d) showing the children any document prepared during these proceedings and is further restrained from allowing the children to view such documents. (e) denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent.   allowing the children to remain in the hearing of any third party who is denigrating the other parent, or speaking in a derogatory or insulting way about the other parent, or any member of the other parent’s family. (c) discussing the issues in these proceedings and any other aspect of these proceedings with the children. (d) showing the children any document prepared during these proceedings and is further restrained from allowing the children to view such documents. (e) denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent.   discussing the issues in these proceedings and any other aspect of these proceedings with the children. (d) showing the children any document prepared during these proceedings and is further restrained from allowing the children to view such documents. (e) denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent.   showing the children any document prepared during these proceedings and is further restrained from allowing the children to view such documents. (e) denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent.   denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent.   contacting or approaching within 200m of the mother. (b) improperly consuming prescription drugs or consuming any illicit substances in the presence of the children or be in any way affected by them whilst the children are in his care or control.   improperly consuming prescription drugs or consuming any illicit substances in the presence of the children or be in any way affected by them whilst the children are in his care or control.
school events and extra-curricular activities
the court orders that:
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge street
associate: dated: 24 august 2023
dated: 24 august 2023