last updated: 8 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
deacon & grover [2023] fedcfamc2f 1080
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility   from 1 october 2023 to 1 february 2024: (i) each wednesday from 3.00pm to thursday 9.00am, and (ii) each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 9.00am monday, and (iii) during each nsw gazetted school holiday period, the weekend arrangement referred to in the preceding order, shall extend to 9.00am on tuesday, (b) from 1 february 2024: (i) each wednesday from 3.00pm to thursday 9.00am, and (ii) each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 9.00am monday, and (iii) half of each nsw gazetted school term holiday period, at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3, being the first half in years ending in an even number and the second half in years ending in an odd number: (iv) half of each nsw gazetted christmas school holiday period, at the end of term 4, as follows: in years ending in an even number, the first two weeks of the holiday period, and shall include christmas day and week five of the holiday period, and in years ending in an odd number, the third, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period, concluding on the final sunday of the school holiday period. (v) from 2026 onwards, for one half of the christmas school holidays, as follows: in the first half in the years ending in an even number, in the second half in the years ending in an odd number.   each wednesday from 3.00pm to thursday 9.00am, and (ii) each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 9.00am monday, and (iii) during each nsw gazetted school holiday period, the weekend arrangement referred to in the preceding order, shall extend to 9.00am on tuesday,  ) each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 9.00am monday, and (iii) during each nsw gazetted school holiday period, the weekend arrangement referred to in the preceding order, shall extend to 9.00am on tuesday,  i) during each nsw gazetted school holiday period, the weekend arrangement referred to in the preceding order, shall extend to 9.00am on tuesday,   from 1 february 2024: (i) each wednesday from 3.00pm to thursday 9.00am, and (ii) each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 9.00am monday, and (iii) half of each nsw gazetted school term holiday period, at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3, being the first half in years ending in an even number and the second half in years ending in an odd number: (iv) half of each nsw gazetted christmas school holiday period, at the end of term 4, as follows: in years ending in an even number, the first two weeks of the holiday period, and shall include christmas day and week five of the holiday period, and in years ending in an odd number, the third, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period, concluding on the final sunday of the school holiday period. (v) from 2026 onwards, for one half of the christmas school holidays, as follows: in the first half in the years ending in an even number, in the second half in the years ending in an odd number.   each wednesday from 3.00pm to thursday 9.00am, and (ii) each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 9.00am monday, and (iii) half of each nsw gazetted school term holiday period, at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3, being the first half in years ending in an even number and the second half in years ending in an odd number: (iv) half of each nsw gazetted christmas school holiday period, at the end of term 4, as follows: in years ending in an even number, the first two weeks of the holiday period, and shall include christmas day and week five of the holiday period, and in years ending in an odd number, the third, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period, concluding on the final sunday of the school holiday period. (v) from 2026 onwards, for one half of the christmas school holidays, as follows: in the first half in the years ending in an even number, in the second half in the years ending in an odd number.  ) each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 9.00am monday, and (iii) half of each nsw gazetted school term holiday period, at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3, being the first half in years ending in an even number and the second half in years ending in an odd number: (iv) half of each nsw gazetted christmas school holiday period, at the end of term 4, as follows: in years ending in an even number, the first two weeks of the holiday period, and shall include christmas day and week five of the holiday period, and in years ending in an odd number, the third, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period, concluding on the final sunday of the school holiday period. (v) from 2026 onwards, for one half of the christmas school holidays, as follows: in the first half in the years ending in an even number, in the second half in the years ending in an odd number.  i) half of each nsw gazetted school term holiday period, at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3, being the first half in years ending in an even number and the second half in years ending in an odd number: (iv) half of each nsw gazetted christmas school holiday period, at the end of term 4, as follows: in years ending in an even number, the first two weeks of the holiday period, and shall include christmas day and week five of the holiday period, and in years ending in an odd number, the third, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period, concluding on the final sunday of the school holiday period. (v) from 2026 onwards, for one half of the christmas school holidays, as follows: in the first half in the years ending in an even number, in the second half in the years ending in an odd number.  ) half of each nsw gazetted christmas school holiday period, at the end of term 4, as follows: in years ending in an even number, the first two weeks of the holiday period, and shall include christmas day and week five of the holiday period, and in years ending in an odd number, the third, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period, concluding on the final sunday of the school holiday period. (v) from 2026 onwards, for one half of the christmas school holidays, as follows: in the first half in the years ending in an even number, in the second half in the years ending in an odd number.   from 2026 onwards, for one half of the christmas school holidays, as follows: in the first half in the years ending in an even number, in the second half in the years ending in an odd number.
time during special occasions   the mother, from 9.00am christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day in each year ending in an even number, and from 12.00pm christmas day until 5.00pm boxing day in each year ending in an odd number. (b) the father, from 9.00am christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day in each year ending in an odd number, and from 12.00pm christmas day until 5.00pm boxing day in each year ending in an even number. (c) the mother, from 10.00am on good friday until 10.00am on easter sunday in each year ending in an even number and from 10.00am on easter sunday until 5.00pm on the easter monday in each year ending in an odd number. (d) the father, from 10.00am on good friday until 10.00am on easter sunday in each year ending in an odd number and from 10.00am on easter sunday until 5.00pm on the easter monday in each year ending in an even number. (e) the mother, on mother’s day weekend from friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (f) the father, on father’s day weekend friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (g) the mother, for the mother’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (h) the father, for the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (i) if the mother is not already spending time with x, with the mother on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. (j) if the father is not already spending time with x, with the father on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm.   the father, from 9.00am christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day in each year ending in an odd number, and from 12.00pm christmas day until 5.00pm boxing day in each year ending in an even number. (c) the mother, from 10.00am on good friday until 10.00am on easter sunday in each year ending in an even number and from 10.00am on easter sunday until 5.00pm on the easter monday in each year ending in an odd number. (d) the father, from 10.00am on good friday until 10.00am on easter sunday in each year ending in an odd number and from 10.00am on easter sunday until 5.00pm on the easter monday in each year ending in an even number. (e) the mother, on mother’s day weekend from friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (f) the father, on father’s day weekend friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (g) the mother, for the mother’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (h) the father, for the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (i) if the mother is not already spending time with x, with the mother on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. (j) if the father is not already spending time with x, with the father on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm.   the mother, from 10.00am on good friday until 10.00am on easter sunday in each year ending in an even number and from 10.00am on easter sunday until 5.00pm on the easter monday in each year ending in an odd number. (d) the father, from 10.00am on good friday until 10.00am on easter sunday in each year ending in an odd number and from 10.00am on easter sunday until 5.00pm on the easter monday in each year ending in an even number. (e) the mother, on mother’s day weekend from friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (f) the father, on father’s day weekend friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (g) the mother, for the mother’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (h) the father, for the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (i) if the mother is not already spending time with x, with the mother on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. (j) if the father is not already spending time with x, with the father on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm.   the father, from 10.00am on good friday until 10.00am on easter sunday in each year ending in an odd number and from 10.00am on easter sunday until 5.00pm on the easter monday in each year ending in an even number. (e) the mother, on mother’s day weekend from friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (f) the father, on father’s day weekend friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (g) the mother, for the mother’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (h) the father, for the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (i) if the mother is not already spending time with x, with the mother on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. (j) if the father is not already spending time with x, with the father on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm.   the mother, on mother’s day weekend from friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (f) the father, on father’s day weekend friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (g) the mother, for the mother’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (h) the father, for the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (i) if the mother is not already spending time with x, with the mother on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. (j) if the father is not already spending time with x, with the father on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm.   the father, on father’s day weekend friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). (g) the mother, for the mother’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (h) the father, for the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (i) if the mother is not already spending time with x, with the mother on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. (j) if the father is not already spending time with x, with the father on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm.   the mother, for the mother’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (h) the father, for the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (i) if the mother is not already spending time with x, with the mother on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. (j) if the father is not already spending time with x, with the father on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm.   the father, for the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). (i) if the mother is not already spending time with x, with the mother on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. (j) if the father is not already spending time with x, with the father on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm.   if the mother is not already spending time with x, with the mother on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. (j) if the father is not already spending time with x, with the father on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm.   if the father is not already spending time with x, with the father on x’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm.   at the child’s school on days she is attending school, and (b) during the school holiday periods or on non-school days, changeover is to occur at city b mcdonalds.   during the school holiday periods or on non-school days, changeover is to occur at city b mcdonalds.
travel  copy of travel itinerary for the child, including addresses for all places at which the child will be staying whilst overseas, (b) telephone numbers upon which the child can be contacted whilst overseas, (c) copies of the child’s return tickets/e-tickets, (d) confirmation that such travel occurs during the child’s school holidays (unless agreed in writing with the non-travelling parent), (e) the travelling parent facilitates the child having reasonable contact by facetime/phone/sms/whatsapp/video chat during the trip with the non-travelling parent, (f) details of who will be accompanying the child on the trip.   telephone numbers upon which the child can be contacted whilst overseas, (c) copies of the child’s return tickets/e-tickets, (d) confirmation that such travel occurs during the child’s school holidays (unless agreed in writing with the non-travelling parent), (e) the travelling parent facilitates the child having reasonable contact by facetime/phone/sms/whatsapp/video chat during the trip with the non-travelling parent, (f) details of who will be accompanying the child on the trip.   copies of the child’s return tickets/e-tickets, (d) confirmation that such travel occurs during the child’s school holidays (unless agreed in writing with the non-travelling parent), (e) the travelling parent facilitates the child having reasonable contact by facetime/phone/sms/whatsapp/video chat during the trip with the non-travelling parent, (f) details of who will be accompanying the child on the trip.   confirmation that such travel occurs during the child’s school holidays (unless agreed in writing with the non-travelling parent), (e) the travelling parent facilitates the child having reasonable contact by facetime/phone/sms/whatsapp/video chat during the trip with the non-travelling parent, (f) details of who will be accompanying the child on the trip.   the travelling parent facilitates the child having reasonable contact by facetime/phone/sms/whatsapp/video chat during the trip with the non-travelling parent, (f) details of who will be accompanying the child on the trip.   details of who will be accompanying the child on the trip.
general
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
applicant’s orders sought
parental responsibility that the mother shall have sole parental responsibility for the child [x], born [in] 2019 (hereinafter referred to as “the child”) and shall consult and inform the father of all long term decisions made by her in relation to the child, including but not limited to: her education, health, and, extra-curricular activities. living arrangements the mother be permitted to relocate with the child to brisbane/[region h] in december 2023. spend time with arrangements that the child spend time with the father as follows: until the mother relocates in december 2023: from the date of these orders until 1 june 2023: each wednesday from 3.00pm to thursday 9.00am, and each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, and during each nsw gazetted school holiday period, the weekend arrangement referred to in the preceding order, shall extent to 9:00am on monday, from 1 june 2023 until the mother relocates in december 2023: each wednesday from 3.00pm to thursday 9.00am, and each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 9.00am monday, and during each nsw gazetted school holiday period, the weekend arrangement referred to in the preceding order, shall extend to 9.00am on tuesday, upon the mother and child relocating to [the brisbane/region h] area: on one occasion each school term at [city b], nsw, for a period of 4 nights, at dates to be agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, to occur on a weekend closest to the mid-point of the school term from 3.00pm friday to 9.00am tuesday, for the first week of all gazetted queensland school term holiday periods, during the gazetted queensland christmas school holidays, commencing at the conclusion of term 4, as follows: for a period of 14 days, as follows:   in years ending in an even number, commencing on the first monday of the holiday period, and shall include christmas day, or as agreed, and (b) in years ending in an odd number, the last two weeks of the school holiday period, concluding on the final sunday of the school holiday period. from 2026 onwards, for one half of the christmas school holidays, as follows: (a) in the first half in the years ending in an even number, (b) in the second half in the years ending in an odd number. notwithstanding order 4, the child shall spend additional time with the father in queensland, on two occasions each year during the school term, for a period of 3 nights, as agreed, or failing agreement from 3.00pm friday to 9.00am monday, provided that the father provides the mother with 60 days written notice of his intention to travel to queensland, including nominating handover times/dates and the location of the father’s accommodation whilst in queensland, including telephone contact details.   in years ending in an odd number, the last two weeks of the school holiday period, concluding on the final sunday of the school holiday period. from 2026 onwards, for one half of the christmas school holidays, as follows: (a) in the first half in the years ending in an even number, (b) in the second half in the years ending in an odd number. notwithstanding order 4, the child shall spend additional time with the father in queensland, on two occasions each year during the school term, for a period of 3 nights, as agreed, or failing agreement from 3.00pm friday to 9.00am monday, provided that the father provides the mother with 60 days written notice of his intention to travel to queensland, including nominating handover times/dates and the location of the father’s accommodation whilst in queensland, including telephone contact details.   in the first half in the years ending in an even number, (b) in the second half in the years ending in an odd number. notwithstanding order 4, the child shall spend additional time with the father in queensland, on two occasions each year during the school term, for a period of 3 nights, as agreed, or failing agreement from 3.00pm friday to 9.00am monday, provided that the father provides the mother with 60 days written notice of his intention to travel to queensland, including nominating handover times/dates and the location of the father’s accommodation whilst in queensland, including telephone contact details.   in the second half in the years ending in an odd number. notwithstanding order 4, the child shall spend additional time with the father in queensland, on two occasions each year during the school term, for a period of 3 nights, as agreed, or failing agreement from 3.00pm friday to 9.00am monday, provided that the father provides the mother with 60 days written notice of his intention to travel to queensland, including nominating handover times/dates and the location of the father’s accommodation whilst in queensland, including telephone contact details.
christmas 2022 notwithstanding order 4, should the child be scheduled to spend time with the father on friday, 23 december 2022 to monday, 26 december 2022, such time is suspended and the child shall spend that time with the mother. spend time arrangements with the father should the mother remain living in the [city b]/[city j] region that the child spend time with the father as follows: from the date of these orders until 1 june 2023: each wednesday from 3.00pm to thursday 9.00am, and each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, and during each nsw gazetted school holiday period, the weekend arrangement referred to in the preceding order, shall extend to 9.00am on monday, from 1 june 2023 to 1 february 2024: each wednesday from 3.00pm to thursday 9.00am, and each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 9.00am monday, and during each nsw gazetted school holiday period, the weekend arrangement referred to in the preceding order, shall extend to 9.00am on tuesday, from 1 february 2024: each wednesday from 3.00pm to thursday 9.00am, and each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday until 9.00am monday, and half of each nsw gazetted school term holiday period, at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3, being the first half in years ending in an even number and the second half in years ending in an odd number: half of each nsw gazetted christmas school holiday period, at the end of term 4, as follows: in years ending in an even number, the first two weeks of the holiday period, and shall include christmas day and week five of the holiday period, and in years ending in an odd number, the third, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period, concluding on the final sunday of the school holiday period. from 2026 onwards, for one half of the christmas school holidays, as follows:   in the first half in the years ending in an even number, (b) in the second half in the years ending in an odd number.   in the second half in the years ending in an odd number.
communication that the mother shall do all acts and things necessary to facilitate the child communicating with the father, either by telephone or audio/video, as follows: each wednesday and sunday beginning at 6.30pm to 7.00pm, or such other times as agreed in writing, if the child is not spending time with the father on the child’s birthday, father’s day or the father’s birthday, at times to be agreed, or failing agreement, from 6.30pm to 7.00pm, if the child is not spending time with the father on christmas day, from 9.00am to 9.30am, such other times as agreed between the parties in writing. during the school holiday periods, when the child is spending time with the father, the father shall do all acts and things necessary to facilitate the child communicating with the mother by telephone or audio/video from 6.30pm to 7.00pm on each wednesday. if the child is not spending time with the mother on christmas day, the child’s birthday, the mother’s birthday or mother’s day, the father shall do all acts and things necessary to facilitate the child communicating with the mother by telephone or audio/video from 6.30pm to 7.00pm on that day. other than in a medical emergency, the parties are to communicate with each other in writing on matters pertaining to the child, in a business-like manner, and the parties are refrained from denigrating, abusing or harassing the other party. handovers during the time that the mother is residing in [city b], nsw, all handovers are to occur at the child’s daycare/preschool, if the child is attending at the relevant times, otherwise handovers are to occur between the parents, or their nominated agents, at [city b] mcdonalds. for the purposes of handover the father or agent will be responsible for collection of the child at the commencement of the visit and the mother or agent will be responsible for the collection of the child at the end of the visit. parties are to nominate no less than 21 days prior to the visit commencing their choice of travel arrangement. if the parties are to meet to exchange via road travel the mother will nominate the nearest mcdonalds in [brisbane/region h]. if the parties elect airline travel for either collection or return, for the father the collection will be the closest airport to the mother’s residence, and for the mother it will be the nearest airport closest to the father’s residence. parties are to inform each other, no less than 21 days prior to the travel date and provide the travel itinerary and flight details for the child. on all airline flights the child must be accompanied by the parent or agent. travel costs travel costs will be covered by the respective travelling parent for the child. in the event that, for whatever reason, the child is unable to travel on the previously booked flight, it is the responsibility of the travelling parent, who booked the flight, to notify the other parent, as soon as practicable, of the change and it is the responsibility of the travelling parent to arrange for, and pay for, the first available alternative flight for the child, and to immediately notify the other parent of those flight details via text. other matters that in the event that the child requires emergency medical attention or hospitalisation whilst in that parent’s care, that parent shall notify the other parent is soon as reasonably practicable, but within 24 hours. the father is to pay half of any specialist medical expenses within 30 days of receiving the invoice from the mother. that both parents are restrained from allowing or encouraging the child from referring to any other person, other than the parties herein, as her “mum” or “dad” or such other derivative. the father is to share half of any private school fees if the child attends an agreed private school in the brisbane/[region h] area, within 30 days of receiving the invoice from the mother. school term holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 5pm on the day prior to the resumption of school in the next term, of the gazetted school term in the state where the child lives. the christmas school holiday period is deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school in term 4 and conclude at 5pm on the day prior to the resumption of school in the next year (term 1) of the gazetted school term in the state where the child lives (“christmas school holidays”). the mother shall forthwith notify the father of the school that the child attends and the father is authorised to obtain copies of all notices, information, reports and invitations from the child’s educational providers, and is authorised to obtain all information, reports or advice from any of the child’s medical or counselling professionals.. the father shall be present for the majority of his scheduled time with the child pursuant to these orders. each of the parties shall provide up to date contact numbers, addresses, and emails to the other. other than for the purposes of relocating in accordance with order 3, upon compliance with that order, the mother is thereafter restrained from relocating from brisbane/[region h] area, other than with the father’s written consent or further order of the court. both parties be restrained by injunction from denigrating the other party or their partners or family members to the child, or within earshot of the child, or allowing any third party to do so. all extant applications are dismissed.
respondent’s orders sought
definitions “mother” means the applicant, [ms deacon] “father” means the respondent, [mr grover], “parties” means the mother and father together, and “[x]” means the parties child [x], born [in] 2019 final orders parental responsibility the parties shall have equal shared parental responsibility and have joint responsibility consultation with one another for making decisions for the long-term care, welfare and development of [x]. if the mother is residing in brisbane/[region h] live with/spend time with arrangements [x] shall live with the father. [x] shall spend time with the mother as follows: for the entirety of the term 1 school holidays, for half of the term 2 school holidays being the first half in years ending in an even number and the second half in years ending in an odd number. for the entirety of the term 3 school holidays, for half of the term 4 school holidays being the first half in years ending in an even number and the second half in years ending in an odd number. that for the purpose of order 3: the school holidays shall coincide with the nsw school calendar, the mother shall pay 100% of [x]’s airfares in facilitating time between her [x] in accordance with these orders, the school holiday period starts at 12.00pm on the first saturday following the last day of the term and concludes at 12.00pm on the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term, and unless otherwise agreed, [x] is to travel between [city b] and brisbane/[region h] by commercial airline with the father accompanying [x] (until she turns 12 years of age) and delivering her to the mother at the airport in brisbane/[region h] at the commencement of the mother’s time and with the mother accompanying [x] (until she turns 12 years of age) and delivering her to the father at the airport in [city j] at the conclusion of her time with [x]. that each party shall have liberal telephone, skype and/or video-call communication with [x] whilst in the care of the other parent, at reasonable times with reasonable frequency. travel that upon [x] turning 6 years of age, pursuant to section 65y of the family law act, the mother and father shall each be and are hereby permitted to take [x] out of the commonwealth of australia for a holiday subject to order 7 of these orders being complied with, for a period of not more than 14 days duration in one calendar year, unless otherwise agreed in writing. if either parent wishes to remove [x] from the commonwealth of australia for a holiday in accordance with order 6 that parent shall only travel to a hague convention country, unless otherwise agreed in writing by the other parent. the parent wishing to take the holiday must provide the other parent at least 6 weeks prior to the expected departure date the following: copy of travel itinerary for [x], including addresses for all places at which [x] will be staying whilst overseas, telephone numbers upon which [x] can be contacted whilst overseas, copies of [x]’s return tickets/e-tickets, confirmation that such travel occurs during [x]’s school holidays (unless agreed in writing with the non-travelling parent), that the travelling parent facilitates [x] having reasonable contact by facetime/phone/sms/whatsapp/ video chat during the trip with the non-travelling parent, details of who will be accompanying [x] on the trip. that the father shall be at liberty to hold in his possession, [x]’s australian passport at all times when not being used by the mother for overseas travel with [x] pursuant to these orders. that for the purposes of facilitating either parties' travel outside the commonwealth of australia with [x] pursuant to these orders, and in the event [x] requires a current australian passport, travel visas and/or other travel related documents for such travel, then both parties shall do all things necessary, sign all documents deeds and instruments and provide all necessary consents to facilitate the issue of an australian passport, all required travel visas and all other travel related documents for [x] within seven (7) days of the one parent receiving a request and documents from the other parent. in the event that the mother defaults on her obligations pursuant to order 9 herein, that pursuant to section 11 of the australian passports act 2005 (cth), the father is permitted to apply for [x] to be issued with australian travel documents without the consent or signature of the mother. in the event that the father defaults on his obligations pursuant to order 9 herein, that pursuant to section 11 of the australian passports act 2005 (cth), the mother is permitted to apply for [x] to be issued with australian travel documents without the consent or signature of the father. that for the purposes of facilitating the mother’s travel outside the commonwealth of australia with [x] pursuant to these orders then within seven (7) days of the father receiving a written request from the mother for [x]’s australian passports, the father shall provide [x]’s australian passport to the mother for the period of intended travel. within seven (7) days upon [x]’s return to australia following each overseas trip, the mother shall return [x]’s passport to the possession of the father. general that whilst [x] is in their respective care, each parent shall advise each other as soon as reasonably practicable of any major medical/dental issues (of any non-routine nature) involving [x], and each party shall keep the other informed of any required treatment, diagnoses or medication required in relation to [x] and the treating practitioner and the parties shall ensure the proper administration of such medications and treatments is performed by them. the parties are restrained from initiating any specialist appointments for [x] without the agreement of the other party in writing. that the parties be at liberty to attend all school events to which parties are invited to and to receive all information about [x]’s education and progress directly from the school and with this order to serve as an authority for the school to provide all information sought by the parties. that each parent keeps the other informed of their current residential address and mobile telephone number of themselves and [x] and [ms c] (maternal grandmother) and advise the other parent of any change thereto within 7 days of such change. that the father shall be permitted to enrol [x] in a school of his choice in [city b], having regard to the mother’s views/preferences of school, and provided he includes the mother’s contact details in the enrolment forms. that neither party shall denigrate the other parent or their family in front of or within hearing distance of [x]. if the mother remains living in [city b] nsw live with/spend time arrangements during the school term [x] shall live with the mother. that until [x] commences primary school, [x] shall spend time with the father from friday 3.00pm (or at the conclusion of school) until wednesday 9.00am (or at the commencement of school) in each alternate week. that upon [x] commencing primary school, order 20 shall be suspended and [x] shall spend time with the father from friday 3.00pm (or at the conclusion of school) until the following friday 9.00am (or at the commencement of school) in each alternate week. time during school holidays that upon [x] commencing primary school, the parties time with [x] pursuant to orders 19 and 21 shall be suspended during the christmas school holiday period such that each party spends time with time with [x] as follows: with the father, for the first half of the christmas school holidays in years ending in an even number and the second half of the christmas school holidays in years ending in an odd number, and with the mother, for the first half of the christmas school holidays in years ending in an odd number and the second half of the christmas school holidays in years ending in an even number. for the purposes of order 22, school holiday periods are defined to commence at 5pm on the last day of term 4 and to conclude at 5pm on the sunday immediately preceding the commencement of the term 1 in the new year. time during special occasions that unless otherwise agreed, each parties’ time with [x] pursuant to these orders are suspended so that [x] spends time with: the mother, from 9.00am christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day in each year ending in an even number, and from 12.00pm christmas day until 5.00pm boxing day in each year ending in an odd number. the father, from 9.00am christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day in each year ending in an odd number, and from 12.00pm christmas day until 5.00pm boxing day in each year ending in an even number. the mother, from 10.00am on good friday until 10.00am on easter sunday in each year ending in an even number and from 10.00am on easter sunday until 5.00pm on the easter monday in each year ending in an odd number. the father, from 10.00am on good friday until 10.00am on easter sunday in each year ending in an odd number and from 10.00am on easter sunday until 5.00pm on the easter monday in each year ending in an even number. the mother, on mother’s day weekend from friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). the father, on father’s day weekend friday at the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to monday at the commencement of school (or 9.00am). the mother, for the mother’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). the father, for the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school (or 9.00am) the following day if the birthday falls on a school day but if the birthday falls on a weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3.00pm) to the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am). if the mother is not already spending time with [x], with the mother on [x]’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. if the father is not already spending time with [x], with the father on [x]’s birthday from 3.00pm until 3.00pm. that each party shall have liberal telephone, skype and/or video-call communication with [x] whilst in the care of the other parent, at reasonable times with reasonable frequency. changeover changeover shall occur as agreed between the parties and failing agreement, as follows: at [x]’s school on days she is attending school, and during the school holiday periods or on non-school days, changeover is to occur at [city b] mcdonalds. travel that upon [x] turning 6 years of age, pursuant to section 65y of the family law act, the mother and father shall each be and are hereby permitted to take [x] out of the commonwealth of australia for a holiday subject to order 28 of these orders being complied with, for a period of not more than 14 days duration in one calendar year, unless otherwise agreed in writing. if either parent wishes to remove [x] from the commonwealth of australia for a holiday in accordance with order 27 that parent shall only travel to a hague convention country, unless otherwise agreed in writing by the other parent. the parent wishing to take the holiday must provide the other parent at least 6 weeks prior to the expected departure date the following: copy of travel itinerary for [x], including addresses for all places at which [x] will be staying whilst overseas, telephone numbers upon which [x] can be contacted whilst overseas, copies of [x]’s return tickets/e-tickets, confirmation that such travel occurs during [x]’s school holidays (unless agreed in writing with the non-travelling parent), that the travelling parent facilitates [x] having reasonable contact by facetime/phone/sms/ whatsapp/ video chat during the trip with the non-travelling parent, details of who will be accompanying [x] on the trip. that the father shall be at liberty to hold in his possession, [x]’s australian passport at all times when not being used by the mother for overseas travel with [x] pursuant to these orders. that for the purposes of facilitating either parties' travel outside the commonwealth of australia with [x] pursuant to these orders, and in the event [x] requires a current australian passport, travel visas and/or other travel related documents for such travel, then both parties shall do all things necessary, sign all documents deeds and instruments and provide all necessary consents to facilitate the issue of an australian passport, all required travel visas and all other travel related documents for [x] within seven (7) days of the one parent receiving a request and documents from the other parent. in the event that the mother defaults on her obligations pursuant to order 30 herein, that pursuant to section 11 of the australian passports act 2005 (cth), the father is permitted to apply for [x] to be issued with australian travel documents without the consent or signature of the mother. in the event that the father defaults on his obligations pursuant to order 30 herein, that pursuant to section 11 of the australian passports act 2005 (cth), the mother is permitted to apply for [x] to be issued with australian travel documents without the consent or signature of the father. that for the purposes of facilitating the mother’s travel outside the commonwealth of australia with [x] pursuant to these orders then within seven (7) days of the father receiving a written request from the mother for [x]’s australian passports, the father shall provide [x]’s australian passport to the mother for the period of intended travel. within seven (7) days upon [x]’s return to australia following each overseas trip, the mother shall return [x]’s passport to the possession of the father. general that whilst [x] is in their respective care, each parent shall advise each other as soon as reasonably practicable of any major medical/dental issues (of any non‑routine nature) involving [x], and each party shall keep the other informed of any required treatment, diagnoses or medication required in relation to [x] and the treating practitioner and the parties shall ensure the proper administration of such medications and treatments is performed by them. the parties are restrained from initiating any specialist appointments for [x] without the agreement of the other party in writing. that the parties be at liberty to attend all school events to which parties are invited to and to receive all information about [x]’s education and progress directly from the school and with this order to serve as an authority for the school to provide all information sought by the parties. that each parent keeps the other informed of their current residential address and mobile telephone number of themselves and [x] and [ms c] (maternal grandmother) and advise the other parent of any change thereto within 7 days of such change. that the father shall be permitted to enrol [x] in a school of his choice in [city b], having regard to the mother’s views/preferences of school, and provided he includes the mother’s contact details in the enrolment forms. that neither party shall denigrate the other parent or their family in front of or within hearing distance of [x].
independent children’s lawyers orders sought
minute of order sought by the independent children’s lawyer (icl. recital: these proposed minutes are the preliminary views of the independent children’s lawyer and these views may change, after the testing of evidence and submissions of the parties. relocation the child [x] born [in] 2019 (‘the child’) be able to relocate to in december 2023 with the mother to brisbane/[region h]. the mother is not permitted to relocate with the child out of brisbane/[region h] without the written consent of the father or an order of the court. parental responsibility the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child and shall inform the father of all long-term decisions made by her in relation to the child within 48 hours of making the decision. for abundant clarity this is includes but is not limited to: - health, including operations, treatments, diagnosis etc. education religion extra curricular activities live with and spend time with if the child remains in the [city b] region unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, until 1 june 2023 the child shall spend time with the father as follows: - in week one from 3pm wednesday to 9am thursday. in week two from 3pm friday to 9am monday. unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, from december 2023 the child shall spend time with the father as follows: -
c. in week one from 3pm wednesday to 9am thursday. d. in week two from 3pm thursday to 9am monday.
nsw school holidays as gazetted or determined by the school commencing in 2024, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, the child shall spend time with the parents in term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays as follows: - the first half of the school holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. the first half in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years with the mother. the first half of the school holiday period will be from 12 noon on the day after the last day of school term until 3:30pm on the day which is the midpoint of the school holiday period commencing in 2024, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, the child shall spend time with the parents in the term 4 school holidays as follows: the child is to spend the first two weeks of the school holidays period in even numbered years and years ending in zero with the father. the child is to spend the third and fourth week of the school holiday period in odd numbered years with the mother. the child is to spend the fifth week of the school holiday period with her father in even numbered years and years ending in zero and with the mother in odd numbered years. the child is to spend the sixth week of the school holiday period with her mother in even numbered years and years ending in zero and with the father in odd numbered years. live with and spend time with if the child is permitted to relocate unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, until 1 june 2023 the child shall spend time with the father as follows: - in week one from 3pm wednesday to 9am thursday. in week two from 3pm friday to 9am monday. unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, from december 2023 until relocation the child shall spend time with the father as follows: - in week one from 3pm wednesday to 9am thursday. in week two from 3pm thursday to 9am monday. qld school holidays as gazetted or determined by the school commencing in 2024, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, the child shall spend time with the parents in the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays as follows: - in the term 1 school holidays, the whole of term 1 school holidays in odd numbered years with time to commence at 5:00pm the first sunday of the school holidays and end at 2:00pm on the last saturday of the school holidays. the entirety of the term 2 and 3 school holidays, with time to commence at 5:00pm the first sunday of the school holidays and end at 2:00pm on the last saturday of the school holidays. commencing in 2024, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, the child shall spend time with the parents in the term 4 school holidays as follows: the child is to spend the first three weeks of the school holidays period in even numbered years and years ending in zero with the father and the last three weeks with the mother. the child is to spend the first three weeks of the school holiday period in odd numbered years with the mother and the last three weeks with the father. changeovers unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties:- while the child remains living in [city b] nsw, for any changeovers that cannot occur at day care or school, they shall occur at mcdonalds [city b], with either the parents facilitating the handover or their nominated agents. if the child is residing in the brisbane/[region h] area the mother or her agents shall be responsible for delivering the child to the father or his agents in [city b] nsw at the commencement of time and these costs shall be borne by the mother. if the child is residing in the brisbane/[region h] area the father or his agents shall be responsible for delivering the child to the mother or her agents at the conclusion of his time by delivering her to the airport closest to the mother’s residence and these costs shall be borne by the father. communication and authorities the child will communicate with the parent that they are not with each wednesday and saturday between 5pm and 6.00pm eastern standard time, or at any other time as requested by the child. the parent who the child is not with shall initiate the call. the child will communicate with the parent that she is not with on special occasions such as christmas, easter, birthdays and any other significant event as agreed between the parties in writing. the parents shall communicate using the our family wizard or any other parenting application as agreed, unless there is a medical emergency. in the case of medical emergency the parents shall communicate by telephone or text message, providing sufficient information about the medical emergency including injuries, hospital admission and details of relevant hospital or medical facility the child is taken to. this order authorises any school, educational facility or extra curricular body to provide information to both parents including but not limited to notices, schedules, timetables, reports, newsletters, school photo forms or any other information that would usually be provided to a parent. this order authorises both parents to attend school and extra curricular activities that a parent is usually invited to attend. this order authorises any medical practitioners, medical facility or health care provider who provides services to the children to provide information about the children to either parent as deemed appropriate by that medical practitioner, facility or health care provider. other matters both parents are hereby restrained by injunction from denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family in the presence or hearing of the children and are not to discuss or involve the children in any disagreements between the parents. the parents shall keep each other informed of any changes to their contact details and advise the other parent of any change within 72 hours of the change. if either parent is unable to care for the children for a period of more than 48 hours then the other parent should be provided first option to care. the costs of the independent children’s lawyer be paid equally by the parents, or as otherwise ordered by the court. it is noted: this order is inconsistent with the terms of the apprehended domestic violence order case number [...] made in the local court [in mid] 2022. to the extent of any inconsistency between the family law orders and the apprehended domestic violence order, pursuant to 68q of the family law act 1975, these orders prevail.
applicant mother’s oral evidence
mr schonell: and it’s correct to say that notwithstanding you undertaking supervision between [early] and [mid]-2020, since those orders on 3 september 2020, you have not attended one changeover?‑‑‑that’s correct. his honour: why is that?‑‑‑the hostility that could evolve between me and [mr grover] is real, and i am in counselling. i have been in counselling since i have left. the only reason that, your honour, i was present during those initial stages was because there was little and limited opportunity financially. i was still on maternity leave. i had not even returned to work. i was still in the family home and i had a one year old. i obviously did not want [x] not to see her father, but i needed to do it in a way that i could achieve with the circumstances i had before me. yes. no, i understand that historically, but do you still ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ have the same issues or concerns today?‑‑‑absolutely. very much so. handover is not an option, and i will not be putting myself or [x] or [mr grover] and his new family at any risk. if [x] is available and made available for her visitation in a safe way, a productive way, a way that doesn’t have [x] see her parents, you know, involved in any conflict, me crying or upset or – i don’t want that for [x] at all. i don’t want that for me in my recovery and progress. i don’t want that for [mr grover], either. so how much longer do you say you are likely to be so anxious or concerned about changeovers that you don’t plan on being present at them?‑‑‑your honour, i think with time and the situation i’ve proposed in the move to queensland, i absolutely feel that in the future – that i could make that – you know, those arrangements happen, and i think with proximity, you know, being a factor, you know, when that is removed and exchanges could be perhaps less frequent, they could become productive and the relationship, with time, i am hoping, could improve, but that is a longer term, i think. so ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑not impossible and not improbable and not the goal, but longer term. so let me put a difficult scenario to you. okay? your parents move to queensland ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑absolutely, your honour. ‑ ‑ ‑ and i make a decision that it’s not in [x]’s best interest to relocate with you to queensland. okay? that’s one of a number of possibilities, right?‑‑‑okay. so what’s going to happen with the changeovers if you’re still in [city b] with [x]? you still want to, and i accept that you will, as far as you can – you will, pardon me, promote and do all things necessary to facilitate [x]’s relationship with her dad?‑‑‑yes. what’s going to happen about changeovers?‑‑‑perhaps, some more structure would need to be put in place than is current. so what does that mean?‑‑‑i might need, you know, a support person or somebody to assist, you know, or come with, or we had discussed – the lawyer had discussed a police station or some other safe venue that would provide less worry for risk. yes, the – you know, that ‑ ‑ ‑ but it’s alleged risk and worry for you, not for [x], correct?‑‑‑i think [x] has already been exposed, unfortunately, to a little bit. it’s less with my mum doing it than it would be with me. i don’t think there’s any contest that me and [mr grover] have ‑ ‑ ‑ issues?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ the potential for that. yes, and i don’t – you know, because there has – because i’ve avoided that exposure, that obviously hasn’t come to the front, and you know, i’ve even left – [city b]is such a small place. you know, when i turn up to [the] park or something and they’re there, i leave, and i literally go to the extent of calling the police, telling them i’m leaving the event, and then, i go home to avoid the conflict. avoiding it is, you know, obviously something that i’ve been doing, but that’s not ideal. my oldest daughter has been missing out on some things and, you know, it’s not just [x]. it’s my oldest as well that feels the brunt of that protective state that is real. it’s very unfortunate, but it’s there. and you’re still – you’re still seeking professional assistance, yes?‑‑‑absolutely, yes.
pc: painful [limb]... ... grandmother was contacted by [ms l] at 1730 that [x] had ? [hurt herself], aloe vera was given topically, [x] had been noted to be holding/rubbing [limb]. reluctant for others to touch/rv it. placing hand behind her back. grandmother brought [x] to her mothers place, who called gp – advised to present to ed. [x] had been well in herself otherwise, had attended playschool in the morning. parents separated. father ([mr grover]) has been physically and verbally abusive to mother. known to be verbally abusive to [x] and her elder sister ([d], 8). mother does not believe father may have hurt child but is concern[ed] that [x] may have falled [sic]/injured herself at her father’s home. clinging to mother/grandmother. avoiding strangers, crying when approached by strangers. no visible trauma/erythema [redness]/bruising to [limb] stripped down. ed rn [ms n] present as chaperone. mild erythema to [limb] – likely when struggling to avoid assessment. old scar tissue on [body part] – [...]. normal genitalia. frenulum not torn. normal anal area, no skin tears. normal nails, no nail bed injuries. scratching [...] there is no definite [...] joint effusion. no convincing fracture is seen on the images provided. ... mother happy to go home, feels safe at home, report made to [...]/child abuse by ed rn [ms n]...
... as we discussed during the appointment, whether this variant actually causes [a medical condition] is uncertain at this stage, however, regardless, it would not cause [a medical condition] without having a second variant found. therefore, this would not have caused [a medical condition] in [x] alone. finding it in you, who do not have any signs of [a medical condition], confirms this conclusion. therefore, as i have discussed with both of you and [x]’s mother, we have not found a variant that would cause [a medical condition] in [x] at this stage.
now, ma’am, you’ve alleged that my client has consumed alcohol on a daily basis and in secret. correct?‑‑‑yes. i want to suggest that’s false?‑‑‑are you asking me is that false? that’s false?‑‑‑no. it’s not false. [mr grover] was drunk a lot when we were married. no. i want to suggest he didn’t, and, indeed, my client has undertaken both drug and alcohol urinalysis, and you agree with me that those results came back negative?‑‑‑absolutely, yes. and, indeed, equally he did a hair drug follicle test. that also came back negative?‑‑‑yes.
maternal grandmother’s oral evidence
respondent father’s oral evidence
father’s partner’s oral evidence
some procedural matters
ms swart: your honour, can i just answer your honour’s questions now, having had that little break to do that ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: thank you. ms swart: ‑ ‑ ‑ and get those instructions. if something were to happen to the grandparents and they were incapacitated in some way and not moving to queensland, question 1, my client would not move to queensland without them. if they did move to queensland but then something happened and they were not able to provide practical support to her in queensland and she’s already there, would she stay, the answer is yes. and would we appreciate a preliminary view from your honour, the answer is yes.
his honour: ‑ ‑ ‑ to the [deacon] ladies at the back of the court, in particular. to state the obvious reality, at some stage all of us are going to die. and if anything untoward – and this has been put to the parties – if anything was to happen to one or either of [ms deacon]’s parents and therefore especially say if something happened to her mother, would [ms deacon] – [x]’s mother – could it be the case that she becomes so distraught and lacking in support that could impact upon her parenting ability for [x]?‑‑‑yes. i imagine that it could, but i am aware that i’m looking at that through a particular lens of, you know, my cultural background of what i view as a normal adult/child relationship with a parent and that there are different family structures where ‑ ‑ ‑ no. i understand ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ all that. i understand all that?‑‑‑yes. no, get that?‑‑‑so, you know, i do think there is always a risk if – particularly for a parent if a parent is reliant – has only one source of support that they’re reliant on. or a primary support?‑‑‑or – yes – one primary support and they find it difficult to access other supports, then that is a risk and that’s the same whether that one support is their partner or their parent or their psychologist. if that is the only support and it’s very difficult for them to find and rely on other supports when needed, then that does place a lot of pressure on that relationship and place – there’s a risk there if something happens to that relationship. this might be more of a theoretical question, but obviously answer whatever way you think best. could it ever get to the stage where an adult child is in a co-dependent relationship with their parent beyond whatever – you know, however you describe it, as just an ordinary parent/child relationship?‑‑‑i think the – the word co-dependent is a tricky one. if – in terms of that sort of enmeshed relationship where it really is a problematic dynamic, yes, absolutely that can happen. i think signs of that would be things like a very volatile dynamic between the individuals, and a sense of control. so one person making all of the decisions, lack of – lack of financial independence, lack of capacity for that person to have other relationships with friends or other, you know, romantic partners, and things like that, would be signs that it’s probably more in that enmeshed dynamic – sort of tricky dynamic rather than a healthy support.
evidence of ms g  and her relationships [x] (aged 3 years) [x] was neatly dressed, and appeared cheerful and confident during the observation sessions. she spoke clearly, and could generally be understood, making some articulation mistakes common at her stage of development. [ms deacon reported that [x] has been diagnosed with [a medical condition] – a group of disorders. these disorders affect individuals differently, and to varying extents. [mr grover] believes that [x] was incorrectly diagnosed and reported that he has a letter from the genetic specialist confirming that [x] does not have [a medical condition]. observations of interactions [x] entered the observation room cheerfully with her mother and maternal grandmother, and immediately showed interest in the toys available. she chatted with her mother about the toys and her mother engaged in an interested manner, asking about the toys, and inviting [x] to look at particular toys. [ms deacon] offered appropriate assistance for [x], and praised [x], saying “oh very clever. you are very good in the kitchen.... you’re so clever and smart”. [ms deacon] encouraged [x] to pack away one set of toys before opening a new toy, and [x] complied with this request, helping to pack away the toys. when the light switched off suddenly, [x] said to her mother, “oh scary! it’s dark!” [ms deacon] comforted [x], saying, “it’s ok. do you want a cuddle?” later, when the light went off again, [x] showed no distress, saying, “maybe it’s ‘lectricity”. [ms deacon] joined in [x]’s imaginative play, and allowed [x] to lead the play. the maternal grandmother sat quietly watching [x] play. at the end of the observation session, [x] asked her mother, “where are you going? i want to go too”. [ms deacon] explained that she needed to go home to [x]’s sister, and encouraged [x] to show her father her toys and her special medal that she had brought with her. when [mr grover], [ms e] and [f] entered the room, [x] gave her father a hug, and then showed him her medal. [x] then hugged [f], who grinned and giggled at [x]. [x] engaged cheerfully and enthusiastically with her father, and showed the assessor her water bottle, saying “daddy choosed this one! i love the bottle that daddy choosed!” [mr grover] brought a variety of snacks for [x], including fruit, chips, and a lollipop, as well as a range of toys, including playdough and books. [x] requested that her father help her with tasks, such as removing playdough shapes from the cutouts, and offered her father a lollipop. [mr grover] praised [x]’s manners, and encouraged her to eat her fruit prior to having a lollipop. while [ms e] mostly focused on [f] during the observation session, she chatted with [x], and [x] engaged happily with her, and asked [ms e] to assist her. [mr grover] encouraged [x] to help pack away toys, and [x] said to him, “you tidy up and i’ll play”. [x] and her father were not observed packing away the toys, and this occurred during [ms e]’s interview. evaluation based on [x]’s developmental stage, the priorities for her are to have: a safe and stable home environment, warm, emotionally sensitive relationships with her caregivers, opportunities for meaningful relationships with both her parents, and to connect with other family members, and a child-focused routine with opportunities for free play and early learning. [x] has been described as a happy and bubbly three-year-old by both her parents, and is reported to be thriving developmentally. during the observation sessions, she interacted in a cheerful, engaging manner with each of her parents, and no developmental concerns were noted. [ms deacon] believes [x]’s eczema and asthma are symptoms of an underlying genetic condition [...] which has affected [x]’s [physical] development. [ms deacon] has sought testing and treatment from medical professionals to address these issues. [mr grover] believes that [x] has undergone unnecessary medical examinations, and that there are no indications that [x] has this condition. he is also concerned that [ms deacon] has posted photos of [x] to public online forums. the dispute between the parents has clearly caused difficulty for [x]’streating medical professionals, who have received different information from each of the parents, and they appear caught up in the dispute. it is highly concerning if [ms deacon] has misreported or fabricated [x]’s symptoms, in an effort to gain a diagnosis for [x]. however, there do not appear to be indications of seeing an unnecessary number of medical professionals, and it seems that she has followed medical advice to seek out specialist care. it seems likely that, due to [ms deacon]’s concerns about [mr grover], that she has attempted to minimise his involvement in [x]’s medical appointments, which has limited the information available to [x]’s treating professionals, particularly in relation to genetic testing. however, it is also concerning if, as [ms deacon] has alleged, [mr grover] has downplayed [x]’s symptoms and his own medical history when speaking with her treating team. it is highly likely that the parents’ dispute about [x]’s medical needs will disrupt the medical care that she is able to receive, and could have a negative psychological impact on [x]. both parents have alleged that the other parent displayed a pattern of volatility and aggression during the relationship, which at times escalated to physical violence. if [x] was exposed to family violence between her parents, it may have had lasting negative effects on her cognitive, emotional, and social development, and impacted her relationships with her caregivers. neither parent raised current concerns about [x] displaying symptoms of trauma. however, [ms deacon] reported that [d] has more memories of the violence prior to the parents’ separation, and experiences ongoing fear of [mr grover]. [mr grover] has raised concerns about [ms deacon]’s volatility and aggression towards him, the children, and her own parents. he believes that this volatility is underpinned by her anxiety, and described her as a quiet and gentle individual at times that she is not overwhelmed by her emotions. [ms deacon] reported that she has engaged in counselling to address her anxiety, and does not believe that her anxiety has a negative effect on her parenting or her relationships with others. she and her mother, [ms c], described an amicable, supportive relationship with one another, and did not indicate significant conflict between them, as alleged by [mr grover]. [ms deacon]’s refusal to attend handovers and her responses to [x] being injured when in [mr grover]’s care, could be an indication that her anxiety continues to interfere with her capacity to co-parent with [mr grover]. however, as [ms deacon] has pointed out, if she was a victim of sustained family violence and control perpetrated by [mr grover], it is reasonable that she would remain vigilant about [x] being harmed in his care, and be unwilling to engage with him directly. [ms deacon] was recently convicted of [offences], relating to incidents between her and [mr grover] during their relationship. [ms deacon] has reported that she retaliated against [mr grover]’s ongoing violence towards her, but accepts responsibility for her behaviour. she believes that [mr grover] made reports to police in late 2021, as retaliation for her allegations that [ms e] was stalking her, and that he was attempting to use the allegations as a way to gain care of [x]. if the court finds that [ms deacon]’s volatility and aggression poses a risk to [x], it may be beneficial for [ms deacon] to engage in further psychological treatment. [mr grover] is concerned at level of involvement that [ms deacon]’s mother has had in [x] and [d]’s lives. however, it appears that, while [ms c] has been significantly involved in the children’s lives, and offers a great deal of support to her daughter, there are no indications that this is detrimental to [x]’s wellbeing. [ms c] appears to have played a positive role in facilitating handovers between the parents, and has ensured that [x] is not exposed to the parents’ dispute. the parents gave opposing and contradictory accounts of the family violence during their relationship. [ms deacon] has alleged that [mr grover] displayed a pattern of controlling violence during their relationship, and alleged that he was physically and emotionally abusive towards [d]. she reported that this abuse was exacerbated by [mr grover]’s excessive alcohol use. she believes there is a risk that [x] will be exposed to physical and emotional abuse in his care, as well as a risk of exposure to family violence between [mr grover] and his new partner. [mr grover] has denied that he was abusive towards [ms deacon], and alleged that she was the perpetrator of abuse. he denied that he consumes alcohol to excess, and there are no other indications that his alcohol use is currently problematic. if the court finds that [mr grover] has displayed a pattern of coercive violence in his relationship with [ms deacon], there are significant concerns about the ongoing risks to [x]. firstly, he has not acknowledged these behaviours nor sought intervention to change his behaviour, so it would be likely that he could display similar behaviours in his current relationship. additionally, it could be that [mr grover] is utilising the court system, criminal justice system, and health systems to continue his harassment of [ms deacon]. if the court finds that this is likely, the court may wish to consider granting sole parental responsibility to [ms deacon], to minimise [mr grover]’s influence over [ms deacon]’s decision-making. [ms deacon] has proposed that she be granted permission to relocate with [x] to brisbane. her primary reasons for relocation are that her parents plan to relocate to brisbane, and that she wishes to avoid ongoing contact with [mr grover]. [ms deacon] appears to have relied heavily on the support of her parents, and will have minimal natural supports if she remains living in [city b] once her parents move to queensland. [x] and [d] both have close relationships with their maternal grandmother, and it is likely to be distressing for them to be separated from her. more of a concern, however, is the impact on [ms deacon]’s mental health. [ms deacon] and her mother have reported confidence in [ms deacon]’s capacity to care for the children without [ms c’s] assistance, but believe that her stress levels will dramatically increase due to the risks posed by contact with [mr grover]. [ms c] currently facilitates all handovers, and [ms deacon] appears fearful of the dynamic between the parents if they are required to manage direct handovers. if the court decides that [ms deacon] is best placed to provide primary care for [x], it will need to balance the risks to [ms deacon]’s mental health and wellbeing if she is required to remain in [city b], and the risks to [x]’s relationship with [mr grover] if [x] relocates to queensland. if the court does permit [ms deacon] to relocate with [x] to queensland, then [ms deacon]’s proposal that this occurs at the end of 2023 has a number of positive aspects for [x]. it gives [x] another year to establish her relationship with [mr grover], making spending extended time with him more suitable, and it means she can commence her formal schooling in queensland in 2024, a natural point of transition in her development. [ms deacon] believes that [x]’s relationship with [mr grover] may actually benefit from relocating to queensland, as she believes [mr grover] would then prioritise his time with [x], rather than working during the scheduled visits. while [x] may be able to maintain a relationship with [mr grover] spending time with him during school holidays, it limits his capacity to be involved in her schooling, and day-to-day parenting tasks, substantially changing his role in [x]’s life. relocating to queensland would also affect [x]’s relationship with [f], and her connections with her stepmother and stepsiblings. [mr grover] is concerned that, if [x] relocates to queensland, [ms deacon] will fail to provide any information to him about [x], and will not facilitate [x]’s relationship with him. if the court does allow [x] to relocate to queensland, specific orders about the requirements for [ms deacon] to maintain this connection may be needed. [ms deacon] has indicated that, if the court does not allow [x] to relocate to queensland, she intends to remain living in [city b], and proposes that [x] continue to live with her, and spend weekend and school holiday time with [mr grover]. her primary concern with this arrangement is that it will exacerbate conflict with [mr grover], and they will not be able to manage handovers in a way that protects [x] from their dispute. [x] has lived primarily with her mother throughout her life, and appears happy and settled in her care. an arrangement in which [x] lives primarily with [ms deacon], and gradually increases her weekend and school holiday time with [mr grover] appears to provide stability for [x], as well opportunities for [x] to build a meaningful relationship with her father, and for him to be involved in the full gamut or parenting responsibilities. once [x] is at school, it will be possible for most handovers to occur at school, minimising the requirement for direct handovers. this may be possible from 2023, if [x] attends childcare on handover days. [mr grover] has proposed that [x] live with him, and spend regular weekend and school holiday time with [ms deacon]. his primary reason for proposing this change is that he believes that [ms deacon] does not facilitate his involvement in [x]’s life, and he believes he would be better at ensuring [x] maintains her relationships with both parents. [x] appeared comfortable spending time with [mr grover], but currently spends only brief overnight periods with him. a change to living with him on a fulltime basis would be a dramatic change, which seems to be underestimated by [mr grover]. it seems that this arrangement would also significantly affect [x]’s relationship with her sister, [d], who she has lived with throughout her life. [mr grover] also believes he is better placed to manage [x]’s medical needs, due to his belief that [ms deacon] has fabricated symptoms and sought unnecessary assessments. if the court finds that this has occurred, the court may wish to have [mr grover] take responsibility for [x]’s medical care. this may require a care arrangement where he has [x] in his care for at least part of the school week, to allow him to take [x] to appointments. fundamentally, the primary issue in the matter is the lack of trust between the parents. there has been a pattern of allegations and counter-allegations involving dcj, police, and this court, with both parents believing that the other parent is driven by spite, rather than [x]’s best interests. [x] appears to have positive, affectionate relationships with both her parents, and a care arrangement that allows her to maintain regular contact with both her parents would be ideal. the history of the co-parenting relationship suggests that the parents would struggle to effectively facilitate a shared time spending arrangement. due to the lack of trust between the parents, and their inability to make decisions together, it may be that the court needs to consider granting only one parent responsibility for [x]’s medical decisions. other long-term decisions, such as [x]’s schooling, may be able to be negotiated in a mediated environment. recommendations in light of the above discussion, and unless evidentiary material should indicate otherwise: if the court determines that [x] is to remain in [city b], it is recommended that [x] live with her mother and spend alternate weekends with her father, from friday afternoon until monday morning, as well as the alternate thursday afternoon until friday morning. if the court determines that the mother may relocate with [x] to queensland in 2024, it is recommended that the above arrangement remain in place until the time of relocation, but increase to include four consecutive nights each alternate weekend for the final three months of 2023. once [x] relocates, it is recommended that [x] live with her mother, and spend time with her father for half of each school holiday period, and one additional weekend during each school term, in the [city b] area. it is recommended that the parents schedule regular video calls for [x] and her father, two or three days each week.
oral evidence of ms g
the mother has given evidence that she has not completed the parenting after separation, but if required to, she would be willing to complete that. would that be enough?‑‑‑no. i think those – those courses are quite good and it would be useful for both parents to complete them. both parents seemed fairly fixed in their perception of the other parent and while there might be some practical strategies that they can get out of those courses, i don’t sense that there’s likely to be a huge shift in their perceptions of one another which i think is really the basis of the difficulties in their co-parenting relationship. ... ... it would appear from the evidence that there is some, “it will be fine. we will get it sorted,” like a fairly easy, “we can do this,” approach. i guess i’m trying to explore in relation to their current relationships whether either parent, perhaps, has insight into how entrenched their positions are and what that means for the other parent?‑‑‑yes. i – i – i think i understand what you’re getting at and – yes – there was, i think, a sense from mum that if she’s just able to create some distance that that will provide enough resolution that she will then be able to communicate quite well. his honour: sorry to interrupt there. in your view, is that a bit too optimistic? is it realistic or what?‑‑‑i think it probably underestimates how difficult the relocation will be for the father to manage. and [x]?‑‑‑and possibly for [x] as well, but i think in terms of the father’s experience of that, he – it’s going to very difficult for him to move forward with a positive communication style with the mother if [x] does relocate which might be underestimated by the mother and, similarly, i think the father probably underestimates how stressful it will be for the mother to remain in [city b] once her parents move to queensland if she’s feeling like she’s stuck in [city b] without support because of him, that that then will make it potentially even more difficult for her to communicate with him.   if there was to be any relocation, the more age-appropriate time to relocate the child is seven years of age, noting that x remains an immature child, (b) both x and her father would very likely struggle with any major change, such as her relocation to a place so far away, (c) it is highly likely that the mother seriously under-estimates the difficulties for herself, and for x, in any relocation, (d) the support from the mother’s parents is significant but a somewhat similar level of support might be provided through one or both of telephone or facetime and that physical presence is not required, and (e) the maternal grandmother intends to make regular visits to the mother and child if the relocation is not granted.   both x and her father would very likely struggle with any major change, such as her relocation to a place so far away, (c) it is highly likely that the mother seriously under-estimates the difficulties for herself, and for x, in any relocation, (d) the support from the mother’s parents is significant but a somewhat similar level of support might be provided through one or both of telephone or facetime and that physical presence is not required, and (e) the maternal grandmother intends to make regular visits to the mother and child if the relocation is not granted.   it is highly likely that the mother seriously under-estimates the difficulties for herself, and for x, in any relocation, (d) the support from the mother’s parents is significant but a somewhat similar level of support might be provided through one or both of telephone or facetime and that physical presence is not required, and (e) the maternal grandmother intends to make regular visits to the mother and child if the relocation is not granted.   the support from the mother’s parents is significant but a somewhat similar level of support might be provided through one or both of telephone or facetime and that physical presence is not required, and (e) the maternal grandmother intends to make regular visits to the mother and child if the relocation is not granted.   the maternal grandmother intends to make regular visits to the mother and child if the relocation is not granted.
tendered documents
index applicant’s documents
respondent’s documents
icl’s documents
written submissions on behalf of the applicant
the proposals the applicant mother’s primary case is that the child [x] born [in] 2019 (now 4 years old) continues to live with her and that she have sole parental responsibility for long term care decisions. she seeks to relocate [x]’s residence to the brisbane/[region h] area of queensland by december 2023 (when she will be almost 5 years old and about to start school). in the alternative, the mother proposes parenting arrangements if [x] is required to continue to reside in the [city b/city j] area of nsw whereby she progresses to spending 5 nights per fortnight with the father, but it is her strong preference to move to queensland and she says that allowing the relocation is in [x]’s best interests. whilst acknowledging that the case law is clear that she does not need to demonstrate a compelling reason to move1, the mother does have good and cogent reasons in support of the move. 2.1 her parents are moving to qld and they have been her main emotional and practical support, 2.2 both [x] and her older half- sister [d] have close relationships with the maternal grandmother and it is likely to be distressing for them to be separated from her, 2.3 the mother will be isolated in [city b] after her parents move and particularly vulnerable to the ongoing conflict with the father, 2.4 potential impact on the mother’s mental health and well-being of the stress related to dealing with the father without the assistance of the maternal grandmother, 2.5 [x] is happy and well settled in the primary care of the mother, the mother wishes to continue as her primary carer and that arrangement is recommended by the court child expert as being in the best interests of [x]. 2.6 the mother says that she will be better able to parent [x] if she is living away from [city b] where she is anxious about the prospect of meeting the father at community events and exposing herself to the risk of prosecution for breach of the advo. 2.7 [x] has a good relationship with the father, his partner and her younger half-sister [f] which provides a strong foundation for an ongoing meaningful relationship even if she is living in the brisbane/[region h] area. the respondent father’s primary case was that [x] should change to live with him and spend time with the mother in queensland but the case proceeded on the basis that the mother had conceded that she would not relocate without the child. the father’s case at trial was that [x] should progress to an equal time week-about arrangement by 2024 when [x] starts school and that the parents should have equal shared parental responsibility for long term care decisions for [x]. the father’s proposal of equal time once [x] is at school next year was not recommended by the court child expert and cannot be seen to be in her best interests given the high conflict and lack of trust between the parties. the applicant mother relies on her outline of case document filed 7 december 2022 and the documents listed in the outline, including the minute of orders sought. the legislative pathway the presumption of equal parental responsibility in s61da(1) does not apply in this case as the mother alleges family violence against the father and herself pleaded guilty to charges of family violence against the husband in criminal proceedings. the court may be satisfied that there are grounds for the exception in s61da(2)(b). in addition to the findings available to the court pursuant to s61da(2)(b), the presumption is also rebutted if the court is satisfied that it would not be in the child’s best interest to have equal shared parental responsibility. at paragraph 88 court child expert stated that “due to the lack of trust between the parents, and their inability to make decisions together, it may be that the court needs to consider granting only one parent responsibility for [x]’s medical decisions. other long-term decisions, such as [x]’s schooling, may be able to be negotiated in a mediated environment”. at the conclusion of the trial, it is clearly open to the court to find that it is overly optimistic to rely on negotiation in a mediated environment for other parental responsibility decisions to be made. the parent with primary care of [x]’s should have sole parental responsibility for long term care decisions. the fundamental issue of “lack of trust” identified by [ms g] appears unlikely to resolve. in the event that the court does order equal shared parental responsibility for [x], the court must then follow the legislative pathway and consider first equal time and then substantial and significant time. clearly, if the mother is permitted to relocate [x]’s residence to queensland, neither equal time nor substantial and significant time with the father is reasonably practicable. if the mother is living in [city b] or [city j], substantial and significant time with the father is reasonably practicable as the distances involved support the mother’s proposal of 5 nights per fortnight. the best interests of the child are the paramount consideration pursuant to s.65aa and while accepting that [x]’s best interests may override the mother’s right to freedom of movement and to choose where she lives with [x], she says that it cannot be in [x]’s best interests for her mother to be restricted to living in the comparatively small rural city of [city b] where she has limited future employment prospects and heightened anxiety from the conflict with the father. the mother’s needs are partly addressed by the alternative orders she seeks that she remain in the greater [city b/city j] area, but not completely, as she is still faced with the prospect of losing the regular and practical support of the maternal grandparents when they themselves relocate to brisbane/[region h]. relevant s60cc factors section 60cc(2)(a) - there is a clear benefit to [x] in having a meaningful relationship with each of her parents. it is clear on the evidence that [x] already has that quality of relationship with her mother and her father as she is secure in the care of each, despite the ongoing high conflict and the protracted litigation. section 60cc(2)(b) – there is a clear need to protect [x] from harm. the mother has experienced the father’s behaviour as controlling and coercive and the mother’s fear of this together with the ongoing behaviour of the father, puts [x] at risk. an example of this is the father reporting the mother to the police almost 2 years after separation immediately after there was a concern than his new partner had stalked the mother. there is a further example post-trial with the new evidence from the advo proceedings. the father gave evidence in this court that he did not fear the mother and that he would file an application to revoke the advo and a consent order was made to that effect. whilst he did file his application, his instructions to the prosecutor [in early] 2023 as recorded on transcript in open court at the local court were that he did fear the mother and did want the continued protection of the advo. at the [early] 2023 listing the police prosecutor indicated to the presiding judge that “...i was instructed by [mr grover] that his application to revoke and now application to vary was only put forward by instruction under family law proceedings, and that he still wants the avo. (page 2, paras 23 – 26). the father’s actions in changing his evidence between the 2 courts leave the mother in the situation where she continues to feel at risk of criminal prosecution in any potential interaction with the father, about which she is not surprisingly anxious. the advo continues until [mid] 2024. section 60cc(3)(a) – [x] at 4 years old is too young for her views to have any weight. section 60cc(3)(b) – [x] has a good relationship with each of her parents, her half-siblings and extended family on both the maternal and paternal sides. these relationships will continue to develop and be meaningful, whether she is living in the brisbane/[region h] area or in the [city b/city j] area, however [x] will particularly miss the day to day contact with the maternal grandmother if she is not living in the brisbane/[region h] area. section 60cc(3)(c) – the poor co-parenting relationship has impacted on the capacity of the parties to both be involved in long term parenting decisions to date and there is no real prospect of that relationship improving given the continuation of the advo. section 60cc(3)(d) – the mother’s relocation proposal will have an impact on [x]’s ability to spend time with the father and the paternal family during school terms but the mother’s proposal builds in a delay until [x] is about to turn 5 years old to continue to build the relationship to assist the transition to video and holiday time with the father. section 60cc(3)(e) – there is an additional expense involved in travel if [x] is living in queensland. section 60cc(3)(f) – the mother has the greater capacity to meet the needs of [x] as her established primary carer but each parent is able to meet her day to day needs. section 60cc(3)(g) – the mother is best placed to arrange for [x]’s medical issues to be managed appropriately. section 60cc(3)(i) – the father has been unable to manage his distrust of the mother and the care she has provided for [x], particularly around medical decisions, and this has affected the capacity of the parents to co-parent [x]. whilst each parent meets [x]’s immediate needs, they are effectively only capable of parallel parenting and from the perspective of the mother, she will be better able to do that if not living in [city b]. section 60cc(3)(j) – there is acknowledged family violence on behalf of the mother and she deposed to progressing with her counselling to understand the reactive nature of her violence. the father has not acknowledged any responsibility for family violence. section 60cc(3)(k) – there is a family violence order against the mother until [mid] 2024 which the father reneged on revoking. section 60cc(3)(l) – it is preferable to make an order which is least likely to lead to further proceedings. from the mother’s perspective, this is the order which allows her to relocate with [x] and remove herself from living close to the father. the evidence the applicant the applicant was extensively cross-examined by counsel for the respondent and counsel for the icl. it is submitted that she was honest in her evidence, and made appropriate concessions, in particular in relation to the family violence convictions. it was clear from her evidence that she too experienced events during the relationship as family violence and was anxious to avoid situations which may expose [x] to the high conflict between the parties and their families. the applicant showed insight gained from her counselling about the dynamic between the parties but she remains anxious. the applicant’s mother [ms c] the applicant’s mother presented as an attentive and caring grandmother, prepared to provide practical assistance for the benefit of her grandchild, including regular changeovers. however, she too is impacted by the conflict between the parties and the lack of trust each has in the other, leading to issues at changeover. [ms c] was firm in her intention of relocating with her husband to queensland as soon as the home in [city b] could be sold and a suitable home purchased in qld. [ms g] (court child expert) the court child expert was particularly concerned about [x]’s medical needs. paragraph 78 “it is highly likely that the parent’s dispute about [x]’s medical needs will disrupt the medical care that she is able to receive, and could have a negative psychological impact on [x].” despite the availability of the letters about [x]’s genetic testing and the “clinical diagnosis”, the parties clearly read the medical information in different ways which cannot be in [x]’s best interests. the court child expert was supportive of the mother’s attention to [x]’s medical needs and there is no expert opinion to support the father’s view that the mother exaggerates [x]’s symptoms due to some mental health issue. dr m (single expert psychiatrist) [dr m] was not required for cross-examination. he assessed the mother as suffering from anxiety but not such that she was not a capable parent for [x] the father the father’s credibility as a witness is challenged in particular in 2 instances. firstly, the father failed to disclose that he had been banned from child care, with the consequence that his partner [ms e] then had to collect on his behalf. it is significant that the father had no insight into the effect of his behaviour on the staff at the child care, just as he appeared to have no insight into the effect of his behaviour on the mother. secondly, the father gave evidence and agreed to a consent order in this court to make an application to revoke the advo. he then advised the prosecutor that he did not want the order revoked and the prosecutor then failed to support his application. if accepted as being an accurate account of the father’s instructions, then his position (still wanting the advo) is inconsistent with the evidence he gave under oath in the family law proceedings. this goes to credit. he says one thing in this court and something different in the local court. the issue is particularly significant given the context of the focus in the father’s evidence on the parties cooperating in the future and the fact that the mother should do face to face handovers with the father and have contact with him. the mother had expressed concerns that she could be accused of breaching the advo and that was a real cause of anxiety for her. to counter that claim, the father was at pains to suggest that the advo was not necessary and he did feel safe interacting with the mother. the court cannot have confidence that the parties will be able to interact safely in the [city b] area and that puts [x]’s best interests at risk. the father’s partner, [ms e] the court can have no doubt after the evidence of [ms e] that she cares deeply for [x] and that she is very supportive of the father. however, it is clear that she is very negative about the mother, does not trust her or the maternal grandmother and that attitude contributes to the risk to [x] of being exposed to conflict if the parties continue to live in close proximity. [ms e]’s postings on social media and involvement in groups supporting male victims of domestic violence predispose her to thinking the worst of the mother. this distrust lead to a joint decision between the father and [ms e] not to inform the mother when [x] suffered a burn in their care from the unguarded [...] heater, contributing to the mother’s anxiety that [x] may not be safe in the care of the father. conclusion the mother submits that it is in the best interest of the child, for her to continue to live in the primary care of the mother. her preference is to relocate to queensland late in 2023.
written submissions on behalf of the respondent
this matter was set down for final hearing from 14-16 december 2022. the gravamen of the proceeding was to determine whether the parties’ child [x] born [in] 2019 (now 4 years old) should be permitted to relocate to the brisbane/[region h] area with her mother. importantly if the mother was not permitted to relocate [x] to the brisbane/[region h] area, the mother would remain in [city b]. the father seeks orders that would see [x] living in an alternate week arrangement by the time she commences primary school in january 2024. the mother sought to rebut the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility due to the presence of family violence whilst the father seeks an order for equal shared parental responsibility. evidence was provided by the father, the mother, the father’s partner [ms e], the father’s brother, [ms e]’s brother, the maternal grandmother and the expert [ms g]. all but the father’s brother and [ms e]’s brother were cross examined. given there was insufficient time to hear oral submissions, an order was made for written submissions. set out below are the written submissions in support of the father’s orders that [x] remain living in [city b]. (b) credit in this matter it is respectfully submitted it is not necessary nor helpful to make findings of credit given the evidence currently before the court and the orders sought the parties – in particular the mother proposes 5 nights a fortnight with the father in the event [x] remains in [city b]. it is noted however that there cannot be criticism for the events precipitated by his application to have the mother’s advo revoked – as the mother invites the court to do in her written submissions. consistent with his evidence on the last day of the trial in december 2022, he approached the local court to have it revoked however events transpired which saw the applicant for the advo (the nsw police) seek to vary the order rather than revoke it. evidence at the interim hearing of the mother’s application on 7 march 2023, including the father’s affidavit make this position clear. strangely when one reads the transcript the mother’s own legal representation, [ms s] sought that the advo remain in place in its original form, despite the prosecutor seeking to vary it. (c) part vii of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“part vii”) part vii sets out the children’s provisions. the objects of the part and principles underlying it are in section 60b. save and except for the objects relating to protecting children from harm (given neither party suggest [x] would be at risk of harm with the other), each of the other objects set out in section 60b are relevant. section 60ca provides that in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, the court must have regard to the best interests of the child as a paramount consideration. in determining what is in a child’s best interest the court must consider the matters set out in section 60cc(2) and (3). indeed the provisions of part vii and the pathway through the legislation apply to relocation matters just as they do in any other children’s case. the best interests of the child is the paramount consideration. (d) summary of matters under ss.60cc primary considerations – the children benefit from a meaningful relationship with both of the children’s parents and the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm [ms g] does not make a recommendation about where [x] should live. in terms of [x]’s relationship with each parent the evidence supports the contention that both parents have a meaningful relationship with [x]. the ultimate orders proposed by the father would see [x] spending increasingly age appropriate time progressing to week about from the commencement of primary school. the mother’s orders for relocation would see a dramatic reduction in the father’s time and it is submitted neither the father nor the expert are of the view that such orders would enable [x] to maintain a meaningful relationship with the father. in the event she does not relocate she proffers an increasing time regime until [x] is seeing her father 5 nights a fortnight. it is submitted, given that concession there is no arguable reason why week about would not be appropriate. any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views. given [x] was 3 years [old] at the time of interview, little can be garnered from what she may have told the family consultant. her views are irrelevant. the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) [x] has a close relationships with each parent and the father’s fiancé [ms e] in addition to friends and family in [city b/city j] area. it is submitted that if she was to relocate to queensland that she will lose these important connections. the mother despite having a close relationship with [x], is an anxious parent and is hyper-vigilant when it comes to medical issues. the benefit of the father’s orders for ultimately equal time is [x] being exposed to two different parenting styles. the mother concedes in her written submissions that “there is no doubt [ms e] cares deeply for [x] and she is supportive of the father”. the sibling relationship between [x] and her sister [f] is equally important. they share a close bond and a separation would undoubtedly have a significantly detrimental impact on that relationship, especially given their ages. of similar importance is the relationship between [ms e]’s children and the child. this too would be damaged by any relocation. the mother has always lived in [the city b/city j] area, as a consequence she would be removing herself from that social network in addition to removing her daughter [d] from her friendship group and school. the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, to spend time with the child and to communicate with the child both parties are committed parents. the father seeks to be actively involved in major decisions that involves [x]. however, it is submitted that the mother goes to great lengths to distance the father from such decision making, in particular relating to her health needs, contrary to court orders. the mother asserts that the child has been diagnosed with [a medical condition]. the mother chose not to involve the father in appointments with specialists. it is submitted that there has been no formal diagnosis by any medical professional. such was his desire to be involved in decisions pertaining to her health, the father took it upon himself to undertake genetic testing to ascertain if [x] had any gene mutation which could identify if she had [that medical condition], results confirmed she does not. the father has taken every opportunity given to him to see [x]. at the commencement of the proceedings he agreed to interim orders for supervised contact to see [x] such was his desire to maintain that relationship. the father regularly seeks additional time with [x] in addition to those provided for in the orders. the extent to which each parent has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligation to maintain the child it is submitted that the parties have fulfilled their obligations to maintain [x]. the father meets his child support obligations as assessed by the agency. the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living the family consultant’s view in cross examination was that if relocation were to happen she would be more comfortable for it to happen if [x] were at least 7 years of age. she is only 4 years old. she was concerned that [x] was too young to maintain the relationship in the large periods she was away from her father. clearly managing the periods apart would be difficult for parents who co-parent well, significantly more problematic for parents who cannot co-parent effectively. she also advanced that there was no research to indicate that an attachment could be maintained by “facetime” where the subjects had long periods apart. and that is unsurprising given we are dealing with a child of 4 who on the mother’s case if permitted to relocate would see her father on one occasion during a school term. respectfully this consideration alone when balanced against the mother’s reasons for relocating, should see her application fail. the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent it is submitted that there is an obvious and significant practical difficulty to the mother’s proposal. the parties and [x] currently live in [city b]. [x] is clearly too young to travel as an unaccompanied minor. the mother proffers no evidence of the distances to be travelled, how that distance is to be travelled or the costs of doing so. the court can take judicial notice that [city b] is a country town in nsw. the mother seeks to relocate to queensland. the father’s evidence was that the drive to brisbane was over 12 hours and the flight time (not including the drive to [city j] airport, waiting time and the drive to the mother’s home from the airport) was one hour and 45 minutes one way. either option would be an exhausting enterprise for a young child. the father’s untested evidence was he cannot relocate. and of course the mother lives in her own home in [city b]. there is no suggestion of financial difficulty in remaining in [city b]. the court has no evidence to determine whether a move would result in an imposition of difficult financial circumstances for the mother. the mother has chosen not to advance any evidence of what her property is worth or what a property in brisbane may cost. the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs the parties are capable of meeting [x]’s needs and have done so since she was born. the single expert, [dr m] said in respect of the mother “the writer found no evidence to suggest that [ms deacon]’s trauma disorder impacted on her capacity to parent [x]” and again at paragraph 665 single expert said “there was no evidence to suggest that the trauma-related disorder impacted upon [ms deacon]’s capacity to care for [x] independently at any time”. finally at paragraph 620 the single expert said “the prognosis for a sustained recovery from [ms deacon]’s trauma related disorder is very good, provided she is able to continue accessing appropriate psychological intervention and counselling”. the court ought have no concerns about the mother’s ability to parent [x] in the event her parents move and she remains in [city b] with [x]. indeed the paternal grandmother said to the expert that she had confidence she would manage. the one area of concern when it comes to the mother’s ability to parent [x] is her inability to encourage [x]’s relationship with the father. the mother clearly holds the father in little regard. she has previously assaulted him, although the tenor of her evidence of the assault was that it was the father’s fault and she was the victim. we know that for almost 5 months post separation the mother supervised the father’s time with [x]. other than the incident [in late] 2020 in which the mother unilaterally withheld [x] from the father she made no complaint about the father’s care of [x] during this time. yet she now alleges her anxiety at seeing the father is so great she cannot attend handovers. she has alleged the dcj informed her that she should leave the father or [x] would be removed from her care. there is nothing in the dcj records indicating this. we also know that following a court ordered supervised visit with the father on 4 november 2020, the mother withheld [x] and refused to facilitate further supervised contact citing that she was concerned about a scratch on [x]’s [body]. this led to the mother taking [x] to the hospital and [x] being stripped down and forensically examined. the mother alleged that she was subsequently advised by the hospital staff and dcj not to facilitate contact with the father. there is nothing in the dcj or the hospital notes indicating this. the mother and the maternal grandmother acknowledged in cross examination that they were surprised by the measures taken by the hospital, but they still chose not to intervene. concerningly the mother and the maternal grandmother confirmed in cross examination that they would not have changed anything that happened although it being clear from the hospital notes that [x] was distressed during the physical examination. of equal concern given her desire to relocate is the fact the mother does not provide makeup time when [x] misses time with the father pursuant to court orders. for instance, the father filed a contravention application on 2 december 2020 and no make-up time was provided for the time he missed. and of course the court is aware that [x]’s half sister [d] has no relationship with her father and it is submitted the mother moved home in detriment to that relationship. the father says that the mother said to him many times during the relationship “i do not want to share [d]. i hope he [mr r] just gives up and goes away”. all these factors point to a mother who is not desirous of supporting [x]’s relationship with her father. that is particularly concerning when the mother wants to relocate [x] so far away from the father resulting in [x] spending just one weekend with him during the school term. there are also concerns about the mother’s relationship with the maternal grandmother, which the father describes as tumultuous given the maternal grandmother’s desire to control and manipulate the mother. the maternal grandmother confirmed in cross examination that the mother calls her controlling. it is not surprising in these circumstances that there have been incidents at handover involving the maternal grandmother the father and the police. the maturity, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and either of the children’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant the father and [ms e] are both [from country t]. the father submits that [x] benefits from extended family events in which [country t] cultural activities are organised and [x] participates. the parents agree that the child has asthma and that it is managed by them. the attitude to the child and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the children’s parents the parties do their best for [x] in the time that they have with her however the mother’s inability to foster [x]’s relationship with the father is of considerable concern given the orders she seeks. any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family the mother was charged with an incident of family violence and pled guilty. a final advo was made in which the father was listed as a protected person. the advo does not prohibit the mother from attending changeovers or contacting the father in relation to matters that concerns [x]. the advo will remain in place until [mid] 2024. whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child the mother has a history of not complying with court orders. if the mother is permitted to relocate [x] it will undoubtedly lead to further contraventions, a deleterious effect on the relationship between [x] and her father and consequently proceedings by the father to enforce orders in order to maintain that relationship. this is not an outcome that is in the best interests of [x]. other relevant matters n/a section 65daa the father’s urges the court to make an order for equal shared parental responsibility and furthermore on the father’s case it is both in [x]’s best interests and reasonably practicable for her to spend equal time with the parties. (e) conclusion it is submitted that when looking at section 60cc and what is in [x]’s best interests, your honour would find that [x] should not be permitted to relocate and that the orders proposed by the father in those circumstances are in [x]’s best interests.
independent children’s lawyers written submissions
proposals this matter is in relation to the live with and spend time with arrangements for the child [x] born [in] 2019, aged 4 years. [x] is the child of [ms deacon] and [mr grover]. [ms deacon] seeks orders that she have sole parental responsibility for [x] and [x] be permitted to relocate with her to the brisbane/[region h area]. [ms deacon] conceded at hearing that if [x] is not permitted to relocate, she will remain in the [city b/city j] region. in the alternative, [ms deacon] proposes if [x] is not able to relocate that [x] live with her parents in a 9/5 arrangement in her favour. [mr grover] seeks an orders for equal shared parental responsibility and that by january 2024 [x] live in a week about arrangement. the independent childrens lawyer (“icl”) relies on her amended case outline filed 14 december 2022 and her minute of order sought filed 6 december 2022. parental responsibility section 61da(1) of the family law act 1975 (“the act”) states that the court must apply a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for their parents to have equal shared parental responsibility. however section 61da(2) of the act states the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds for believing that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the icl submits that the court will find that family violence has occurred in this case and the evidence of this is that the mother was charged with and plead guilty of assault [offences]. the victim of the charges was [mr grover]. further, [in mid] 2022 an apprehended domestic violence order was made in which [mr grover] is named the protected person and the mother is the respondent. [ms deacon] alleges that she was also the victim of family violence and was cross-examined on these allegations. the father denied all family violence allegations against him. [ms g] at paragraph 83 raises concerns that if the court finds that [mr grover] has displayed a pattern of coercive violence, she would have concerns that he has not acknowledged or sought treatment of this behaviour. the icl submits that the court can and should find that the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility does not apply pursuant to section 61da(2)(b). the icl submits that the court may also find that the presumption is rebutted pursuant to section 61da(4), being that it is not in [x]’s best interests for her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility. it is acknowledged by the icl that an order granting sole parental responsibility to one parent should not be arrived at lightly, however, in this matter there is evidence of: - a lack of trust between the parents. the parents being at odds in relation to medical decisions for [x]. the mother experiencing anxiety in negotiating with the father or even attending the same location as the father. contradictory evidence before the court by the father of whether or not he remains in fear of the mother. the father gave evidence in this court that he did not have concerns for his safety in relation to the mother, but the transcripts from the local court appear to indicate that [mr grover] continued to hold fears and did not want the apprehended domestic violence order revoked. while these transcripts were untested in court, they speak for themselves in relation to what happened in the local court. the family report writer [ms g] was clear in both her report and in her evidence that it was unlikely the parents would be able to co-parent into the future. paragraph 88 of the family report by [ms g] states: “fundamentally, the primary issue in the matter is the lack of trust between the parents. there has been a pattern of allegations and counter-allegations involving dcj, police and this court, with both parents believing that the other parent is driven by spite rather than [x]’s best interests.” the icl supports these comments and in submits that an order for equal shared parental responsibility is likely to increase the conflict between the parents and may affect [x] receiving timely medical treatment. in marvel & marvel (no2) [2010] fam cafc 10 at paragraph 103 the court said: -
“it appears to us that as a parenting order, including an order for equal shared parental responsibility, must be in the best interests of a child, a court may in the exercise of its discretion find it is inappropriate to make such an order in certain circumstances. this could occur where, although there is no family violence or child abuse, the conflict or lack of effective communication between the parents is such that to properly exercise their equal shared parental responsibility they would be unable to comply with s 65dac by consulting and making a genuine effort to reach agreement about major long-term issues affecting their child or children. in other words, in these circumstances an order for equal shared parental responsibility would inevitably lead to further conflict and perhaps contravention applications, which conflict and/or ongoing litigation could be adverse to the child’s best interests.” the icl submits that the court can and should find that the parties would not be able to communicate at a level that is required to properly exercise equal shared parental responsibility and would fall within the above example in marvel & marvel (no 2). if the court finds that an order for equal shared parental responsibility is appropriate the court must then follow the legislative pathway in section 65daa of the act. whether equal time or substantial and significant time is reasonably practicable will depend on the court’s determination as to whether [x] is able to relocate to the brisbane/[region h] area. i will make detailed submissions about the relocation and spend time with arrangements below, however, at this time it is submitted that if the relocation is permitted then equal time or substantial and significant time is not reasonably practicable. conversely, if the relocation is not permitted then equal time or substantial and significant time is reasonably practicable.
relocation the mother seeks an order from this court that [x] be able to relocate from [city b] to the brisbane/[region h] area and has conceded that if [x] is unable to relocate she would remain in the [city j/city b] region. the mother seeks this order primarily on the basis that her parents, which have provided significant and substantial support to the mother, intend to relocate. the maternal grandmother gave evidence that she intends to relocate to queensland and that this would occur even in circumstances where the court did not allow [x] to relocate. the mother’s second reason for seeking relocation is on the basis that she will have better employment prospects in the brisbane/[region h] area than in [city b]. the icl submits that the mother’s evidence on this point was not persuasive and at its highest is only supported by a letter from her current employer that they will consider a transfer of employment to that area should there be “suitable opportunities in the region at the time of her relocation.” see annexure u to the mother’s affidavit sworn 23 november 2023. it is well settled law that the parent wishing to relocate does not need to demonstrate “compelling reasons to justify the relocation” ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at 191. it is also well settled law that parenting proceedings involving relocation are to be determined in the same manner in which all parenting proceedings are determined. in zahawi and rayne [2016]famcafc 90 at paragraphs 47 and 48 the court said
47. all applications for parenting orders before the court involve a situation that, axiomatically, is not in the children’s best interests. what is best for children is that their parents co-parent by agreement and without conflict and as selflessly as circumstances reasonably allow. when parents are unable to agree, the parents’ proposals embraced in competing applications involve, again axiomatically, advantages and disadvantages for the children, each and all of which have ramifications for the children’s best interests. concomitantly, gummow and callinan jj said in u v u:
...the reality is that maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents: obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement have been incurred.[16]
48. “relocation cases” are no different from other applications for parenting orders in that respect. like all applications for parenting orders, an application to have the children live with a parent significantly geographically remote from the other parent is to be determined by the children’s best interests. however, the issues in a “relocation case” are, by reason of the proposed geographical separation of parents from their children, often significantly more acute and all the more so in cases of proposed international relocation.[17] and, of course, that same factor will usually render more acute the burden or burdens to be borne by one parent or the other, including restrictions on their freedoms. in adamson & adamson (2014) flc 93-62 at 79,700 at [65] – [66] the full court said: it follows from the decisions of the high court in ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 and u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 that in parenting proceedings there is no requirement for a parent to demonstrate “compelling reasons” to live where the parent proposes to live, be that a proposed new location or, axiomatically, in their current place of residence. here, the mother was no more required to demonstrate “compelling reasons” for her choice to remain living in town s than was the father to so do with respect to his choice to live in town c or for either to not live anywhere else. the same may be said of their respective choices of employment, the mother’s in town s and the father’s in sydney. the court must be sensitive to the wishes and rights of parents to live and work wherever they desire. (u v u at [82] citing ams v aif). the written submissions of the mother filed 24 march 2023 at paragraph 2 outline her reasons for wishing to relocate to the same area in which her parents intend to move. it is not in dispute that upon the grandparents moving, the mother would have no familial support which she has previously and currently significantly relied on. the mother gave evidence that her mental health would be affected if she was required to remain in the [city b] area and take on the responsibilities of facilitating time with the father. while there was no medical evidence tendered by the mother to this effect, her evidence as to the anxiety she experiences even in incidental contact with the father is significant. the father’s position at trial was that [x] should not be able to relocate and if the mother wished to relocate [x] should come into his primary care. while the decision of relocation is finely balanced, the case law is clear in that the mother does not need a compelling reason to relocate and the court needs to be considerate of the mother’s freedom of movement to live and work wherever she chooses.
relevant 60cc factors there is clearly a benefit to [x] having a meaningful relationship with both parents. as stated in mccall and clark [2009] famcafc 92, (2009) flc 93-405 “a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitive adjective, not a strictly quantitative one.” [mr grover] seeks orders that [x] remain in [city b] and that she commence a week about arrangement when she commences school. it is submitted that the evidence presented in this matter does not support a week about arrangement. [ms g] in her report recommends that if [x] remains in [city b] there be a 10/4 arrangement in favour of the mother, this did not change when she gave evidence. [ms g] at paragraph 90 proposed a regime of time increasing for [x] in the event she was able to relocate with her mother in 2024. [ms g] in her evidence stated that a further year or so remaining in [city b] will secure [x]’s relationship with her father prior to relocation. the icl submits that the orders proposed in her minute of consent that cover both if the relocation is permitted or not, provide for [x] to have a meaningful relationship with her parents. it is submitted by the icl that the court will be able to find that the most significant risk for [x] is the ongoing relationship dynamics between the adults in her life. there is evidence before the court of both the mother and father making complaints against each other including to the police, childcare and child welfare authorities, videoing changeovers and parties even following each other. there is evidence before the court of the parent’s disagreements in relation to medical matters, which may have the consequence that [x] is not provided adequate treatment when she requires it. given [x]’s age no weight can be given to her views or wishes. at paragraph 88 [ms g] described [x] having a positive, affectionate relationship with both her parents. [x] has a close relationship with her half-sister [d] who she has resided with all her life and a close relationship with her maternal grandmother [ms c] who she has seen every day since birth. the evidence before the court is clear that [ms c] has provided significant support to [ms deacon] and [x]. [x] and her mother reside with the maternal grandparents who are acutely involved in [x]’s care. [x] also has a close and developing relationship with [mr grover]’s partner [ms e] and her half-sister [f]. the icl submits that the court will find that both parents have to the extent possible taken the opportunity to participate in long-term decision making, spending time with and communicating with [x] and have fulfilled their parental obligations. what is clear in the evidence is that the co-parenting relationship since separation has been fraught with difficulties and that there have been difficulties since separation in relation to the parent’s ability to make joint decisions in relation to medical matters, difficulties in relation to the time [x] spends with her father and a complete lack of trust between the parents. a significant consideration in this matter is 60cc(3)(d) and the potential impact on [x] of the different proposals before the court. there is no dispute that if the mother is able to relocate there will be an impact on the relationship [x] has with her father, [f] and his extended family. it is undisputed that [ms deacon] has been [x]’s primary carer. the evidence of [ms c] is that she and her husband will be relocating to queensland and at paragraph 84 of [ms g]’s report she opines that [x] and [d] are likely to be distressed in being separated from their grandmother. further she states that if the court finds that [ms deacon] should be the primary carer for [x], the court will need to balance the risks to [ms deacon]’s mental health and well-being against and the risks to the relationship between [x], her father and the paternal family. if the court was to determine that [x] should be in the primary care of her father, [ms g]’s report at paragraph 87 states this would be a “a dramatic change, which seems to be underestimated by [mr grover].” [ms g] in her evidence was clear that it would be preferable for [x] to remain in [city b] for a further 1 – 2 years for the purpose of establishing a strong relationship between [x] and her father, prior to the relocation. [ms g] in her evidence was clear that if the mother was to relocate after a 1 -2 year period, [x] would be able to maintain a meaningful relationship with her paternal family despite the distance. [ms g] gave evidence that if permitted to relocate, she believed the mother would continue to facilitate [x]’s relationship with her father. there is no evidence before the court that either parent is not able to provide for [x]’s needs. the father contends that the mother would not be able to facilitate a positive relationship between him and the child. the icl submits that the evidence will not allow the court to make such a finding. as already stated, the level of distrust between the parents is significant. neither parent trusts each other in relation to medical issues which has led [x] to be taken for second opinions and subjected to significant and distressing medical checks. the icl submits that parallel parenting of [x] is likely to occur, which would not be in [x]’s best interests (especially in relation to medical issues). the icl submits that the father in his evidence minimises the potential impact on [x] in being separated from her sister [d] with many of his responses instead focusing on [f]. while this is important, the reality is that [x] has lived all her life with [d] and the impact on her of being separated on [d] is likely to be far more significant that the impact of separation with [f]. the court heard evidence in relation to the father having been banned from collecting [x] from childcare. the father downplayed the incident and seemed to place most of the blame on the staff. the one area of concern for the icl was the mother’s evidence in relation to [x] being subjected to an invasive examination at the hospital and that if the same was to occur again the mother would do the same thing. the icl has addressed the issue of family violence at paragraphs 7 – 9 of these submissions. the icl submits that it will be open to the court to find that both parents at various times have engaged in family violence. all parties agree that it would be in [x]’s best interests for an order to be made that is least likely to lead to instigation of further proceedings. the icl submits that an order for sole parental responsibility and very specific orders for spend time, changeover, communication etc. are required in this matter. evidence of witnesses the icl submits that the court will find the mother to be an honest and reliable witness. the icl submits that the anxiety described by the mother in having to have direct contact with the father, while it may seem excessive is her reality and was not embellished. the mother’s insight into the co-parenting relationship now and into the future with the father should be preferred. the father’s evidence was that the mother should have attended handovers in the past and should do so in the future, despite hearing the mother’s reservations, anxieties and worries that she may be in breach of the advo. the father gave evidence that he was not in fear of the mother and did not require the continuation of the advo, and yet his position appears at least on the transcripts from the local court to contradict this. the father in his written submissions seems to lay the blame at the feet of the mother for not agreeing to a variation, yet he does not dispute the contents of the transcript which clearly shows he wanted the advo to continue. the icl submits that the father in his affidavits, oral evidence and in his written submissions shows a lack of willingness to accept any failings on his part to the current status of the co-parenting relationship. the mother answered truthfully about her feelings towards the father and her unwillingness to deal with, come into contact with or co-parent with the father. there is no doubt that all family members who gave evidence in these proceedings love and adore [x] and want what is best for her. the icl submits that the father’s evidence and that of [ms e] combined would raise serious concerns about their willingness to facilitate a relationship with [x] and her maternal family if there was a change of residence. [ms e] was clear in her oral evidence that she would never allow [f] to spend time with [x] in the home of the maternal family and of concern to the court should be the social media postings and her distrust of the mother and maternal grandmother. conclusion the icl submits an order for sole parental responsibility in favour of the mother should be made in this matter and an order that [x] live with her mother is appropriate. the icl submits that the court should make an order permitting [x] to relocate to the brisbane/[region h] area, but that this not be before december 2024 and the spend time with arrangements for the time with her father be in accordance with the icl’s proposed orders 8, 9, 10 & 11. if the court determines a relocation is not in [x]’s best interests, the icl submits that the spend time with arrangements [x] spend with her father be in accordance with the icl’s proposed orders 4, 5, 6 & 7.
outline of principle
... maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents, obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement having been incurred.
... it must not be assumed that one parent (the father) cannot move and that the mother must, in every case, subordinate her ambitions and wishes, not to the needs of the child, but to the wishes of the father to pursue his life in a place of his choosing. it is the interests of the child which are paramount, not the interests or needs of the parents, let alone the interests of one of them.  4] the problems that family law legislation deals with are human problems: with all their attendant variety and complexity. and at the end of a court proceeding under such legislation, a judge must make an order - usually an order that says yes or no to some application. "[a] complicated mass of human experience has to be reduced to the simplest possible terms." because the problems are human problems, because they are as varied and complicated as they are, the legislature speaks in terms more often found in statements of aspiration than legal prescription. it is, then, hardly surprising that the guiding principles prescribed by the legislation for application in cases concerning the guardianship or custody of children or related issues, are principles that seldom, if ever, permit syllogistic reasoning. [205] further, when considering the reasons given by a judge who has made an order in an application about the guardianship or custody of children, it is necessary to bear steadily in mind that the judge must grapple with the chaotic complexity of real life, make predictions not only of what he or she concludes may happen in future but also of what will be "best" for the child, and do so having regard to what the parties have chosen to contest or emphasise in the course of the hearing.
in most cases about parenting orders under the family law act there is no conceptual difficulty in the court applying the principle that the best interests of the child are the paramount consideration. however, that is not so when deciding upon orders in what have become known as “relocation cases”. that is because, when in relocation cases regard is also had to another consideration, namely the right to freedom of movement of a parent, a delicate interplay of concepts arises. that is on the most favourable view of it. on another view, that to which i incline, the result is an imbroglio of principles.
on the one hand, the appellate court is obliged to “give the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first instance.” on the other, it must, of necessity, observe the “natural limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on the record. these limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the “feeling” of a case which an appellate court, reading the transcript, cannot always fully share. furthermore, the appellate court does not typically get taken to, or read, all of the evidence taken at the trial. commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the obligation at trial to receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence and to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.
... [a] primary judge [is] obliged to give sufficient reasons to explain the overall result: not to explain every forensic step in reaching that result.
... it has to be remembered that no two cases which involve the possibility of children being moved from their established residence and from one of their parents will ever present in an exactly identical way to the judge or federal magistrate who has to determine such cases. in every such case, issues peculiar to that case will arise. moreover, no two judicial officers will necessarily see the issues arising in any particular case as capable of treatment (for example within the framework of the provisions of s 65daa) in exactly the same way.   the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))  ] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s 60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.  ] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.  ] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):  6] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.  ] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
i am conscious that a long-distance relationship, with longer but less frequent times spent together, is inevitably different from a relationship where people live closer together with regular face-to-face contact. but it does not itself mean it cannot be meaningful.
we also observe that in champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 the full court (thackray, o’ryan & benjamin jj) observed at [103]:
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994.) (emphasis in original)
the full court also observed at [191]: “the first and very important observation we would make about this complaint is that the expression ‘meaningful relationship’ is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’ ”.
a) in the absence of legislative direction, no single factor is dispositive of decisions governing residence of a child in a context of the proposed relocation of the parent with whom the child resides. (ams v aif, kirby j, [143], cf. powell v ptolemy, [48]). b) the over-arching issue is to ensure that any parenting order is in the best interests of the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [144], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [80],[138] hayne j, [171], bolitho v cohen, [71], powell v ptolemy, [40]). this is also to say that if there is a conflict between the welfare or best interests of the child, on the one hand, and the legitimate interests and desires of the parents, on the other, priority must be given to the best interests of the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [144], hayne j, [217-219], cf. goode v goode, [72]). c) freedom of movement of parents is a significant priority. that freedom is linked with the object of family law legislation to facilitate parties to a broken relationship to start a new life for themselves, including the possibility of forming a new relationship “free from unnecessary interference from a former spouse or partner or from a court.” (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]. on “freedom of movement” generally, see ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [40-45], gaudron j, [96], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [89], cf. powell v ptolemy, [36]. inhibition of movement may impinge upon the happiness of the custodial parent, which may in turn be transmitted to the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]).[139] freedom of movement, however, takes second place to the paramount interests of the child. d) there is no presumption in favour of a custodial parent to reside wherever he or she wishes. (ams v aif, kirby j, [146]). e) the applicant who seeks to relocate need not establish “compelling reasons” for such a move. (ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [47], gaudron j, [92], kirby j, [191] & [195], hayne j, [209], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [82]). nor does either party bear an onus to establish whether relocation is, or is not, in a child’s best interests. f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
b) the over-arching issue is to ensure that any parenting order is in the best interests of the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [144], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [80],[138] hayne j, [171], bolitho v cohen, [71], powell v ptolemy, [40]). this is also to say that if there is a conflict between the welfare or best interests of the child, on the one hand, and the legitimate interests and desires of the parents, on the other, priority must be given to the best interests of the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [144], hayne j, [217-219], cf. goode v goode, [72]). c) freedom of movement of parents is a significant priority. that freedom is linked with the object of family law legislation to facilitate parties to a broken relationship to start a new life for themselves, including the possibility of forming a new relationship “free from unnecessary interference from a former spouse or partner or from a court.” (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]. on “freedom of movement” generally, see ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [40-45], gaudron j, [96], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [89], cf. powell v ptolemy, [36]. inhibition of movement may impinge upon the happiness of the custodial parent, which may in turn be transmitted to the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]).[139] freedom of movement, however, takes second place to the paramount interests of the child. d) there is no presumption in favour of a custodial parent to reside wherever he or she wishes. (ams v aif, kirby j, [146]). e) the applicant who seeks to relocate need not establish “compelling reasons” for such a move. (ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [47], gaudron j, [92], kirby j, [191] & [195], hayne j, [209], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [82]). nor does either party bear an onus to establish whether relocation is, or is not, in a child’s best interests. f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
c) freedom of movement of parents is a significant priority. that freedom is linked with the object of family law legislation to facilitate parties to a broken relationship to start a new life for themselves, including the possibility of forming a new relationship “free from unnecessary interference from a former spouse or partner or from a court.” (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]. on “freedom of movement” generally, see ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [40-45], gaudron j, [96], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [89], cf. powell v ptolemy, [36]. inhibition of movement may impinge upon the happiness of the custodial parent, which may in turn be transmitted to the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]).[139] freedom of movement, however, takes second place to the paramount interests of the child. d) there is no presumption in favour of a custodial parent to reside wherever he or she wishes. (ams v aif, kirby j, [146]). e) the applicant who seeks to relocate need not establish “compelling reasons” for such a move. (ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [47], gaudron j, [92], kirby j, [191] & [195], hayne j, [209], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [82]). nor does either party bear an onus to establish whether relocation is, or is not, in a child’s best interests. f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
d) there is no presumption in favour of a custodial parent to reside wherever he or she wishes. (ams v aif, kirby j, [146]). e) the applicant who seeks to relocate need not establish “compelling reasons” for such a move. (ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [47], gaudron j, [92], kirby j, [191] & [195], hayne j, [209], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [82]). nor does either party bear an onus to establish whether relocation is, or is not, in a child’s best interests. f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
e) the applicant who seeks to relocate need not establish “compelling reasons” for such a move. (ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [47], gaudron j, [92], kirby j, [191] & [195], hayne j, [209], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [82]). nor does either party bear an onus to establish whether relocation is, or is not, in a child’s best interests. f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
we agree that when dealing with a case concerning the future living arrangements for a child, and involving a significant change in the geographical place where the child is to live, the preferred approach according to established principle has been not to deal with that change, or relocation, as a separate or discrete issue, but rather as just one of the proposals for the child’s future living arrangements, at least in so far as that approach is possible.
in sealey & archer [2008] famcafc 142 the full court (bryant cj, finn and thackray jj) said at paragraph 63:
while it has been recognised that the act does not provide any express direction or guidance as to the overall order in which the provisions of part vii must be applied (taylor & barker [2007] fam ca 1236, (2007) flc 93-345 at [62]), the legislation does require in s 61da that when a court makes a parenting order, it must apply the presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child (unless there are circumstances in which the presumption does not apply, or in which it would be inappropriate to apply it, or it is rebutted), and it further requires in s 65daa that if there is to be equal shared parental responsibility for the child, consideration must be given to the child spending equal time (or if not, substantial and significant time) with each parent.
and at paragraphs 66 and 67:
again as was recognised in taylor & barker (supra, see in particular paragraphs 58 and 77-83), in a case which involves a proposal that there be a significant change in the place where a child lives, it is appropriate for a court in its application of s 65daa, and particularly s 65daa(5), to canvass the advantages and disadvantages of a proposal “to re-locate” the child. we would also expect that the court would have addressed the matters arising under s 65daa(5) in the context of its consideration of relevant s 60cc matters.
in making the latter observation, we should say that we do not see anything said in taylor & barker as suggesting that a trial judge would ignore the relocation proposal when making the necessary s 60cc findings...
... the apportionment of weight or importance to evidence is a matter for the exercise in relation to such asserted errors in the exercise of discretion is high (see gronow v gronow [1979] hca 63, (1979) 144 clr 513).  ] there is an inherent tension between, on the one hand, separated parents being able to establish new homes wherever they like and, on the other, their restraint by injunction from living too far apart to avoid any impingement of their children’s ability to retain meaningful relationships with both parents. the conflict is between the best interests of the children to know and have regular personal contact with each parent and the interests of the parents to enjoy a high measure of freedom of movement which is not lost by reason only of their parental responsibility for the children (see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 (“ams v aif”) at 196, 206, 207-208, 210) ... [28] while the children’s interests are paramount, their interests are not the sole determinant of parenting orders under part vii of the act (ams v aif at 207, 225, 230, u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 (“u v u”) at 282). parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they please as is compatible with their obligations pertaining to the children (see ams v aif at 223-224, 231-232 ... only when the children’s welfare would be adversely affected must a parent’s right to freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the children’s best interests (see u v u at 262).
as the full court said in malcolm and munro [2011] famcafc 16, (2011) flc 93-460 at [83]:
we emphasise that it is not the law that a parent wishing to relocate must establish compelling reasons for this to be permissible: see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160, 179, and u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238, 259-260. equally, there is no onus on a parent who may be “left behind” to demonstrate reasons as to why the other parent should not relocate. but it is properly part of a court’s inquiry to consider what each parent proposes and to determine the context of those plans and reasons for them in determining what is in the best interests of a child.
we agree with counsel for the mother that it was necessary for the primary judge to consider the totality of the evidence concerning family violence and reflect on the reality of how these parents could give effect to an order for equal shared parental responsibility before an order of that type could be made. to isolate the relevance of evidence of family violence merely to the application of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility was wrong. it was plainly relevant to the broader question of the allocation of parental responsibility once that issue was at large.
we pause here to observe that the task before the primary judge was to determine what parenting orders were in the child’s best interests. it was not to determine the location in which the mother was “permitted” to live. the use of that phrase in the context that it was used tends to focus on the mother having to justify to the court where she wishes to live and obtain its approval. the use of that phrase obscures, if not overrides, the mother’s undoubted right to live where she chooses as explained in ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at [92] and [191] and u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 (“u v u”) at [37], [137] and [176].
consideration and disposition
conclusion
associate: dated: 31 august 2023
dated: 31 august 2023
[1] t 9. [2] t 9 – 10. [3] t 10. [4] t 11. [5] t 11.[6] t 12. [7] t 12. [8] t 13. [9] t 13 – 14. [10] t 14. [11] t 15. [12] t 15 – 16. [13] t 15 & 16.[14] t 19 – 22. [15] t 23. [16] these and other matters will be re-visited later in the light of evidence provided in a report on the mother’s behalf by psychiatrist, dr m, briefly noted later. regrettably, and without explanation, there was no evidence from the mother’s treating psychologist/counsellor.[17] see the well-known principles in jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298.[18] 24 – 25. [19] t 25. dr m was not required for cross examination.[20] t 30 – 31. [21] t 32. [22] t 33 – 36. [23] in this regard, i note that the medical records for the hospital visit the next day (tender bundle p.49) “prescribed” that the mother to “keep monitoring [...] swelling ...”, and “can give panadol 6 hourly as required for pain.”[24] t 39. [25] t 41 – 43. [26] t 43 – 44. [27] t 45 – 50. [28] t 50.[29] t 53 – 54. [30] t56 – 57. [31] t 57 – 58. [32] t 58 – 61. [33] t 64 [34] 65 – 67. [35] t 67 – 69. [36] t 71. [37] t 74 – 75. [38] t 75 – 78. [39] t 80 – 83. [40] see t 85 – 87. [41] t 88. [42] t 90 – 93. [43] t 93 – 94. [44] t 95 – 97; tc 2. [45] t 100. [46] t 100. it was confirmed that the father’s hair follicle test dealt with both drugs and alcohol. it was negative on both counts.[47] t 100 – 101. [48] t 107 – 108. [49] 109. [50] tb 3 – 4. [51] tb 5 – 6. [52] tb 8. [53] tb 9 –10. [54] tb 15 – 16. [55] tb 17 – 18. [56] tb 19. [57] tb 21 – 22. [58] tb 22. [59] tb 27 – 28. [60] t 29 - [61] tb 37.[62] tb 37 – 38. [63] tb 38 - [64] tb 38 – 42. [65] tb 43. [66] tb 44. [67] tb 48. [68] tb 51 – 54. [69] tb 55. [70] tb 55 – 57.[71] tb 57 – 58. [72] tb 59. [73] tb 62 – 63. [74] tb 64. [75] tb 73 – 74. [76] tb 74 – 75. [77] tb 75. [78] tb 77 – 78. [79] tb 79. [80] tb 80 – 82. [81] tb 83 – 85. [82] tb 86. [83] tb 89. [84] tb 90. [85] tb 92. [86] tb 97. [87] tc 8 – 10. [88] tc 10. [89] tc 12 – 13. [90] tc 19 – 20. [91] tc 22 – 23. [92] tc 24. [93] tc 32 – 33. [94] tc 33 – 34. [95] tc 37 – 38. [96] tc 39. [97] tc 40. [98] tc 42 – 43. [99] tc 44 – 45. [100] tc 45 – 47. [101] tc 48 – 49. [102] tc 50. [103] tc 60. [104] tc 61. [105] tc 62, [106] tc 62. [107] tc 66 – 67. [108] tc 69 – 70. [109] t 34.[110] see t 77 & 78.[111] the contours of this abbreviated preliminary view are to be found at tc 56 & 57.[112] tc 75. [113] tc 75 – 77.[114] t 76 & 77.[115] tc 80. [116] tc 80. [117] tc 81.[118] tc 83. [119] tc 85 – 86. [120] tc 90 – 91. [121] see also par. 27 of ms g’s family report dated 31st october 2022. [122] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238.[123] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.211 [150].[124] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.228 [204] & [205]. of course, the comments by both kirby & hayne jj were in a legislative context different to that which operates today. accepting that qualification, respectfully, their honour’s comments remain important.[125] b & b [2006] famca 1207 at [1]. warnick j was sitting as the full court, pursuant to s.94aaa of the act.[126] fox v percy (2003) 214 clr 118 at pp.125-126 [23]. see also the extensive discussion by mchugh j in the same case at [65] – [93].[127] franklyn & franklyn [2021] famcafc 112; (2021) flc 94-031.[128] wiley & wiley [2008] famcafc 153 at [70].[129] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238 at p.283 [164]. his honour observed: “it is also highly desirable that courts, such as this court and the family court of australia, should consider such [relocation] cases in accordance with principles that are consistent, conformable to like legislation and attentive to the paramount consideration of the best interests of the child, viewed in the long term and not just the short term.”[130] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[131] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. the full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[132] godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102; (2007) 208 flr 287.[133] m v s [2006] famca 1408; (2008) 37 fam lr 32.[134] mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483.[135] sigley & evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[136] f v f [2007] fmcafam 831; (2008) 38 fam lr 52 at pp.56-58 [7]. a more abbreviated summary is provided by ryan j in sheldon & weir (no.3) [2010] famca 1138 at [244] & [245].[137] it will be seen that, in the light of full court authority which confirmed that the earlier decision of a and a [2000] famca 751; (2000) flc 93-035 no longer reflects the principles to be applied in relocation cases and, therefore, should not now be followed, all references to that case have been omitted. see hepburn & noble [2010] famcafc 111; (2010) flc 93-438 at [100], and cales & cales [2010] famcafc 237; (2010) 44 fam lr 376 at [139].[138] it should be noted that in u v u, gleeson cj agreed with the judgment of gummow & callinan jj, as well as with the comments of hayne j. see (2002) 211 clr at p.240 [1].[139] cf. payne v payne [2001] ewca civ 166; [2001] fam 473, where thorpe lj, summarised, at [26], the two governing propositions under uk legislation and judicial authority over 30 years in relocation cases as (a) the welfare of the child is the paramount consideration and (b) refusing the primary carer’s reasonable proposals for relocation of her family life is likely to impact detrimentally on the welfare of her dependent children. see also the reasons of dame butler-sloss p [85], as well as the comments of bryant cj and finn j in taylor & barker [2007] fam ca 1236; (2007) 37 fam lr 461 at [84] – [113].[140] mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483. see also the full court’s discussion in starr & duggan [2009] famcafc 115 at [38] & [39], and by ryan j in sheldon & weir (no.3) at [242] – [243].[141] blanding v blanding [2016] famcafc 21; (2016) 55 fam lr 218.[142] franklyn & franklyn [2019] famcafc 256.[143] hendy & penningh [2018] famcafc 257; (2018) flc 93-879.[144] asher v wilkinson (2021) 61 fam lr 523.[145] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238.[146] hendy & penningh [2018] famcafc 257; (2018) flc 93-879.