last updated: 25 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
radek & radek [2023] fedcfamc2f 1153
orders
the court orders that:  contemporaneously with the payment, the wife shall be declared to be the sole legal and beneficial owner of the property at b street, suburb c being lot ... in deposited plan ... and subject to the mortgage number ... to d company. (b) contemporaneously with the above declaration the wife shall, (i) do all such acts, execute all such documents and pay all such moneys as are necessary to discharge the parties’ mortgage to e bank in respect of the property at b street, suburb c, or refinance such mortgage so that the husband is removed as a borrower therefrom.   contemporaneously with the above declaration the wife shall, (i) do all such acts, execute all such documents and pay all such moneys as are necessary to discharge the parties’ mortgage to e bank in respect of the property at b street, suburb c, or refinance such mortgage so that the husband is removed as a borrower therefrom.   do all such acts, execute all such documents and pay all such moneys as are necessary to discharge the parties’ mortgage to e bank in respect of the property at b street, suburb c, or refinance such mortgage so that the husband is removed as a borrower therefrom.   each party be solely entitled to all property including choses-in-action in the possession of such party as the date of these orders, (b) any moneys standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (c) each party forgoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save for the superannuation splitting orders as provided for in these reasons, (d) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (e) each party is solely liable for and indemnifies the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   any moneys standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (c) each party forgoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save for the superannuation splitting orders as provided for in these reasons, (d) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (e) each party is solely liable for and indemnifies the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   each party forgoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save for the superannuation splitting orders as provided for in these reasons, (d) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (e) each party is solely liable for and indemnifies the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (e) each party is solely liable for and indemnifies the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   each party is solely liable for and indemnifies the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the husband and wife in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.
reasons for judgment
judge betts
overview
the orders have not been complied with.
the hearing & material relied upon
husband:  case outline document filed 09/06/23, (b) amended initiating application filed 15/05/23, (c) affidavit of the husband filed 15/05/23, (d) financial statement of the husband filed 15/05/23.   amended initiating application filed 15/05/23, (c) affidavit of the husband filed 15/05/23, (d) financial statement of the husband filed 15/05/23.   affidavit of the husband filed 15/05/23, (d) financial statement of the husband filed 15/05/23.   financial statement of the husband filed 15/05/23.
wife:  case outline document filed 13/06/23, (b) second amended response filed 16/05/23. this document was superseded by a corrected version. (the husband did not object), (c) affidavit of the wife filed 16/05/23, (d) financial statement of the wife filed 16/05/23.   second amended response filed 16/05/23. this document was superseded by a corrected version. (the husband did not object), (c) affidavit of the wife filed 16/05/23, (d) financial statement of the wife filed 16/05/23.   affidavit of the wife filed 16/05/23, (d) financial statement of the wife filed 16/05/23.   financial statement of the wife filed 16/05/23.
the law  identify and value the property, liabilities, and financial resources of the parties (the balance sheet), consider whether it is just and equitable to make any property settlement order, (b) if it is, then identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards the net assets as required by s 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) of the act. for convenience, each party’s respective contributions-based entitlement will be expressed in percentage terms, (c) identify and assess the relevant “future factors” set out in s 75(2) of the act, including any relevant matters arising pursuant to section 79(4)(d), (f) and (g) of the act. i will then determine what (if any) adjustment ought be made to the parties’ respective contributions-based entitlements on account of such matters, (d) lastly, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that any overall property settlement order i am contemplating is ‘just and equitable’.
consider whether it is just and equitable to make any property settlement order, (b) if it is, then identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards the net assets as required by s 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) of the act. for convenience, each party’s respective contributions-based entitlement will be expressed in percentage terms, (c) identify and assess the relevant “future factors” set out in s 75(2) of the act, including any relevant matters arising pursuant to section 79(4)(d), (f) and (g) of the act. i will then determine what (if any) adjustment ought be made to the parties’ respective contributions-based entitlements on account of such matters, (d) lastly, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that any overall property settlement order i am contemplating is ‘just and equitable’.   if it is, then identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards the net assets as required by s 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) of the act. for convenience, each party’s respective contributions-based entitlement will be expressed in percentage terms, (c) identify and assess the relevant “future factors” set out in s 75(2) of the act, including any relevant matters arising pursuant to section 79(4)(d), (f) and (g) of the act. i will then determine what (if any) adjustment ought be made to the parties’ respective contributions-based entitlements on account of such matters, (d) lastly, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that any overall property settlement order i am contemplating is ‘just and equitable’.   identify and assess the relevant “future factors” set out in s 75(2) of the act, including any relevant matters arising pursuant to section 79(4)(d), (f) and (g) of the act. i will then determine what (if any) adjustment ought be made to the parties’ respective contributions-based entitlements on account of such matters, (d) lastly, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that any overall property settlement order i am contemplating is ‘just and equitable’.   lastly, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that any overall property settlement order i am contemplating is ‘just and equitable’.
the balance sheet
assets
item
description
value (h)
value (w)
value adopted
1
b street, suburb c (w)
$1,965,000
2
furniture & furnishings incl jewellery (w) *
$25,000
$ disregard
3
j company shares (w)
$53,568
4
motor vehicle 1 (w)
$5,000
5
k bank account (w)
$124
6
l bank account (w)
$1
$ disregard (de minimis)
7
m street suburb o (h)
$1,090,000
8
motor vehicle 2 (h)
$60,000
9
furniture & furnishings (h) *
$10,000
10
westpac bank account (h)
$8,205
11
commonwealth bank account (joint)
sub-total:
$3,181,897
add-backs
12
e bank mortgage redraw (w)
$1,825 but abandoned
$0
liabilities
13
e bank mortgage suburb c (joint)
$298,406
14
l bank home mortgage suburb o (h)
$622,667
15
lease on motor vehicle 2 (h)
$69,504
16
p company personal loan (h)
$10,085
17
ato debt for fy 2023 (h) *
$88,378
$disregard
$1,000,662
superannuation
18
super fund 1 (h)
$477,558
19
super fund 2 (w)
$157,682
$635,240
financial resources
20
q company shares (on trust for the children)
$95,737
items 2 & 9 – furniture & furnishings of the parties (including jewellery of the wife)
item 17 – husband’s anticipated ato debt for fy 2023
is it just & equitable to make a property settlement order?
step 3 – assessment of contributions:
initial contributions
contributions during the relationship
“[i]t was heartbreaking, confronting, but most of all it was relentless and exhausting. i still had two other young children to look after, and my husband had a demanding job, so, i felt like i was doing it all alone.”
post-separation  installed a solar panel system, with the assistance of a personal loan from ‘p company’ as set out in the balance sheet, (b) attended to interior and exterior painting, (c) knocked out an interior wall to open up the living/dining area, (d) changed lights and installed curtains, (e) undertaken some tiling and replaced some taps and fittings, (f) resurfaced the bar area and installed led lights, (g) created a gym in the garage and a library, (h) installed artificial grass and undertaken some landscaping, (i) installed a picture rail.   attended to interior and exterior painting, (c) knocked out an interior wall to open up the living/dining area, (d) changed lights and installed curtains, (e) undertaken some tiling and replaced some taps and fittings, (f) resurfaced the bar area and installed led lights, (g) created a gym in the garage and a library, (h) installed artificial grass and undertaken some landscaping, (i) installed a picture rail.   knocked out an interior wall to open up the living/dining area, (d) changed lights and installed curtains, (e) undertaken some tiling and replaced some taps and fittings, (f) resurfaced the bar area and installed led lights, (g) created a gym in the garage and a library, (h) installed artificial grass and undertaken some landscaping, (i) installed a picture rail.   changed lights and installed curtains, (e) undertaken some tiling and replaced some taps and fittings, (f) resurfaced the bar area and installed led lights, (g) created a gym in the garage and a library, (h) installed artificial grass and undertaken some landscaping, (i) installed a picture rail.   undertaken some tiling and replaced some taps and fittings, (f) resurfaced the bar area and installed led lights, (g) created a gym in the garage and a library, (h) installed artificial grass and undertaken some landscaping, (i) installed a picture rail.   resurfaced the bar area and installed led lights, (g) created a gym in the garage and a library, (h) installed artificial grass and undertaken some landscaping, (i) installed a picture rail.   created a gym in the garage and a library, (h) installed artificial grass and undertaken some landscaping, (i) installed a picture rail.   installed artificial grass and undertaken some landscaping, (i) installed a picture rail.   installed a picture rail.
overall assessment of contributions  in respect of the non-superannuation property – 53% to the wife and 47% to the husband, (b) in respect of the superannuation property – 50% to the wife and 50% to the husband, ie. that their combined superannuation should be divided equally, (c) in respect of the q company shares (financial resource) – 50% to the wife and 50% to the husband.   in respect of the superannuation property – 50% to the wife and 50% to the husband, ie. that their combined superannuation should be divided equally, (c) in respect of the q company shares (financial resource) – 50% to the wife and 50% to the husband.   in respect of the q company shares (financial resource) – 50% to the wife and 50% to the husband.   in respect of the non-superannuation property – $1,156,055 to the wife and $1,025,180 to the husband, (b) in respect of the superannuation – $317,620 each.   in respect of the superannuation – $317,620 each.
step 4 – adjustments for future factors:
being a weekly total of $4,381.
“i don’t determine that, it depends on [y] and his need for support.”
appropriate s 75(2) adjustment  the wife is entitled to 73% of the non-superannuation property, being $1,592,302. the husband is entitled to 27% or $588,933, (b) the wife is entitled to 55% of the combined superannuation property, or $349,382. the husband is entitled to 45% or $285,858.   the wife is entitled to 55% of the combined superannuation property, or $349,382. the husband is entitled to 45% or $285,858.
step 5 – considering the effect of my findings / ensuring a just & equitable outcome:
conclusion & orders:
associate: dated: 1 september 2023
dated: 1 september 2023
[1] exhibit 4[2] exhibit 2[3] see for instance exhibit 3[4] paras 54 and 55 of their honours’ judgment at p 81,456