last updated: 25 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
breton & breton (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 1157
orders
the court orders that:  any school, after school care provider or extracurricular activity provider that y attends from time to time, (b) any medical or allied health professional upon whom y attends from time to time, (c) any government or non-government agency in relation to any matters concerning: (i) parental responsibility, (ii) the care of y, (iii) the personal protection of y and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining passports for y, and (v) y travelling outside the commonwealth of australia.   any medical or allied health professional upon whom y attends from time to time, (c) any government or non-government agency in relation to any matters concerning: (i) parental responsibility, (ii) the care of y, (iii) the personal protection of y and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining passports for y, and (v) y travelling outside the commonwealth of australia.   any government or non-government agency in relation to any matters concerning: (i) parental responsibility, (ii) the care of y, (iii) the personal protection of y and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining passports for y, and (v) y travelling outside the commonwealth of australia.   parental responsibility, (ii) the care of y, (iii) the personal protection of y and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining passports for y, and (v) y travelling outside the commonwealth of australia.  ) the care of y, (iii) the personal protection of y and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining passports for y, and (v) y travelling outside the commonwealth of australia.  i) the personal protection of y and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining passports for y, and (v) y travelling outside the commonwealth of australia.  ) applying for and obtaining passports for y, and (v) y travelling outside the commonwealth of australia.   y travelling outside the commonwealth of australia.   denigrating each other or their family to or in the presence and/or hearing of the children and from permitting anybody else to do so, (b) discussing these proceedings with the children in their presence and/or hearing and from permitting anybody else to do so, (c) exposing the children or either of them to any form of family violence, and (d) permitting the children or any of them to read or be exposed to any documents filed or produced in these proceedings.   discussing these proceedings with the children in their presence and/or hearing and from permitting anybody else to do so, (c) exposing the children or either of them to any form of family violence, and (d) permitting the children or any of them to read or be exposed to any documents filed or produced in these proceedings.   exposing the children or either of them to any form of family violence, and (d) permitting the children or any of them to read or be exposed to any documents filed or produced in these proceedings.   permitting the children or any of them to read or be exposed to any documents filed or produced in these proceedings.
reasons for judgment
judge blake:
background
the care arrangments of the children since separation
child
periods spent living with the mother since separation
periods spent living with the father since separation
z
from 16 july 2018 to 22 april 2019.
since 22 april 2019 to present.
x
from 16 july 2018 to october 2018. from 8 september 2020 to 18 october 2022.
from 8 september 2020 to 18 october 2022.
from october 2018 to 8 september 2020. from 18 october 2022 to present.
from 18 october 2022 to present.
y
from 16 july 2018 to 22 april 2019. from 8 september 2020 to present.
from 8 september 2020 to present.
from 22 april 2019 to 8 september 2020.
issues and position of the parties  that the father have sole parental responsibility for x, that x live with the father and spend time with her in accordance with x’s wishes, (b) that she have sole parental responsibility for y and that y spend no time and have no communication with the father (and by extension, with his brothers), and (c) various injunctions restraining the father, his servants or agents from approaching or communicating with y, and from approaching or coming within 200 metres of her home or place of work.   that she have sole parental responsibility for y and that y spend no time and have no communication with the father (and by extension, with his brothers), and (c) various injunctions restraining the father, his servants or agents from approaching or communicating with y, and from approaching or coming within 200 metres of her home or place of work.   various injunctions restraining the father, his servants or agents from approaching or communicating with y, and from approaching or coming within 200 metres of her home or place of work.   he have sole parental responsibility for x and y, (b) x spend time with the mother in accordance with his wishes, and (c) y spend time with the mother each alternate saturday from the conclusion of her work until the commencement of school on monday, for periods during each school holidays and for other special occasions.   x spend time with the mother in accordance with his wishes, and (c) y spend time with the mother each alternate saturday from the conclusion of her work until the commencement of school on monday, for periods during each school holidays and for other special occasions.   y spend time with the mother each alternate saturday from the conclusion of her work until the commencement of school on monday, for periods during each school holidays and for other special occasions.   the father have sole parental responsibility for x and that x live with the father, (b) the mother have sole parental responsibility for y and that y with the mother, (c) x spend time with the mother and communicate with her in accordance with his wishes, and (d) y spend time with the father and his brothers on four occasions each year, with such time to be professionally supervised by m contact service.   the mother have sole parental responsibility for y and that y with the mother, (c) x spend time with the mother and communicate with her in accordance with his wishes, and (d) y spend time with the father and his brothers on four occasions each year, with such time to be professionally supervised by m contact service.   x spend time with the mother and communicate with her in accordance with his wishes, and (d) y spend time with the father and his brothers on four occasions each year, with such time to be professionally supervised by m contact service.   y spend time with the father and his brothers on four occasions each year, with such time to be professionally supervised by m contact service.
evidence   he failed to answer questions directly about the threat he made to kill the mother in front of a worker from f contact service, (b) he was unable to clearly answer how he would encourage the children, but in particular y, to spend time with the mother, despite the fact that the father proposed an order that he would use his ‘best endeavours to encourage the children to spend time with the mother’, (c) he sought to avoid answering questions as to whether it was true that the two older children don’t wish to see their mother, and (d) when he was asked about the existence of a girlfriend in country p.   he was unable to clearly answer how he would encourage the children, but in particular y, to spend time with the mother, despite the fact that the father proposed an order that he would use his ‘best endeavours to encourage the children to spend time with the mother’, (c) he sought to avoid answering questions as to whether it was true that the two older children don’t wish to see their mother, and (d) when he was asked about the existence of a girlfriend in country p.   he sought to avoid answering questions as to whether it was true that the two older children don’t wish to see their mother, and (d) when he was asked about the existence of a girlfriend in country p.   when he was asked about the existence of a girlfriend in country p.   he told the court that he thought the children should spend time with their mother (which reflects the position in his response that the children should spend time with their mother and that he would encourage them to do so). in his affidavit, he also claimed to encourage the older children to call their mother. however, he also told the court that the mother’s name is never mentioned in his house, and that he never told x to return to the mother’s care in october 2022, and (b) he told the court that the law was important, but then admitted he had failed to comply with the orders of the court during the covid-19 lockdowns (in circumstances where he had read the statement of the chief justice as to what was to occur during lockdowns).   he told the court that the law was important, but then admitted he had failed to comply with the orders of the court during the covid-19 lockdowns (in circumstances where he had read the statement of the chief justice as to what was to occur during lockdowns).
the law
‘the ordinary standard of proof required of a party who bares the onus in civil litigation in this country is proof on the balance of probabilities. that remains so even where the matter to be proved involves criminal conduct or fraud. on the other hand, the strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts on the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature of what is sought to prove. thus, authoritative statements have often been made to the effect that clear or cogent or strict proof is necessary “where so serious a matter as fraud is to be found”. statements to that effect should not, however, be understood as directed to the standard of proof. rather, they should be understood as merely reflecting a conventional perception that members of our society do not ordinarily engage in fraudulent or criminal conduct and a judicial approach that a court should not likely make a finding that, on the balance of probabilities, a party to civil litigation has been guilty of such conduct.’ (citations omitted) (see also, the statement of dixon j in briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 at 362 (‘briginshaw’))   stated risks, like all prospective events, are capable of classification in only one of three mutually exclusive categories: possibilities, probabilities or certainties. once it is accepted courts should react to dangers in the form of risks of harm which may merely be possibilities, it is an oxymoron to expect such possibilities to then be forensically proven on the balance of probabilities according to the civil standard of proof (at [7]), (b) rejected the proposition that a finding of unacceptable risk needs to be made according to the civil standard of proof, and expressly endorsed the comments and approach of austin j in fitzwater v fitzwater [2019] famcafc 251, (2019) 60 fam lr 212 at [132]- [142] (at [50]-[51]), (c) noted that the act in its present form is more comprehensive than what it was when m v m was decided (at [58]), and that the terms of the act are pre-eminent and the provisions within section 60cc and 60cg are wide enough to embrace most, if not all, assertions of an unacceptable risk of harm to children, and so it is preferable for litigants to conduct their parenting disputes by reference to the express provisions of the act, and (d) stated the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary, and that the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. the full court went on to state it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion. that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations set out in section 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one (at [85]).   rejected the proposition that a finding of unacceptable risk needs to be made according to the civil standard of proof, and expressly endorsed the comments and approach of austin j in fitzwater v fitzwater [2019] famcafc 251, (2019) 60 fam lr 212 at [132]- [142] (at [50]-[51]), (c) noted that the act in its present form is more comprehensive than what it was when m v m was decided (at [58]), and that the terms of the act are pre-eminent and the provisions within section 60cc and 60cg are wide enough to embrace most, if not all, assertions of an unacceptable risk of harm to children, and so it is preferable for litigants to conduct their parenting disputes by reference to the express provisions of the act, and (d) stated the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary, and that the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. the full court went on to state it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion. that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations set out in section 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one (at [85]).   noted that the act in its present form is more comprehensive than what it was when m v m was decided (at [58]), and that the terms of the act are pre-eminent and the provisions within section 60cc and 60cg are wide enough to embrace most, if not all, assertions of an unacceptable risk of harm to children, and so it is preferable for litigants to conduct their parenting disputes by reference to the express provisions of the act, and (d) stated the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary, and that the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. the full court went on to state it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion. that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations set out in section 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one (at [85]).   stated the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary, and that the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. the full court went on to state it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion. that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations set out in section 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one (at [85]).   the principles above are applicable to all allegations of risk of harm, including family violence, and are not confined to allegations of risk by reason of sexual abuse: see a v a [1998] famca 25, (1998) flc 92-800 at 84,994 – 84,995, and (b) the process of evaluating whatever allegations are made must be conducted vigorously as the termination of a relationship between a child and the allegedly abusive parent is generally to be the course of last resort: see keane & keane [2020] famca 99 at [77] referring in turn to the full court in re w (sex abuse: standard of proof) [2004] famca 768, (2004) flc 93-192 at 79,217-8.   the process of evaluating whatever allegations are made must be conducted vigorously as the termination of a relationship between a child and the allegedly abusive parent is generally to be the course of last resort: see keane & keane [2020] famca 99 at [77] referring in turn to the full court in re w (sex abuse: standard of proof) [2004] famca 768, (2004) flc 93-192 at 79,217-8.
best interest considerations
the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm, etc
the father’s allegations about the mother   in around mid-2018, the mother pushed x hard enough for him to hit his head, (b) at the end of 2018, the mother hit x in her bedroom and threatened to kick x until he died, (c) the mother physically assaulted z and would grab him by the throat and push him against the wall, (d) in around early 2019 the mother refused to feed z, and (e) that the mother told z she would get her new partner to ‘bash him up’.   at the end of 2018, the mother hit x in her bedroom and threatened to kick x until he died, (c) the mother physically assaulted z and would grab him by the throat and push him against the wall, (d) in around early 2019 the mother refused to feed z, and (e) that the mother told z she would get her new partner to ‘bash him up’.   the mother physically assaulted z and would grab him by the throat and push him against the wall, (d) in around early 2019 the mother refused to feed z, and (e) that the mother told z she would get her new partner to ‘bash him up’.   in around early 2019 the mother refused to feed z, and (e) that the mother told z she would get her new partner to ‘bash him up’.   that the mother told z she would get her new partner to ‘bash him up’.   in around late 2018, y developed a habit of pulling his pants down, (b) in mid-2020, y said to the father words to the effect that he should not put his penis in his mouth because he will get sick. questioned about this, y apparently told the father that he had heard those words from his uncle (who i understand to be a friend of the mother’s or the mother’s partner), and (c) in mid-2020, y told his brothers that the mother had said to an uncle words to the effect that y’s penis tastes very nice.   in mid-2020, y said to the father words to the effect that he should not put his penis in his mouth because he will get sick. questioned about this, y apparently told the father that he had heard those words from his uncle (who i understand to be a friend of the mother’s or the mother’s partner), and (c) in mid-2020, y told his brothers that the mother had said to an uncle words to the effect that y’s penis tastes very nice.   in mid-2020, y told his brothers that the mother had said to an uncle words to the effect that y’s penis tastes very nice.
the allegations by the mother about the father  that in 2005, the father accused her of having sex with her own father, and that the father told her that he thought z was the result of that relationship with her father. when she denied this, the father abused her and called her a ‘bitch’ and a ‘slut’, (b) that in late 2006, she arrived home late from work. the father accused her of having an affair, hit her, slapped her across the face, punched her in the arms and stomach, and dragged her by the hair in front of z. the mother applied (but ultimately did not pursue) an application for an intervention order in late 2006. that application contains a description from the mother of the assault the father perpetrated upon her. the assault occurred in the presence of z, (c) that in early 2014, she and the father began arguing, and the father grabbed the phone out of her hand and hit her over the head with it. she grabbed an object to try to defend herself and the father grabbed her by the throat and pushed her against the wall. this occurred in the presence of z and x. the mother applied (but ultimately did not pursue) for an intervention order in early 2014. that application contains a description from the mother of the father hitting her in the head with a phone and pushing her in the throat. that the assault occurred in the presence of z and x, (d) that in late 2016, the father called his mother-in-law in country g and got in a heated argument with her. the father threatened to kill the mother, telling his mother-in-law that he was sharpening his knife. police attended the home. a safety notice was issued against the father to protect the mother and the children. the mother applied for an intervention order. that application discloses allegations that the father had threatened to kill his mother-in-law in country g, which he admitted, but said that the threats were not serious, and (e) that in mid-2018, the father attended her home, accused her father of sexually abusing her sister, told her she was a bad mother, accused her of having sex with other men, and called her a ‘bitch’ and a ‘slut’. this all occurred in the presence of other persons including the children. the police told the mother to apply for an intervention order, which she did.   that in late 2006, she arrived home late from work. the father accused her of having an affair, hit her, slapped her across the face, punched her in the arms and stomach, and dragged her by the hair in front of z. the mother applied (but ultimately did not pursue) an application for an intervention order in late 2006. that application contains a description from the mother of the assault the father perpetrated upon her. the assault occurred in the presence of z, (c) that in early 2014, she and the father began arguing, and the father grabbed the phone out of her hand and hit her over the head with it. she grabbed an object to try to defend herself and the father grabbed her by the throat and pushed her against the wall. this occurred in the presence of z and x. the mother applied (but ultimately did not pursue) for an intervention order in early 2014. that application contains a description from the mother of the father hitting her in the head with a phone and pushing her in the throat. that the assault occurred in the presence of z and x, (d) that in late 2016, the father called his mother-in-law in country g and got in a heated argument with her. the father threatened to kill the mother, telling his mother-in-law that he was sharpening his knife. police attended the home. a safety notice was issued against the father to protect the mother and the children. the mother applied for an intervention order. that application discloses allegations that the father had threatened to kill his mother-in-law in country g, which he admitted, but said that the threats were not serious, and (e) that in mid-2018, the father attended her home, accused her father of sexually abusing her sister, told her she was a bad mother, accused her of having sex with other men, and called her a ‘bitch’ and a ‘slut’. this all occurred in the presence of other persons including the children. the police told the mother to apply for an intervention order, which she did.   that in early 2014, she and the father began arguing, and the father grabbed the phone out of her hand and hit her over the head with it. she grabbed an object to try to defend herself and the father grabbed her by the throat and pushed her against the wall. this occurred in the presence of z and x. the mother applied (but ultimately did not pursue) for an intervention order in early 2014. that application contains a description from the mother of the father hitting her in the head with a phone and pushing her in the throat. that the assault occurred in the presence of z and x, (d) that in late 2016, the father called his mother-in-law in country g and got in a heated argument with her. the father threatened to kill the mother, telling his mother-in-law that he was sharpening his knife. police attended the home. a safety notice was issued against the father to protect the mother and the children. the mother applied for an intervention order. that application discloses allegations that the father had threatened to kill his mother-in-law in country g, which he admitted, but said that the threats were not serious, and (e) that in mid-2018, the father attended her home, accused her father of sexually abusing her sister, told her she was a bad mother, accused her of having sex with other men, and called her a ‘bitch’ and a ‘slut’. this all occurred in the presence of other persons including the children. the police told the mother to apply for an intervention order, which she did.   that in late 2016, the father called his mother-in-law in country g and got in a heated argument with her. the father threatened to kill the mother, telling his mother-in-law that he was sharpening his knife. police attended the home. a safety notice was issued against the father to protect the mother and the children. the mother applied for an intervention order. that application discloses allegations that the father had threatened to kill his mother-in-law in country g, which he admitted, but said that the threats were not serious, and (e) that in mid-2018, the father attended her home, accused her father of sexually abusing her sister, told her she was a bad mother, accused her of having sex with other men, and called her a ‘bitch’ and a ‘slut’. this all occurred in the presence of other persons including the children. the police told the mother to apply for an intervention order, which she did.   that in mid-2018, the father attended her home, accused her father of sexually abusing her sister, told her she was a bad mother, accused her of having sex with other men, and called her a ‘bitch’ and a ‘slut’. this all occurred in the presence of other persons including the children. the police told the mother to apply for an intervention order, which she did.
surrounding or corroborating evidence
the reports from dhhs  there was a pattern of ongoing parental conflict regarding separation, child care, and custody, (b) there were a number of family violence incidents to which police have responded. however, there has been limited evidence of violence upon police attendance and thus, limited ability to substantiate factual information, (c) information gathered indicated the father persistently made efforts to discredit the mother and that the father appears to have aligned the children to himself and alienated the children from their mother, (d) the mother admitted using physical chastisement as a form of discipline historically, although denied recent significant use. the father denied physical chastisement of the children, although x reported that his father hits him. x expressed genuine fear of the father, however he subsequently retracted his statement and indicated this was historical only, (e) the report writer directly observed, during a home visit, the father speaking negatively about the mother, (f) the father had received a recent warning from x’s school about the father’s inappropriate behaviour towards other adults at the school grounds, (g) the father was proactive in seeking supports, (h) z and x reported physical chastisement, verbal aggression, and poor parenting whilst in their mother’s care, both historically and recently. both children appeared to idolise their father and made no disclosures of any significant harm perpetrated by the father towards them, (i) dhhs planned for contact to occur between x and the mother as a regular occurrence. those plans failed to commence, with the father initially stating he misunderstood the plans, but then later saying he was scared the mother would not return the children, (j) it was reported z and x had both displayed aggression at school, with the report writer observing that the use of aggression appears to have increased since the children have resided in their father’s care full-time, and (k) there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   there were a number of family violence incidents to which police have responded. however, there has been limited evidence of violence upon police attendance and thus, limited ability to substantiate factual information, (c) information gathered indicated the father persistently made efforts to discredit the mother and that the father appears to have aligned the children to himself and alienated the children from their mother, (d) the mother admitted using physical chastisement as a form of discipline historically, although denied recent significant use. the father denied physical chastisement of the children, although x reported that his father hits him. x expressed genuine fear of the father, however he subsequently retracted his statement and indicated this was historical only, (e) the report writer directly observed, during a home visit, the father speaking negatively about the mother, (f) the father had received a recent warning from x’s school about the father’s inappropriate behaviour towards other adults at the school grounds, (g) the father was proactive in seeking supports, (h) z and x reported physical chastisement, verbal aggression, and poor parenting whilst in their mother’s care, both historically and recently. both children appeared to idolise their father and made no disclosures of any significant harm perpetrated by the father towards them, (i) dhhs planned for contact to occur between x and the mother as a regular occurrence. those plans failed to commence, with the father initially stating he misunderstood the plans, but then later saying he was scared the mother would not return the children, (j) it was reported z and x had both displayed aggression at school, with the report writer observing that the use of aggression appears to have increased since the children have resided in their father’s care full-time, and (k) there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   information gathered indicated the father persistently made efforts to discredit the mother and that the father appears to have aligned the children to himself and alienated the children from their mother, (d) the mother admitted using physical chastisement as a form of discipline historically, although denied recent significant use. the father denied physical chastisement of the children, although x reported that his father hits him. x expressed genuine fear of the father, however he subsequently retracted his statement and indicated this was historical only, (e) the report writer directly observed, during a home visit, the father speaking negatively about the mother, (f) the father had received a recent warning from x’s school about the father’s inappropriate behaviour towards other adults at the school grounds, (g) the father was proactive in seeking supports, (h) z and x reported physical chastisement, verbal aggression, and poor parenting whilst in their mother’s care, both historically and recently. both children appeared to idolise their father and made no disclosures of any significant harm perpetrated by the father towards them, (i) dhhs planned for contact to occur between x and the mother as a regular occurrence. those plans failed to commence, with the father initially stating he misunderstood the plans, but then later saying he was scared the mother would not return the children, (j) it was reported z and x had both displayed aggression at school, with the report writer observing that the use of aggression appears to have increased since the children have resided in their father’s care full-time, and (k) there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   the mother admitted using physical chastisement as a form of discipline historically, although denied recent significant use. the father denied physical chastisement of the children, although x reported that his father hits him. x expressed genuine fear of the father, however he subsequently retracted his statement and indicated this was historical only, (e) the report writer directly observed, during a home visit, the father speaking negatively about the mother, (f) the father had received a recent warning from x’s school about the father’s inappropriate behaviour towards other adults at the school grounds, (g) the father was proactive in seeking supports, (h) z and x reported physical chastisement, verbal aggression, and poor parenting whilst in their mother’s care, both historically and recently. both children appeared to idolise their father and made no disclosures of any significant harm perpetrated by the father towards them, (i) dhhs planned for contact to occur between x and the mother as a regular occurrence. those plans failed to commence, with the father initially stating he misunderstood the plans, but then later saying he was scared the mother would not return the children, (j) it was reported z and x had both displayed aggression at school, with the report writer observing that the use of aggression appears to have increased since the children have resided in their father’s care full-time, and (k) there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   the report writer directly observed, during a home visit, the father speaking negatively about the mother, (f) the father had received a recent warning from x’s school about the father’s inappropriate behaviour towards other adults at the school grounds, (g) the father was proactive in seeking supports, (h) z and x reported physical chastisement, verbal aggression, and poor parenting whilst in their mother’s care, both historically and recently. both children appeared to idolise their father and made no disclosures of any significant harm perpetrated by the father towards them, (i) dhhs planned for contact to occur between x and the mother as a regular occurrence. those plans failed to commence, with the father initially stating he misunderstood the plans, but then later saying he was scared the mother would not return the children, (j) it was reported z and x had both displayed aggression at school, with the report writer observing that the use of aggression appears to have increased since the children have resided in their father’s care full-time, and (k) there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   the father had received a recent warning from x’s school about the father’s inappropriate behaviour towards other adults at the school grounds, (g) the father was proactive in seeking supports, (h) z and x reported physical chastisement, verbal aggression, and poor parenting whilst in their mother’s care, both historically and recently. both children appeared to idolise their father and made no disclosures of any significant harm perpetrated by the father towards them, (i) dhhs planned for contact to occur between x and the mother as a regular occurrence. those plans failed to commence, with the father initially stating he misunderstood the plans, but then later saying he was scared the mother would not return the children, (j) it was reported z and x had both displayed aggression at school, with the report writer observing that the use of aggression appears to have increased since the children have resided in their father’s care full-time, and (k) there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   the father was proactive in seeking supports, (h) z and x reported physical chastisement, verbal aggression, and poor parenting whilst in their mother’s care, both historically and recently. both children appeared to idolise their father and made no disclosures of any significant harm perpetrated by the father towards them, (i) dhhs planned for contact to occur between x and the mother as a regular occurrence. those plans failed to commence, with the father initially stating he misunderstood the plans, but then later saying he was scared the mother would not return the children, (j) it was reported z and x had both displayed aggression at school, with the report writer observing that the use of aggression appears to have increased since the children have resided in their father’s care full-time, and (k) there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   z and x reported physical chastisement, verbal aggression, and poor parenting whilst in their mother’s care, both historically and recently. both children appeared to idolise their father and made no disclosures of any significant harm perpetrated by the father towards them, (i) dhhs planned for contact to occur between x and the mother as a regular occurrence. those plans failed to commence, with the father initially stating he misunderstood the plans, but then later saying he was scared the mother would not return the children, (j) it was reported z and x had both displayed aggression at school, with the report writer observing that the use of aggression appears to have increased since the children have resided in their father’s care full-time, and (k) there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   dhhs planned for contact to occur between x and the mother as a regular occurrence. those plans failed to commence, with the father initially stating he misunderstood the plans, but then later saying he was scared the mother would not return the children, (j) it was reported z and x had both displayed aggression at school, with the report writer observing that the use of aggression appears to have increased since the children have resided in their father’s care full-time, and (k) there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   it was reported z and x had both displayed aggression at school, with the report writer observing that the use of aggression appears to have increased since the children have resided in their father’s care full-time, and (k) there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   there was clear evidence to support the children’s exposure of verbal abuse.   there is clear evidence to support the children’s exposure ‘of verbal abuse of [the mother] to the children which has been observed by a number of professionals and i’, (b) the father admitted to withholding contact of the children from the mother, thus directly preventing a meaningful relationship with the children and the mother, (c) the father’s constant belittling of the mother has occurred in front of the children, which has further increased z and x aligning with their father’s beliefs. this is indicative of a likelihood of emotional harm towards x and z. however, it was very difficult to evidence given their presentation and how they portray their relationship and memories of their mother, (d) there have been no direct concerns regarding the father’s contact with his children, and the elder children spoke positively of him. it remains unclear whether z’s and x’s beliefs and memories of their father were factual or accurate, (e) there was evidence that the father portrays a strong negative image of the mother which may have been pivotal in the children’s strong beliefs, and their wish not to have contact with their mother, (f) there was confidence in the mother’s ability to engage positively with any services or assessments in the best interests of the children, (g) there was evidence of indicative family violence between the parties during the relationship. corroborative proof to substantiate this was limited. the father’s presentation to a number of professionals belittling the mother, and recent threats made towards the mother are highly indicative that the father is the perpetrator of violence. furthermore, x’s and z’s observation of more outward aggression in their nature at school since residing with their father full-time, (h) the father clearly loves his children, however, was unwilling or unable to prioritise their needs or wishes at times, (i) the mother has greatly engaged in the investigation process, and reports from professionals indicate she was positive with a consistent theme of prioritising the needs and wishes of the children independently, (j) it was recommended that the mother’s time with y and x should be progressed as soon as possible, with the time with x requiring initial supervision, and (k) significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   the father admitted to withholding contact of the children from the mother, thus directly preventing a meaningful relationship with the children and the mother, (c) the father’s constant belittling of the mother has occurred in front of the children, which has further increased z and x aligning with their father’s beliefs. this is indicative of a likelihood of emotional harm towards x and z. however, it was very difficult to evidence given their presentation and how they portray their relationship and memories of their mother, (d) there have been no direct concerns regarding the father’s contact with his children, and the elder children spoke positively of him. it remains unclear whether z’s and x’s beliefs and memories of their father were factual or accurate, (e) there was evidence that the father portrays a strong negative image of the mother which may have been pivotal in the children’s strong beliefs, and their wish not to have contact with their mother, (f) there was confidence in the mother’s ability to engage positively with any services or assessments in the best interests of the children, (g) there was evidence of indicative family violence between the parties during the relationship. corroborative proof to substantiate this was limited. the father’s presentation to a number of professionals belittling the mother, and recent threats made towards the mother are highly indicative that the father is the perpetrator of violence. furthermore, x’s and z’s observation of more outward aggression in their nature at school since residing with their father full-time, (h) the father clearly loves his children, however, was unwilling or unable to prioritise their needs or wishes at times, (i) the mother has greatly engaged in the investigation process, and reports from professionals indicate she was positive with a consistent theme of prioritising the needs and wishes of the children independently, (j) it was recommended that the mother’s time with y and x should be progressed as soon as possible, with the time with x requiring initial supervision, and (k) significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   the father’s constant belittling of the mother has occurred in front of the children, which has further increased z and x aligning with their father’s beliefs. this is indicative of a likelihood of emotional harm towards x and z. however, it was very difficult to evidence given their presentation and how they portray their relationship and memories of their mother, (d) there have been no direct concerns regarding the father’s contact with his children, and the elder children spoke positively of him. it remains unclear whether z’s and x’s beliefs and memories of their father were factual or accurate, (e) there was evidence that the father portrays a strong negative image of the mother which may have been pivotal in the children’s strong beliefs, and their wish not to have contact with their mother, (f) there was confidence in the mother’s ability to engage positively with any services or assessments in the best interests of the children, (g) there was evidence of indicative family violence between the parties during the relationship. corroborative proof to substantiate this was limited. the father’s presentation to a number of professionals belittling the mother, and recent threats made towards the mother are highly indicative that the father is the perpetrator of violence. furthermore, x’s and z’s observation of more outward aggression in their nature at school since residing with their father full-time, (h) the father clearly loves his children, however, was unwilling or unable to prioritise their needs or wishes at times, (i) the mother has greatly engaged in the investigation process, and reports from professionals indicate she was positive with a consistent theme of prioritising the needs and wishes of the children independently, (j) it was recommended that the mother’s time with y and x should be progressed as soon as possible, with the time with x requiring initial supervision, and (k) significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   there have been no direct concerns regarding the father’s contact with his children, and the elder children spoke positively of him. it remains unclear whether z’s and x’s beliefs and memories of their father were factual or accurate, (e) there was evidence that the father portrays a strong negative image of the mother which may have been pivotal in the children’s strong beliefs, and their wish not to have contact with their mother, (f) there was confidence in the mother’s ability to engage positively with any services or assessments in the best interests of the children, (g) there was evidence of indicative family violence between the parties during the relationship. corroborative proof to substantiate this was limited. the father’s presentation to a number of professionals belittling the mother, and recent threats made towards the mother are highly indicative that the father is the perpetrator of violence. furthermore, x’s and z’s observation of more outward aggression in their nature at school since residing with their father full-time, (h) the father clearly loves his children, however, was unwilling or unable to prioritise their needs or wishes at times, (i) the mother has greatly engaged in the investigation process, and reports from professionals indicate she was positive with a consistent theme of prioritising the needs and wishes of the children independently, (j) it was recommended that the mother’s time with y and x should be progressed as soon as possible, with the time with x requiring initial supervision, and (k) significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   there was evidence that the father portrays a strong negative image of the mother which may have been pivotal in the children’s strong beliefs, and their wish not to have contact with their mother, (f) there was confidence in the mother’s ability to engage positively with any services or assessments in the best interests of the children, (g) there was evidence of indicative family violence between the parties during the relationship. corroborative proof to substantiate this was limited. the father’s presentation to a number of professionals belittling the mother, and recent threats made towards the mother are highly indicative that the father is the perpetrator of violence. furthermore, x’s and z’s observation of more outward aggression in their nature at school since residing with their father full-time, (h) the father clearly loves his children, however, was unwilling or unable to prioritise their needs or wishes at times, (i) the mother has greatly engaged in the investigation process, and reports from professionals indicate she was positive with a consistent theme of prioritising the needs and wishes of the children independently, (j) it was recommended that the mother’s time with y and x should be progressed as soon as possible, with the time with x requiring initial supervision, and (k) significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   there was confidence in the mother’s ability to engage positively with any services or assessments in the best interests of the children, (g) there was evidence of indicative family violence between the parties during the relationship. corroborative proof to substantiate this was limited. the father’s presentation to a number of professionals belittling the mother, and recent threats made towards the mother are highly indicative that the father is the perpetrator of violence. furthermore, x’s and z’s observation of more outward aggression in their nature at school since residing with their father full-time, (h) the father clearly loves his children, however, was unwilling or unable to prioritise their needs or wishes at times, (i) the mother has greatly engaged in the investigation process, and reports from professionals indicate she was positive with a consistent theme of prioritising the needs and wishes of the children independently, (j) it was recommended that the mother’s time with y and x should be progressed as soon as possible, with the time with x requiring initial supervision, and (k) significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   there was evidence of indicative family violence between the parties during the relationship. corroborative proof to substantiate this was limited. the father’s presentation to a number of professionals belittling the mother, and recent threats made towards the mother are highly indicative that the father is the perpetrator of violence. furthermore, x’s and z’s observation of more outward aggression in their nature at school since residing with their father full-time, (h) the father clearly loves his children, however, was unwilling or unable to prioritise their needs or wishes at times, (i) the mother has greatly engaged in the investigation process, and reports from professionals indicate she was positive with a consistent theme of prioritising the needs and wishes of the children independently, (j) it was recommended that the mother’s time with y and x should be progressed as soon as possible, with the time with x requiring initial supervision, and (k) significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   the father clearly loves his children, however, was unwilling or unable to prioritise their needs or wishes at times, (i) the mother has greatly engaged in the investigation process, and reports from professionals indicate she was positive with a consistent theme of prioritising the needs and wishes of the children independently, (j) it was recommended that the mother’s time with y and x should be progressed as soon as possible, with the time with x requiring initial supervision, and (k) significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   the mother has greatly engaged in the investigation process, and reports from professionals indicate she was positive with a consistent theme of prioritising the needs and wishes of the children independently, (j) it was recommended that the mother’s time with y and x should be progressed as soon as possible, with the time with x requiring initial supervision, and (k) significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   it was recommended that the mother’s time with y and x should be progressed as soon as possible, with the time with x requiring initial supervision, and (k) significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   significantly, there was no evidence of concerns regarding the mother which would prevent appropriate increasing contact, including unsupervised, overnight, or shared care arrangements.   traversed the various reports received by dhhs, (b) noted that in respect of the period 25 march 2019 to 15 october 2019, while the father appeared to have aligned the children to himself and alienate the mother, there were no direct concerns noted regarding the father’s care of the children, (c) recorded a current open report relating to concerns raised by the father that y had been sexually abused by the mother’s partner. the content of the report concerned a comment made by the mother’s partner to y about genitals. the report writer notes that the father had presented with y to the hospital and multiple police stations with information that was inconsistent, vague, and with no disclosures of sexual abuse. there was insufficient evidence of sexual harm and the report was closed, (d) noted that the mother had engaged with supports but that it was unclear whether the father had accessed support, (e) highlighted a child protection investigation between march 2019 and october 2019 assessed that the children were not at risk of significant harm in the care of either parent and that the matter was appropriately addressed by this court, and (f) recommended that the children have contact with their mother.   noted that in respect of the period 25 march 2019 to 15 october 2019, while the father appeared to have aligned the children to himself and alienate the mother, there were no direct concerns noted regarding the father’s care of the children, (c) recorded a current open report relating to concerns raised by the father that y had been sexually abused by the mother’s partner. the content of the report concerned a comment made by the mother’s partner to y about genitals. the report writer notes that the father had presented with y to the hospital and multiple police stations with information that was inconsistent, vague, and with no disclosures of sexual abuse. there was insufficient evidence of sexual harm and the report was closed, (d) noted that the mother had engaged with supports but that it was unclear whether the father had accessed support, (e) highlighted a child protection investigation between march 2019 and october 2019 assessed that the children were not at risk of significant harm in the care of either parent and that the matter was appropriately addressed by this court, and (f) recommended that the children have contact with their mother.   recorded a current open report relating to concerns raised by the father that y had been sexually abused by the mother’s partner. the content of the report concerned a comment made by the mother’s partner to y about genitals. the report writer notes that the father had presented with y to the hospital and multiple police stations with information that was inconsistent, vague, and with no disclosures of sexual abuse. there was insufficient evidence of sexual harm and the report was closed, (d) noted that the mother had engaged with supports but that it was unclear whether the father had accessed support, (e) highlighted a child protection investigation between march 2019 and october 2019 assessed that the children were not at risk of significant harm in the care of either parent and that the matter was appropriately addressed by this court, and (f) recommended that the children have contact with their mother.   noted that the mother had engaged with supports but that it was unclear whether the father had accessed support, (e) highlighted a child protection investigation between march 2019 and october 2019 assessed that the children were not at risk of significant harm in the care of either parent and that the matter was appropriately addressed by this court, and (f) recommended that the children have contact with their mother.   highlighted a child protection investigation between march 2019 and october 2019 assessed that the children were not at risk of significant harm in the care of either parent and that the matter was appropriately addressed by this court, and (f) recommended that the children have contact with their mother.   recommended that the children have contact with their mother.   a report received in relation to x’s behaviour, which includes ongoing aggression toward other students at school that led to police involvement, reports of cyberbullying, and inappropriate social media use, (b) x and the father were both interviewed in relation to the incidents concerning x. both x and the father demonstrated little or no insight into the concerning behaviours, (c) the father made a further report to persons unknown that y had been sexually abused by the mother’s new partner. the allegation was that y had seen the partner’s penis. the reported concerns were not substantiated, (d) the father had refused to engage with counselling and other support services. this included failure to engage with services to assist him with parenting as well as failure to follow through on recommendations for support services for the children’s mental health, (e) the father had made threats to a professional counsellor to kill the mother if y was placed into her care full-time. the department recorded that: (i) the father denied making the threats and said the professional who reported this had made it up, (ii) both z and x believe the father would never make threats to harm the mother, and that the mother had made up threats, (iii) a full exclusionary intervention order (‘ivo’) for the mother against the father had been granted because of the threats. (f) both z and x had been privy to adult information that appears to have been provided by the father, (g) the father presented with a fixated view on portraying the mother in a negative light and exposes the children to this frequently, (h) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impact of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother. child protection recorded that it was highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this was having on the children’s relationship with the mother, as well as the impact on their mental health and social development, (i) child protection were very concerned that the father was not able to regulate his emotions in front of the children, and that this was having a negative impact on the children’s mental health, their sense of identity and their confidence in their own understanding of reality, (j) child protection held concerns that the father was not able to demonstrate insight into the impact of his behaviours on the children, (k) child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   x and the father were both interviewed in relation to the incidents concerning x. both x and the father demonstrated little or no insight into the concerning behaviours, (c) the father made a further report to persons unknown that y had been sexually abused by the mother’s new partner. the allegation was that y had seen the partner’s penis. the reported concerns were not substantiated, (d) the father had refused to engage with counselling and other support services. this included failure to engage with services to assist him with parenting as well as failure to follow through on recommendations for support services for the children’s mental health, (e) the father had made threats to a professional counsellor to kill the mother if y was placed into her care full-time. the department recorded that: (i) the father denied making the threats and said the professional who reported this had made it up, (ii) both z and x believe the father would never make threats to harm the mother, and that the mother had made up threats, (iii) a full exclusionary intervention order (‘ivo’) for the mother against the father had been granted because of the threats. (f) both z and x had been privy to adult information that appears to have been provided by the father, (g) the father presented with a fixated view on portraying the mother in a negative light and exposes the children to this frequently, (h) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impact of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother. child protection recorded that it was highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this was having on the children’s relationship with the mother, as well as the impact on their mental health and social development, (i) child protection were very concerned that the father was not able to regulate his emotions in front of the children, and that this was having a negative impact on the children’s mental health, their sense of identity and their confidence in their own understanding of reality, (j) child protection held concerns that the father was not able to demonstrate insight into the impact of his behaviours on the children, (k) child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   the father made a further report to persons unknown that y had been sexually abused by the mother’s new partner. the allegation was that y had seen the partner’s penis. the reported concerns were not substantiated, (d) the father had refused to engage with counselling and other support services. this included failure to engage with services to assist him with parenting as well as failure to follow through on recommendations for support services for the children’s mental health, (e) the father had made threats to a professional counsellor to kill the mother if y was placed into her care full-time. the department recorded that: (i) the father denied making the threats and said the professional who reported this had made it up, (ii) both z and x believe the father would never make threats to harm the mother, and that the mother had made up threats, (iii) a full exclusionary intervention order (‘ivo’) for the mother against the father had been granted because of the threats. (f) both z and x had been privy to adult information that appears to have been provided by the father, (g) the father presented with a fixated view on portraying the mother in a negative light and exposes the children to this frequently, (h) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impact of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother. child protection recorded that it was highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this was having on the children’s relationship with the mother, as well as the impact on their mental health and social development, (i) child protection were very concerned that the father was not able to regulate his emotions in front of the children, and that this was having a negative impact on the children’s mental health, their sense of identity and their confidence in their own understanding of reality, (j) child protection held concerns that the father was not able to demonstrate insight into the impact of his behaviours on the children, (k) child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   the father had refused to engage with counselling and other support services. this included failure to engage with services to assist him with parenting as well as failure to follow through on recommendations for support services for the children’s mental health, (e) the father had made threats to a professional counsellor to kill the mother if y was placed into her care full-time. the department recorded that: (i) the father denied making the threats and said the professional who reported this had made it up, (ii) both z and x believe the father would never make threats to harm the mother, and that the mother had made up threats, (iii) a full exclusionary intervention order (‘ivo’) for the mother against the father had been granted because of the threats. (f) both z and x had been privy to adult information that appears to have been provided by the father, (g) the father presented with a fixated view on portraying the mother in a negative light and exposes the children to this frequently, (h) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impact of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother. child protection recorded that it was highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this was having on the children’s relationship with the mother, as well as the impact on their mental health and social development, (i) child protection were very concerned that the father was not able to regulate his emotions in front of the children, and that this was having a negative impact on the children’s mental health, their sense of identity and their confidence in their own understanding of reality, (j) child protection held concerns that the father was not able to demonstrate insight into the impact of his behaviours on the children, (k) child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   the father had made threats to a professional counsellor to kill the mother if y was placed into her care full-time. the department recorded that: (i) the father denied making the threats and said the professional who reported this had made it up, (ii) both z and x believe the father would never make threats to harm the mother, and that the mother had made up threats, (iii) a full exclusionary intervention order (‘ivo’) for the mother against the father had been granted because of the threats. (f) both z and x had been privy to adult information that appears to have been provided by the father, (g) the father presented with a fixated view on portraying the mother in a negative light and exposes the children to this frequently, (h) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impact of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother. child protection recorded that it was highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this was having on the children’s relationship with the mother, as well as the impact on their mental health and social development, (i) child protection were very concerned that the father was not able to regulate his emotions in front of the children, and that this was having a negative impact on the children’s mental health, their sense of identity and their confidence in their own understanding of reality, (j) child protection held concerns that the father was not able to demonstrate insight into the impact of his behaviours on the children, (k) child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   the father denied making the threats and said the professional who reported this had made it up, (ii) both z and x believe the father would never make threats to harm the mother, and that the mother had made up threats, (iii) a full exclusionary intervention order (‘ivo’) for the mother against the father had been granted because of the threats.  ) both z and x believe the father would never make threats to harm the mother, and that the mother had made up threats, (iii) a full exclusionary intervention order (‘ivo’) for the mother against the father had been granted because of the threats.  i) a full exclusionary intervention order (‘ivo’) for the mother against the father had been granted because of the threats.   both z and x had been privy to adult information that appears to have been provided by the father, (g) the father presented with a fixated view on portraying the mother in a negative light and exposes the children to this frequently, (h) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impact of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother. child protection recorded that it was highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this was having on the children’s relationship with the mother, as well as the impact on their mental health and social development, (i) child protection were very concerned that the father was not able to regulate his emotions in front of the children, and that this was having a negative impact on the children’s mental health, their sense of identity and their confidence in their own understanding of reality, (j) child protection held concerns that the father was not able to demonstrate insight into the impact of his behaviours on the children, (k) child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   the father presented with a fixated view on portraying the mother in a negative light and exposes the children to this frequently, (h) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impact of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother. child protection recorded that it was highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this was having on the children’s relationship with the mother, as well as the impact on their mental health and social development, (i) child protection were very concerned that the father was not able to regulate his emotions in front of the children, and that this was having a negative impact on the children’s mental health, their sense of identity and their confidence in their own understanding of reality, (j) child protection held concerns that the father was not able to demonstrate insight into the impact of his behaviours on the children, (k) child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impact of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother. child protection recorded that it was highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this was having on the children’s relationship with the mother, as well as the impact on their mental health and social development, (i) child protection were very concerned that the father was not able to regulate his emotions in front of the children, and that this was having a negative impact on the children’s mental health, their sense of identity and their confidence in their own understanding of reality, (j) child protection held concerns that the father was not able to demonstrate insight into the impact of his behaviours on the children, (k) child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   child protection were very concerned that the father was not able to regulate his emotions in front of the children, and that this was having a negative impact on the children’s mental health, their sense of identity and their confidence in their own understanding of reality, (j) child protection held concerns that the father was not able to demonstrate insight into the impact of his behaviours on the children, (k) child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   child protection held concerns that the father was not able to demonstrate insight into the impact of his behaviours on the children, (k) child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   child protection held significant concerns that the mother did not have regular contact with z and x which is impacting their ability to build positive relationships, and (l) child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.   child protection concluded that while ‘the children are not at significant risk of harm in the care of [the father], child protection are concerned about the likelihood of emotional and psychological harm without support services and therapeutic intervention’.
the statements from the children  z told family consultant ms e (who conducted the cic report) that his mother pushed him against the wall, and would not let him eat her food. he also told the writer of the first report that his mother had denied him food, (b) y told the writer of the first report that his mother smacks him, (c) x told the writer of the first report that his mother yells at him, and has a bad temper, (d) z told the writer of the first report that his mother had hit x, and he hit his head on the bedhead, and that she told x to ‘f*ck off to your dad’, (e) z told the writer of the first report that his mother threatened to get her boyfriend to kill him, (f) z told the writer of the first report that his mother had ironed y’s face, (g) x told the writer of the second report in response to a question about discipline in the mother’s house, that ‘i get slapped, but not like full on slapped, or i get my phone taken’, and (h) as noted earlier, x and z told dhhs prior to their report in august 2019 of inappropriate physical chastisement and verbal aggression in the mother’s care.   y told the writer of the first report that his mother smacks him, (c) x told the writer of the first report that his mother yells at him, and has a bad temper, (d) z told the writer of the first report that his mother had hit x, and he hit his head on the bedhead, and that she told x to ‘f*ck off to your dad’, (e) z told the writer of the first report that his mother threatened to get her boyfriend to kill him, (f) z told the writer of the first report that his mother had ironed y’s face, (g) x told the writer of the second report in response to a question about discipline in the mother’s house, that ‘i get slapped, but not like full on slapped, or i get my phone taken’, and (h) as noted earlier, x and z told dhhs prior to their report in august 2019 of inappropriate physical chastisement and verbal aggression in the mother’s care.   x told the writer of the first report that his mother yells at him, and has a bad temper, (d) z told the writer of the first report that his mother had hit x, and he hit his head on the bedhead, and that she told x to ‘f*ck off to your dad’, (e) z told the writer of the first report that his mother threatened to get her boyfriend to kill him, (f) z told the writer of the first report that his mother had ironed y’s face, (g) x told the writer of the second report in response to a question about discipline in the mother’s house, that ‘i get slapped, but not like full on slapped, or i get my phone taken’, and (h) as noted earlier, x and z told dhhs prior to their report in august 2019 of inappropriate physical chastisement and verbal aggression in the mother’s care.   z told the writer of the first report that his mother had hit x, and he hit his head on the bedhead, and that she told x to ‘f*ck off to your dad’, (e) z told the writer of the first report that his mother threatened to get her boyfriend to kill him, (f) z told the writer of the first report that his mother had ironed y’s face, (g) x told the writer of the second report in response to a question about discipline in the mother’s house, that ‘i get slapped, but not like full on slapped, or i get my phone taken’, and (h) as noted earlier, x and z told dhhs prior to their report in august 2019 of inappropriate physical chastisement and verbal aggression in the mother’s care.   z told the writer of the first report that his mother threatened to get her boyfriend to kill him, (f) z told the writer of the first report that his mother had ironed y’s face, (g) x told the writer of the second report in response to a question about discipline in the mother’s house, that ‘i get slapped, but not like full on slapped, or i get my phone taken’, and (h) as noted earlier, x and z told dhhs prior to their report in august 2019 of inappropriate physical chastisement and verbal aggression in the mother’s care.   z told the writer of the first report that his mother had ironed y’s face, (g) x told the writer of the second report in response to a question about discipline in the mother’s house, that ‘i get slapped, but not like full on slapped, or i get my phone taken’, and (h) as noted earlier, x and z told dhhs prior to their report in august 2019 of inappropriate physical chastisement and verbal aggression in the mother’s care.   x told the writer of the second report in response to a question about discipline in the mother’s house, that ‘i get slapped, but not like full on slapped, or i get my phone taken’, and (h) as noted earlier, x and z told dhhs prior to their report in august 2019 of inappropriate physical chastisement and verbal aggression in the mother’s care.   as noted earlier, x and z told dhhs prior to their report in august 2019 of inappropriate physical chastisement and verbal aggression in the mother’s care.   ms e stated that while the children were likely to have some lived experiences of rejection by their mother, they present as so on the father’s side that their views are likely compromised. she noted that z and x used words like ‘we’ or ‘us’ and that it was difficult to unpack what was genuine, or what had been rehearsed, or was part of a narrative, (b) the writer of the first report considered that y had been coached. she also considered that: (i) some of the children’s views and feelings would have derived from lived experiences when ms breton had been heavy handed in her attempts to discipline and guide them, (ii) that the father has reinforced any views the children express about the mother that match his own, (iii) z’s negative views of the mother have likely stemmed from his lived experience of difficulties with his mother and views that had been cultivated by the father, (iv) that z used words such as ‘we’ and ‘us’ as though he and his father were one entity, and that z was aligned with the father, (c) the writer of the second report stated ‘no doubt x and y are influenced by their older brother’s attitude’, (d) dhhs in its report of august 2019 noted that: (i) x and z appear to ‘idolise their father’, (ii) the children have been exposed to the father’s verbal abuse and denigration of the mother and that has resulted in them being further aligned to their father’s beliefs, (e) dhhs in its report of september 2020 noted that: (i) the father is fixated on presenting a negative view of the mother and exposes the children to this frequently, (ii) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impacts of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother on the children, and (iii) child protection is highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this is having on the children’s relationship with the mother.   the writer of the first report considered that y had been coached. she also considered that: (i) some of the children’s views and feelings would have derived from lived experiences when ms breton had been heavy handed in her attempts to discipline and guide them, (ii) that the father has reinforced any views the children express about the mother that match his own, (iii) z’s negative views of the mother have likely stemmed from his lived experience of difficulties with his mother and views that had been cultivated by the father, (iv) that z used words such as ‘we’ and ‘us’ as though he and his father were one entity, and that z was aligned with the father, (c) the writer of the second report stated ‘no doubt x and y are influenced by their older brother’s attitude’, (d) dhhs in its report of august 2019 noted that: (i) x and z appear to ‘idolise their father’, (ii) the children have been exposed to the father’s verbal abuse and denigration of the mother and that has resulted in them being further aligned to their father’s beliefs, (e) dhhs in its report of september 2020 noted that: (i) the father is fixated on presenting a negative view of the mother and exposes the children to this frequently, (ii) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impacts of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother on the children, and (iii) child protection is highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this is having on the children’s relationship with the mother.   some of the children’s views and feelings would have derived from lived experiences when ms breton had been heavy handed in her attempts to discipline and guide them, (ii) that the father has reinforced any views the children express about the mother that match his own, (iii) z’s negative views of the mother have likely stemmed from his lived experience of difficulties with his mother and views that had been cultivated by the father, (iv) that z used words such as ‘we’ and ‘us’ as though he and his father were one entity, and that z was aligned with the father,  ) that the father has reinforced any views the children express about the mother that match his own, (iii) z’s negative views of the mother have likely stemmed from his lived experience of difficulties with his mother and views that had been cultivated by the father, (iv) that z used words such as ‘we’ and ‘us’ as though he and his father were one entity, and that z was aligned with the father,  i) z’s negative views of the mother have likely stemmed from his lived experience of difficulties with his mother and views that had been cultivated by the father, (iv) that z used words such as ‘we’ and ‘us’ as though he and his father were one entity, and that z was aligned with the father,  ) that z used words such as ‘we’ and ‘us’ as though he and his father were one entity, and that z was aligned with the father,   the writer of the second report stated ‘no doubt x and y are influenced by their older brother’s attitude’, (d) dhhs in its report of august 2019 noted that: (i) x and z appear to ‘idolise their father’, (ii) the children have been exposed to the father’s verbal abuse and denigration of the mother and that has resulted in them being further aligned to their father’s beliefs, (e) dhhs in its report of september 2020 noted that: (i) the father is fixated on presenting a negative view of the mother and exposes the children to this frequently, (ii) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impacts of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother on the children, and (iii) child protection is highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this is having on the children’s relationship with the mother.   dhhs in its report of august 2019 noted that: (i) x and z appear to ‘idolise their father’, (ii) the children have been exposed to the father’s verbal abuse and denigration of the mother and that has resulted in them being further aligned to their father’s beliefs, (e) dhhs in its report of september 2020 noted that: (i) the father is fixated on presenting a negative view of the mother and exposes the children to this frequently, (ii) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impacts of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother on the children, and (iii) child protection is highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this is having on the children’s relationship with the mother.   x and z appear to ‘idolise their father’, (ii) the children have been exposed to the father’s verbal abuse and denigration of the mother and that has resulted in them being further aligned to their father’s beliefs,  ) the children have been exposed to the father’s verbal abuse and denigration of the mother and that has resulted in them being further aligned to their father’s beliefs,   dhhs in its report of september 2020 noted that: (i) the father is fixated on presenting a negative view of the mother and exposes the children to this frequently, (ii) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impacts of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother on the children, and (iii) child protection is highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this is having on the children’s relationship with the mother.   the father is fixated on presenting a negative view of the mother and exposes the children to this frequently, (ii) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impacts of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother on the children, and (iii) child protection is highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this is having on the children’s relationship with the mother.  ) the father demonstrates limited insight into the negative impacts of his violent and controlling behaviour towards the mother on the children, and (iii) child protection is highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this is having on the children’s relationship with the mother.  i) child protection is highly concerned over the vilification of the mother by the father, and the negative impact this is having on the children’s relationship with the mother.
findings in respect of family violence  the mother pushed x causing him to hit his head, or threatened to kick him until he was dead. the father made this allegation when applying for an intervention order in early 2019. the application discloses, however, that the father claimed at that time that the incident occurred in late 2018, some five months earlier. he clearly took no action at the time. moreover, the application made by the father in early 2019 occurred in a context where the mother brought her own application for an intervention order against the father. (b) the mother told x to ‘f*ck off’ back to his father. x does not recount his mother saying this to him, despite the various professionals he has spoken to during the course of the proceedings, and despite his willingness to criticise the mother, (c) the mother physically assaulted z and grabbed him by the throat, (d) the mother refused to feed z, and (e) the mother told z she would get her partner to bash him up.   the mother told x to ‘f*ck off’ back to his father. x does not recount his mother saying this to him, despite the various professionals he has spoken to during the course of the proceedings, and despite his willingness to criticise the mother, (c) the mother physically assaulted z and grabbed him by the throat, (d) the mother refused to feed z, and (e) the mother told z she would get her partner to bash him up.   the mother physically assaulted z and grabbed him by the throat, (d) the mother refused to feed z, and (e) the mother told z she would get her partner to bash him up.   the mother refused to feed z, and (e) the mother told z she would get her partner to bash him up.   the mother told z she would get her partner to bash him up.   he threatened to kill the mother in the presence of an independent third person who was most likely to report that threat to an appropriate authority. the presence of that person did not prevent the father from making the threat, (b) the father has either belittled or spoken negatively about the mother in the presence of representatives from dhhs. the presence of those persons has not stopped the father from speaking negatively about the mother, (c) the father repeatedly sought to explain his actions by saying that he was either angry or upset at the time of his behaviour. the father uses his emotional reactions (which he cannot control) to excuse his behaviour, (d) the father was unable to regulate his emotions before me both in the witness box, and in the courtroom generally during the course of hearing, (e) x told the writer of the first report that his father could not control his temper (at [74] of the first report), and (f) the father’s failure to continue with any form of counselling, despite court orders to do so.   the father has either belittled or spoken negatively about the mother in the presence of representatives from dhhs. the presence of those persons has not stopped the father from speaking negatively about the mother, (c) the father repeatedly sought to explain his actions by saying that he was either angry or upset at the time of his behaviour. the father uses his emotional reactions (which he cannot control) to excuse his behaviour, (d) the father was unable to regulate his emotions before me both in the witness box, and in the courtroom generally during the course of hearing, (e) x told the writer of the first report that his father could not control his temper (at [74] of the first report), and (f) the father’s failure to continue with any form of counselling, despite court orders to do so.   the father repeatedly sought to explain his actions by saying that he was either angry or upset at the time of his behaviour. the father uses his emotional reactions (which he cannot control) to excuse his behaviour, (d) the father was unable to regulate his emotions before me both in the witness box, and in the courtroom generally during the course of hearing, (e) x told the writer of the first report that his father could not control his temper (at [74] of the first report), and (f) the father’s failure to continue with any form of counselling, despite court orders to do so.   the father was unable to regulate his emotions before me both in the witness box, and in the courtroom generally during the course of hearing, (e) x told the writer of the first report that his father could not control his temper (at [74] of the first report), and (f) the father’s failure to continue with any form of counselling, despite court orders to do so.   x told the writer of the first report that his father could not control his temper (at [74] of the first report), and (f) the father’s failure to continue with any form of counselling, despite court orders to do so.   the father’s failure to continue with any form of counselling, despite court orders to do so.   mr c notes the limited scope of the assessment, including that personality testing was not conducted, (b) parenting skills were not formally assessed, and (c) it was recommend the father undertake cognitive behavioural therapy for at least 12 months. that treatment, which the father has not undertaken, was to assist with relationship discord.   parenting skills were not formally assessed, and (c) it was recommend the father undertake cognitive behavioural therapy for at least 12 months. that treatment, which the father has not undertaken, was to assist with relationship discord.   it was recommend the father undertake cognitive behavioural therapy for at least 12 months. that treatment, which the father has not undertaken, was to assist with relationship discord.
meaningful relationship with both parents  when z and x were living with her and returned from spending time with the father, they would blame her for throwing the father out of the house and breaking up the marriage, (b) z refused to eat meals she prepared and would call her names such as ‘bitch’ and ‘slut’. z’s language towards her mirrored the insults the father directed towards her, (c) the father bought x and y gifts in an attempt to influence them, (d) victoria police repeatedly conducted welfare checks on her home at the request of the father, (e) the father has frustrated her ability or opportunity to spend time with the children including: (i) in august 2019, interim orders were made that included an order permitting the mother to visit y at kindergarten. the father subsequently refused to take y to kindergarten, (ii) the father failed to complete intake forms to permit the mother to spend supervised time with x and y following interim orders made on 30 august 2019, (iii) the father withheld y from her, and did not permit her to spend time with y during the initial stages of the covid-19 pandemic, (iv) the father, z and x being in the background whenever she was to have facetime calls with y, (f) the father was not willing, and did not convince y at times in 2020 to spend time with her, and instead told her that she should respect y’s wishes (y was aged approximately six years old at the time), and (g) z intervened in disputes between the parents as to whether y should spend time with his mother. the mother alleges that z told her to ‘shut up’ when y did not want to go with her. the mother alleges that the father failed to do anything to stop z.   z refused to eat meals she prepared and would call her names such as ‘bitch’ and ‘slut’. z’s language towards her mirrored the insults the father directed towards her, (c) the father bought x and y gifts in an attempt to influence them, (d) victoria police repeatedly conducted welfare checks on her home at the request of the father, (e) the father has frustrated her ability or opportunity to spend time with the children including: (i) in august 2019, interim orders were made that included an order permitting the mother to visit y at kindergarten. the father subsequently refused to take y to kindergarten, (ii) the father failed to complete intake forms to permit the mother to spend supervised time with x and y following interim orders made on 30 august 2019, (iii) the father withheld y from her, and did not permit her to spend time with y during the initial stages of the covid-19 pandemic, (iv) the father, z and x being in the background whenever she was to have facetime calls with y, (f) the father was not willing, and did not convince y at times in 2020 to spend time with her, and instead told her that she should respect y’s wishes (y was aged approximately six years old at the time), and (g) z intervened in disputes between the parents as to whether y should spend time with his mother. the mother alleges that z told her to ‘shut up’ when y did not want to go with her. the mother alleges that the father failed to do anything to stop z.   the father bought x and y gifts in an attempt to influence them, (d) victoria police repeatedly conducted welfare checks on her home at the request of the father, (e) the father has frustrated her ability or opportunity to spend time with the children including: (i) in august 2019, interim orders were made that included an order permitting the mother to visit y at kindergarten. the father subsequently refused to take y to kindergarten, (ii) the father failed to complete intake forms to permit the mother to spend supervised time with x and y following interim orders made on 30 august 2019, (iii) the father withheld y from her, and did not permit her to spend time with y during the initial stages of the covid-19 pandemic, (iv) the father, z and x being in the background whenever she was to have facetime calls with y, (f) the father was not willing, and did not convince y at times in 2020 to spend time with her, and instead told her that she should respect y’s wishes (y was aged approximately six years old at the time), and (g) z intervened in disputes between the parents as to whether y should spend time with his mother. the mother alleges that z told her to ‘shut up’ when y did not want to go with her. the mother alleges that the father failed to do anything to stop z.   victoria police repeatedly conducted welfare checks on her home at the request of the father, (e) the father has frustrated her ability or opportunity to spend time with the children including: (i) in august 2019, interim orders were made that included an order permitting the mother to visit y at kindergarten. the father subsequently refused to take y to kindergarten, (ii) the father failed to complete intake forms to permit the mother to spend supervised time with x and y following interim orders made on 30 august 2019, (iii) the father withheld y from her, and did not permit her to spend time with y during the initial stages of the covid-19 pandemic, (iv) the father, z and x being in the background whenever she was to have facetime calls with y, (f) the father was not willing, and did not convince y at times in 2020 to spend time with her, and instead told her that she should respect y’s wishes (y was aged approximately six years old at the time), and (g) z intervened in disputes between the parents as to whether y should spend time with his mother. the mother alleges that z told her to ‘shut up’ when y did not want to go with her. the mother alleges that the father failed to do anything to stop z.   the father has frustrated her ability or opportunity to spend time with the children including: (i) in august 2019, interim orders were made that included an order permitting the mother to visit y at kindergarten. the father subsequently refused to take y to kindergarten, (ii) the father failed to complete intake forms to permit the mother to spend supervised time with x and y following interim orders made on 30 august 2019, (iii) the father withheld y from her, and did not permit her to spend time with y during the initial stages of the covid-19 pandemic, (iv) the father, z and x being in the background whenever she was to have facetime calls with y, (f) the father was not willing, and did not convince y at times in 2020 to spend time with her, and instead told her that she should respect y’s wishes (y was aged approximately six years old at the time), and (g) z intervened in disputes between the parents as to whether y should spend time with his mother. the mother alleges that z told her to ‘shut up’ when y did not want to go with her. the mother alleges that the father failed to do anything to stop z.   in august 2019, interim orders were made that included an order permitting the mother to visit y at kindergarten. the father subsequently refused to take y to kindergarten, (ii) the father failed to complete intake forms to permit the mother to spend supervised time with x and y following interim orders made on 30 august 2019, (iii) the father withheld y from her, and did not permit her to spend time with y during the initial stages of the covid-19 pandemic, (iv) the father, z and x being in the background whenever she was to have facetime calls with y,  ) the father failed to complete intake forms to permit the mother to spend supervised time with x and y following interim orders made on 30 august 2019, (iii) the father withheld y from her, and did not permit her to spend time with y during the initial stages of the covid-19 pandemic, (iv) the father, z and x being in the background whenever she was to have facetime calls with y,  i) the father withheld y from her, and did not permit her to spend time with y during the initial stages of the covid-19 pandemic, (iv) the father, z and x being in the background whenever she was to have facetime calls with y,  ) the father, z and x being in the background whenever she was to have facetime calls with y,   the father was not willing, and did not convince y at times in 2020 to spend time with her, and instead told her that she should respect y’s wishes (y was aged approximately six years old at the time), and (g) z intervened in disputes between the parents as to whether y should spend time with his mother. the mother alleges that z told her to ‘shut up’ when y did not want to go with her. the mother alleges that the father failed to do anything to stop z.   z intervened in disputes between the parents as to whether y should spend time with his mother. the mother alleges that z told her to ‘shut up’ when y did not want to go with her. the mother alleges that the father failed to do anything to stop z.   the cic report prepared 30 august 2019 records the following in relation to z:
he gave a litany of complaints about his mother and wanted to explain all the incidents which led him to a fixed a clear position that he did not want anything to do with her, and that his brother’s should not have anything to do with her. he spoke in terms of “we”, and “us”, describing a seize type mentality as “us” (his father and brothers) against the mother and her family. he described the mother pushing him against the wall and then him pushing her away, and her calling the police and saying he had abused her. he says she would not allow him to eat her food. these are the same issues and accounts of incidents raised by the father.   the cic report also records the following in relation to x:   much like his older brother he wanted to describe a list of things his mother has done wrong and that he did not feel safe with her. he too spoke in terms of “we” and “us”, language that is often indicative of children experiencing influence or repeated exposure to a narrative about relationships within the family.   the dhhs report prepared august 2019 records the following in relation to z and x:
i feel that [mr breton]'s constant belittling of [ms breton] has occurred in front of the children which has further increased [x] and [z] aligning with their father's beliefs.   the dhhs report of september 2020 records the following:
child protection is highly concerned over the vilification of [ms breton] by [mr breton] and the negative impact this is having on their children’s relationship with [ms breton] ...   i have noted earlier the views z and x expressed in the cic report in august 2019. they had been living with the father prior to that report. they were highly critical of the mother, (b) by the time of the first report in february 2021, x had been living with the mother for approximately four months. the first report records the following:   by the time of the first report in february 2021, x had been living with the mother for approximately four months. the first report records the following:
in relation to the current parenting arrangements, [x] was okay about spending time with his mother and acknowledged that his relationship with his mother had “kind of changed, but we still fight. i don’t hate her as much now. i used to, i didn’t even want to call her mum before. my relationship was bad.” however, [x] still maintained that he has more of a relationship with his father, asserting: “i need to see my dad more. i spent more than 3 years with my dad, he was always there, my mum worked.” [x] quickly defended that this was because of his father’s workplace injury.   by the time of the second report in january 2022, x and y had been living with the mother for approximately 15 months. asked by the report writer how he wanted to interact with his parents, x gave a more balanced view:
in relation to his parents he says he wants to do 'mix mix'. he wants to see his father for more than an hour and a half. he wants to see his father for a couple of days a week. it makes him feel bad about his life because he can not. he sees most people with their mother and father and he is the only one who sees their father for an hour or so, supervised at a dffh office in [suburb q]. he wants to have some days at his mother's and some days at his father's.   the third report from ms n is dated 12 may 2023. x had, by that stage, been back living with his father for some months. x told ms n that his mother ‘acts all nice and friendly in front of other people but on your own she doesn’t speak nicely’. he described his relationship with his father as ‘a hundred million times better than my relationship with mum’. he told ms n that he wanted to ‘live with his father and make his own decisions about seeing his mother which at the moment he does not want to do’.
section 60cc(3)(a) - views expressed by the child, etc
nature of the child’s relationship with each of the parents and other persons
extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity to spend time or communicate with the child, or participate in making decisions  following the making of the interim orders in september 2020, the father did not initiate supervision with the family contact service and as a result, did not spend any time with x and y for several months after they came into her care, (b) on 26 october 2020, the father’s solicitors advised that he was unable to pay for private supervision and requested that supervised time occur with m contact service, which the mother almost immediately agreed to, and (c) notwithstanding the above, the father then spent only limited time with x and y on four occasions being 2 may 2021, 13 june 2021, 27 june 2021 and 11 july 2021.   on 26 october 2020, the father’s solicitors advised that he was unable to pay for private supervision and requested that supervised time occur with m contact service, which the mother almost immediately agreed to, and (c) notwithstanding the above, the father then spent only limited time with x and y on four occasions being 2 may 2021, 13 june 2021, 27 june 2021 and 11 july 2021.   notwithstanding the above, the father then spent only limited time with x and y on four occasions being 2 may 2021, 13 june 2021, 27 june 2021 and 11 july 2021.
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain the child
the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, etc.  making the orders sought by the father will mean that y will need to transition between the parents in order to spend time with the mother. the overwhelming evidence in this case is that there is conflict between the parents whenever a transition occurs. that conflict can take many forms, including, as has occurred in the past, the father withholding y. there is every prospect that y will be exposed to such conflict and every prospect that such conflict will unsettle him, and (b) a notable feature of this case is that z and x have both had issues with aggression that have led to troubles at school, and with the authorities. this has occurred predominantly while both z and x have lived with the father. it is a matter reported on by dhhs. there is some prospect of this pattern being repeated.   a notable feature of this case is that z and x have both had issues with aggression that have led to troubles at school, and with the authorities. this has occurred predominantly while both z and x have lived with the father. it is a matter reported on by dhhs. there is some prospect of this pattern being repeated.
practical difficulty and expense of the child spending time with and communicating with a parent, etc  the father’s evidence, at one point, was that he cannot afford to pay for supervised time with y, should that be ordered. if he lacks capacity to pay, that will affect his ability to spend time with y if supervised time is ordered, (b) the mother’s evidence is that when she attempted to have video calls with y, the father and y’s brothers were always in the background. i accept this evidence and accept that her time with y was interrupted, and (c) there is a high probability that y will be discouraged from seeing his mother at all if he goes to live with his father and his brothers.   the mother’s evidence is that when she attempted to have video calls with y, the father and y’s brothers were always in the background. i accept this evidence and accept that her time with y was interrupted, and (c) there is a high probability that y will be discouraged from seeing his mother at all if he goes to live with his father and his brothers.   there is a high probability that y will be discouraged from seeing his mother at all if he goes to live with his father and his brothers.
the capacity of each of the child’s parents and other persons to provide for the needs of the child
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background, etc of the child and the child’s parents
the attitude to the child and to the responsibilities of parenthood, etc
family violence
the order least likely to lead to further proceedings
is the father an unacceptable risk to y?
consideration of orders
live with and spend time orders
parental responsibility
y
x
other orders sought
conclusion
associate: dated: 6 september 2023
dated: 6 september 2023