last updated: 25 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
shelburn & beazley [2023] fedcfamc2f 1163
orders
the court orders that:  the father shall notify the applicant mother ms shelburn (“the mother”) of any major-long term decisions to be made concerning the child not less than four (4) weeks prior to such decision to be made and the mother may express a view about that decision by written communication to the father, and (b) the father must give mother’s expressed view bona fide consideration when making such decision, but will not be not be bound by it.   the father must give mother’s expressed view bona fide consideration when making such decision, but will not be not be bound by it.   the child live with the father, from the conclusion of school on wednesday 6 september 2023, and (b) the child spend supervised time with the mother at the j contact centre for two (2) hours every weekend commencing 9 september 2023, subject to availability, and additional time if agreed and can be facilitated by the j contact centre, and (c) the mother is restrained from approaching the child and attending the school to seek to communicate or engage with her.   the child spend supervised time with the mother at the j contact centre for two (2) hours every weekend commencing 9 september 2023, subject to availability, and additional time if agreed and can be facilitated by the j contact centre, and (c) the mother is restrained from approaching the child and attending the school to seek to communicate or engage with her.   the mother is restrained from approaching the child and attending the school to seek to communicate or engage with her.   the child live with the father, and (b) the child spend time with the mother from after school on friday 29 september 2023 until 3:00pm monday 2 october 2023.   the child spend time with the mother from after school on friday 29 september 2023 until 3:00pm monday 2 october 2023.   with the father in the week commencing 2 october 2023, and each alternate week thereafter, (b) with the mother in the week commencing 9 october 2023, and each alternate week thereafter, and (c) with changeovers of care to occur at h school on mondays at the commencement of school or 3:00pm on a non-school day.   with the mother in the week commencing 9 october 2023, and each alternate week thereafter, and (c) with changeovers of care to occur at h school on mondays at the commencement of school or 3:00pm on a non-school day.   with changeovers of care to occur at h school on mondays at the commencement of school or 3:00pm on a non-school day.
special occasions  for christmas 2023, and each alternate year thereafter: (i) with the mother from 2:30pm on 24 december until 2:30pm on christmas day, (ii) with the father from 2:30pm on christmas day until 2:30pm on 26 december. (b) for christmas 2024, and each alternate year thereafter: (i) with the father from 2:30pm on 24 december until 2:30pm on christmas day, (ii) with the mother from 2:30pm on christmas day until 2:30pm on 26 december. (c) for mother’s and father’s day: (i) in the event the child is not with the mother on mother’s day each year, with the mother from 5:00pm the saturday prior until 5:00pm that day, (ii) in the event the child is not with the father on father’s day each year, with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday prior until 5:00pm that day.   with the mother from 2:30pm on 24 december until 2:30pm on christmas day, (ii) with the father from 2:30pm on christmas day until 2:30pm on 26 december.  ) with the father from 2:30pm on christmas day until 2:30pm on 26 december.   for christmas 2024, and each alternate year thereafter: (i) with the father from 2:30pm on 24 december until 2:30pm on christmas day, (ii) with the mother from 2:30pm on christmas day until 2:30pm on 26 december. (c) for mother’s and father’s day: (i) in the event the child is not with the mother on mother’s day each year, with the mother from 5:00pm the saturday prior until 5:00pm that day, (ii) in the event the child is not with the father on father’s day each year, with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday prior until 5:00pm that day.   with the father from 2:30pm on 24 december until 2:30pm on christmas day, (ii) with the mother from 2:30pm on christmas day until 2:30pm on 26 december.  ) with the mother from 2:30pm on christmas day until 2:30pm on 26 december.   for mother’s and father’s day: (i) in the event the child is not with the mother on mother’s day each year, with the mother from 5:00pm the saturday prior until 5:00pm that day, (ii) in the event the child is not with the father on father’s day each year, with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday prior until 5:00pm that day.   in the event the child is not with the mother on mother’s day each year, with the mother from 5:00pm the saturday prior until 5:00pm that day, (ii) in the event the child is not with the father on father’s day each year, with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday prior until 5:00pm that day.  ) in the event the child is not with the father on father’s day each year, with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday prior until 5:00pm that day.
parenting courses and other protections relating to the father
section 68b injunctions
and the court notes that:
other orders
copies of orders
reasons for judgment
judge taglieri
background
issues in dispute
the mother’s case  her affidavit filed 8 may 2023, (b) the affidavit of ms g (“the maternal grandmother”) filed 8 may 2023, (c) the affidavit of mr r filed 8 may 2023, and (d) her case outline filed 22 may 2023.   the affidavit of ms g (“the maternal grandmother”) filed 8 may 2023, (c) the affidavit of mr r filed 8 may 2023, and (d) her case outline filed 22 may 2023.   the affidavit of mr r filed 8 may 2023, and (d) her case outline filed 22 may 2023.   her case outline filed 22 may 2023.
the mother’s evidence
the maternal grandmother
mr r
the father’s case  he have sole responsibility for the child and that the child live with him, and (f) the child spend professionally supervised time with mother or, in the alternative, unsupervised on alternate weekends.   the child spend professionally supervised time with mother or, in the alternative, unsupervised on alternate weekends.   his affidavit filed 8 may 2023, (b) his affidavit filed 18 may 2023 (c) affidavit of ms e filed 8 may 2023, (d) affidavit of mr l filed 8 may 2023, (e) affidavit of mr ff (“the paternal uncle”) filed 8 may 2023, (f) affidavit of mr gg (“the paternal grandfather”) filed 8 may 2023, (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019, (h) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022, (i) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022, (j) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023, (k) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   his affidavit filed 18 may 2023 (c) affidavit of ms e filed 8 may 2023, (d) affidavit of mr l filed 8 may 2023, (e) affidavit of mr ff (“the paternal uncle”) filed 8 may 2023, (f) affidavit of mr gg (“the paternal grandfather”) filed 8 may 2023, (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019, (h) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022, (i) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022, (j) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023, (k) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   affidavit of ms e filed 8 may 2023, (d) affidavit of mr l filed 8 may 2023, (e) affidavit of mr ff (“the paternal uncle”) filed 8 may 2023, (f) affidavit of mr gg (“the paternal grandfather”) filed 8 may 2023, (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019, (h) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022, (i) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022, (j) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023, (k) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   affidavit of mr l filed 8 may 2023, (e) affidavit of mr ff (“the paternal uncle”) filed 8 may 2023, (f) affidavit of mr gg (“the paternal grandfather”) filed 8 may 2023, (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019, (h) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022, (i) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022, (j) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023, (k) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   affidavit of mr ff (“the paternal uncle”) filed 8 may 2023, (f) affidavit of mr gg (“the paternal grandfather”) filed 8 may 2023, (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019, (h) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022, (i) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022, (j) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023, (k) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   affidavit of mr gg (“the paternal grandfather”) filed 8 may 2023, (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019, (h) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022, (i) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022, (j) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023, (k) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019, (h) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022, (i) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022, (j) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023, (k) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022, (i) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022, (j) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023, (k) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022, (j) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023, (k) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023, (k) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023, and (l) his case outline filed 20 may 2023.   his case outline filed 20 may 2023.
evidence of the father  the paternal grandfather lives in the father’s household and does not have a drinking problem, (b) the paternal grandmother does not come to the father’s home due to tensions with the paternal grandfather. she has not recently spent time with the child, which is difficult for the child, (c) the child spends time with her cousins when family functions fall within time she is spending with him, but there is an age difference between the cousins and the child, and (d) the father is not close to his siblings, his older brother because he is addicted to drugs and his sister because they had a “falling out”.   the paternal grandmother does not come to the father’s home due to tensions with the paternal grandfather. she has not recently spent time with the child, which is difficult for the child, (c) the child spends time with her cousins when family functions fall within time she is spending with him, but there is an age difference between the cousins and the child, and (d) the father is not close to his siblings, his older brother because he is addicted to drugs and his sister because they had a “falling out”.   the child spends time with her cousins when family functions fall within time she is spending with him, but there is an age difference between the cousins and the child, and (d) the father is not close to his siblings, his older brother because he is addicted to drugs and his sister because they had a “falling out”.   the father is not close to his siblings, his older brother because he is addicted to drugs and his sister because they had a “falling out”.   as to the child’s presentation in his care and allegations of the “monster”, the father stated in summary that: (b) the child had the occasional nightmare when in his care overnight, and he would comfort her until she fell back asleep, (c) the descriptions in the affidavits of the maternal grandmother and mr r as being scared and frightened do not accord with his experiences of her in his care, (d) the child’s disclosures to mr r of the monster “only liking little girls” did not alarm the father as he did not think that the monster was a person in his household, but it did upset him, (e) he asked the child about the monster on one occasion as she had not mentioned it to him. the child gave short answers and had a quiet demeanour, and when the conversation had finished she resumed playing, and (f) following the child’s disclosures regarding the monster, the father became more cautious while she was in his care. he stayed up after the child went to bed to ensure that she was fully asleep and not having nightmares.   the child had the occasional nightmare when in his care overnight, and he would comfort her until she fell back asleep, (c) the descriptions in the affidavits of the maternal grandmother and mr r as being scared and frightened do not accord with his experiences of her in his care, (d) the child’s disclosures to mr r of the monster “only liking little girls” did not alarm the father as he did not think that the monster was a person in his household, but it did upset him, (e) he asked the child about the monster on one occasion as she had not mentioned it to him. the child gave short answers and had a quiet demeanour, and when the conversation had finished she resumed playing, and (f) following the child’s disclosures regarding the monster, the father became more cautious while she was in his care. he stayed up after the child went to bed to ensure that she was fully asleep and not having nightmares.   the descriptions in the affidavits of the maternal grandmother and mr r as being scared and frightened do not accord with his experiences of her in his care, (d) the child’s disclosures to mr r of the monster “only liking little girls” did not alarm the father as he did not think that the monster was a person in his household, but it did upset him, (e) he asked the child about the monster on one occasion as she had not mentioned it to him. the child gave short answers and had a quiet demeanour, and when the conversation had finished she resumed playing, and (f) following the child’s disclosures regarding the monster, the father became more cautious while she was in his care. he stayed up after the child went to bed to ensure that she was fully asleep and not having nightmares.   the child’s disclosures to mr r of the monster “only liking little girls” did not alarm the father as he did not think that the monster was a person in his household, but it did upset him, (e) he asked the child about the monster on one occasion as she had not mentioned it to him. the child gave short answers and had a quiet demeanour, and when the conversation had finished she resumed playing, and (f) following the child’s disclosures regarding the monster, the father became more cautious while she was in his care. he stayed up after the child went to bed to ensure that she was fully asleep and not having nightmares.   he asked the child about the monster on one occasion as she had not mentioned it to him. the child gave short answers and had a quiet demeanour, and when the conversation had finished she resumed playing, and (f) following the child’s disclosures regarding the monster, the father became more cautious while she was in his care. he stayed up after the child went to bed to ensure that she was fully asleep and not having nightmares.   following the child’s disclosures regarding the monster, the father became more cautious while she was in his care. he stayed up after the child went to bed to ensure that she was fully asleep and not having nightmares.   the mother has made most of the decisions concerning the child, although he has had opportunity to take part, (b) shared decision making does not work well as they do not trust each other and communicate poorly. he also agreed that there will always be tension between them, and this is unlikely to improve, (c) the child loves the mother and has a meaningful relationship with her and members of the maternal family, (d) the connection with the mother and the maternal family would be lost if the child moved into the father’s primary care and had only supervised visits with the mother, and (e) he had no concerns about the mother’s parenting capacity or abilities until recently, which i inferred was reference to the revelation of mr bb’s offending.   shared decision making does not work well as they do not trust each other and communicate poorly. he also agreed that there will always be tension between them, and this is unlikely to improve, (c) the child loves the mother and has a meaningful relationship with her and members of the maternal family, (d) the connection with the mother and the maternal family would be lost if the child moved into the father’s primary care and had only supervised visits with the mother, and (e) he had no concerns about the mother’s parenting capacity or abilities until recently, which i inferred was reference to the revelation of mr bb’s offending.   the child loves the mother and has a meaningful relationship with her and members of the maternal family, (d) the connection with the mother and the maternal family would be lost if the child moved into the father’s primary care and had only supervised visits with the mother, and (e) he had no concerns about the mother’s parenting capacity or abilities until recently, which i inferred was reference to the revelation of mr bb’s offending.   the connection with the mother and the maternal family would be lost if the child moved into the father’s primary care and had only supervised visits with the mother, and (e) he had no concerns about the mother’s parenting capacity or abilities until recently, which i inferred was reference to the revelation of mr bb’s offending.   he had no concerns about the mother’s parenting capacity or abilities until recently, which i inferred was reference to the revelation of mr bb’s offending.
ms e
the paternal grandfather  that he has never seen the father smack the child, but had seen the father smack the half-brother once. this was when the half-brother ran out on to a road and not in respect of a toileting accident as alleged by the mother. (b) about the advice he gave to the father concerning how to smack the children, he said it was to clasp a cupped hand around the child’s hand so as to cause a noise and not actually touch the child. (c) he has never observed the father smoke around the child and has only seen the father smoke outside the house. (d) he has also never known the father put deodorant on the child, which he knows aggravates her eczema. (e) he has seen the father go through “hard times” in his high school years and following the death by suicide of his friend and then his brother’s death six months later.   about the advice he gave to the father concerning how to smack the children, he said it was to clasp a cupped hand around the child’s hand so as to cause a noise and not actually touch the child. (c) he has never observed the father smoke around the child and has only seen the father smoke outside the house. (d) he has also never known the father put deodorant on the child, which he knows aggravates her eczema. (e) he has seen the father go through “hard times” in his high school years and following the death by suicide of his friend and then his brother’s death six months later.   he has never observed the father smoke around the child and has only seen the father smoke outside the house. (d) he has also never known the father put deodorant on the child, which he knows aggravates her eczema. (e) he has seen the father go through “hard times” in his high school years and following the death by suicide of his friend and then his brother’s death six months later.   he has also never known the father put deodorant on the child, which he knows aggravates her eczema. (e) he has seen the father go through “hard times” in his high school years and following the death by suicide of his friend and then his brother’s death six months later.   he has seen the father go through “hard times” in his high school years and following the death by suicide of his friend and then his brother’s death six months later.   he has invited the father to discuss any issues with him, (b) he has discussed with the father the possibility of the half-brother spending time with the child and the father at the j contact centre, but it would require four car trips for each visit. the paternal grandfather is the one who drives the father to and from the j contact centre, and would have to also collect the half-brother from ms e’s house, (c) he sometimes has alcoholic drinks two or three times a week at a bar with friends, (d) he maintained the evidence in his affidavit at [34] that the father does not drink to excess, (e) the bruising to the child after a fall in the father’s care to which he refers in his affidavit at [39] was a red mark rather than a bruise, (f) the father did not binge drink during the period the child was spending overnight time in his house, and if the paternal grandfather had observed such behaviour he would have “pulled him up on it”, (g) any anxiety the father experienced from text messages from the mother was due to the length and number of those messages. the father would answer simply and succinctly, only to receive another lengthy reply, (h) mr l would on occasion be in the bedroom with the child or the half-brother, but the door was never closed and the father regularly checked on them, (i) the child had not reported negatively to him about time she spent with mr bb. when she spoke positively about it, he would reply to the effect of “i’m glad you had a good time”, (j) agreed that the child loves the mother, and were the court to order that the child live with the father then there would be a period of transition for the child. the paternal family would help the child work through that, and (k) he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.   he has discussed with the father the possibility of the half-brother spending time with the child and the father at the j contact centre, but it would require four car trips for each visit. the paternal grandfather is the one who drives the father to and from the j contact centre, and would have to also collect the half-brother from ms e’s house, (c) he sometimes has alcoholic drinks two or three times a week at a bar with friends, (d) he maintained the evidence in his affidavit at [34] that the father does not drink to excess, (e) the bruising to the child after a fall in the father’s care to which he refers in his affidavit at [39] was a red mark rather than a bruise, (f) the father did not binge drink during the period the child was spending overnight time in his house, and if the paternal grandfather had observed such behaviour he would have “pulled him up on it”, (g) any anxiety the father experienced from text messages from the mother was due to the length and number of those messages. the father would answer simply and succinctly, only to receive another lengthy reply, (h) mr l would on occasion be in the bedroom with the child or the half-brother, but the door was never closed and the father regularly checked on them, (i) the child had not reported negatively to him about time she spent with mr bb. when she spoke positively about it, he would reply to the effect of “i’m glad you had a good time”, (j) agreed that the child loves the mother, and were the court to order that the child live with the father then there would be a period of transition for the child. the paternal family would help the child work through that, and (k) he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.   he sometimes has alcoholic drinks two or three times a week at a bar with friends, (d) he maintained the evidence in his affidavit at [34] that the father does not drink to excess, (e) the bruising to the child after a fall in the father’s care to which he refers in his affidavit at [39] was a red mark rather than a bruise, (f) the father did not binge drink during the period the child was spending overnight time in his house, and if the paternal grandfather had observed such behaviour he would have “pulled him up on it”, (g) any anxiety the father experienced from text messages from the mother was due to the length and number of those messages. the father would answer simply and succinctly, only to receive another lengthy reply, (h) mr l would on occasion be in the bedroom with the child or the half-brother, but the door was never closed and the father regularly checked on them, (i) the child had not reported negatively to him about time she spent with mr bb. when she spoke positively about it, he would reply to the effect of “i’m glad you had a good time”, (j) agreed that the child loves the mother, and were the court to order that the child live with the father then there would be a period of transition for the child. the paternal family would help the child work through that, and (k) he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.   he maintained the evidence in his affidavit at [34] that the father does not drink to excess, (e) the bruising to the child after a fall in the father’s care to which he refers in his affidavit at [39] was a red mark rather than a bruise, (f) the father did not binge drink during the period the child was spending overnight time in his house, and if the paternal grandfather had observed such behaviour he would have “pulled him up on it”, (g) any anxiety the father experienced from text messages from the mother was due to the length and number of those messages. the father would answer simply and succinctly, only to receive another lengthy reply, (h) mr l would on occasion be in the bedroom with the child or the half-brother, but the door was never closed and the father regularly checked on them, (i) the child had not reported negatively to him about time she spent with mr bb. when she spoke positively about it, he would reply to the effect of “i’m glad you had a good time”, (j) agreed that the child loves the mother, and were the court to order that the child live with the father then there would be a period of transition for the child. the paternal family would help the child work through that, and (k) he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.   the bruising to the child after a fall in the father’s care to which he refers in his affidavit at [39] was a red mark rather than a bruise, (f) the father did not binge drink during the period the child was spending overnight time in his house, and if the paternal grandfather had observed such behaviour he would have “pulled him up on it”, (g) any anxiety the father experienced from text messages from the mother was due to the length and number of those messages. the father would answer simply and succinctly, only to receive another lengthy reply, (h) mr l would on occasion be in the bedroom with the child or the half-brother, but the door was never closed and the father regularly checked on them, (i) the child had not reported negatively to him about time she spent with mr bb. when she spoke positively about it, he would reply to the effect of “i’m glad you had a good time”, (j) agreed that the child loves the mother, and were the court to order that the child live with the father then there would be a period of transition for the child. the paternal family would help the child work through that, and (k) he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.   the father did not binge drink during the period the child was spending overnight time in his house, and if the paternal grandfather had observed such behaviour he would have “pulled him up on it”, (g) any anxiety the father experienced from text messages from the mother was due to the length and number of those messages. the father would answer simply and succinctly, only to receive another lengthy reply, (h) mr l would on occasion be in the bedroom with the child or the half-brother, but the door was never closed and the father regularly checked on them, (i) the child had not reported negatively to him about time she spent with mr bb. when she spoke positively about it, he would reply to the effect of “i’m glad you had a good time”, (j) agreed that the child loves the mother, and were the court to order that the child live with the father then there would be a period of transition for the child. the paternal family would help the child work through that, and (k) he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.   any anxiety the father experienced from text messages from the mother was due to the length and number of those messages. the father would answer simply and succinctly, only to receive another lengthy reply, (h) mr l would on occasion be in the bedroom with the child or the half-brother, but the door was never closed and the father regularly checked on them, (i) the child had not reported negatively to him about time she spent with mr bb. when she spoke positively about it, he would reply to the effect of “i’m glad you had a good time”, (j) agreed that the child loves the mother, and were the court to order that the child live with the father then there would be a period of transition for the child. the paternal family would help the child work through that, and (k) he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.   mr l would on occasion be in the bedroom with the child or the half-brother, but the door was never closed and the father regularly checked on them, (i) the child had not reported negatively to him about time she spent with mr bb. when she spoke positively about it, he would reply to the effect of “i’m glad you had a good time”, (j) agreed that the child loves the mother, and were the court to order that the child live with the father then there would be a period of transition for the child. the paternal family would help the child work through that, and (k) he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.   the child had not reported negatively to him about time she spent with mr bb. when she spoke positively about it, he would reply to the effect of “i’m glad you had a good time”, (j) agreed that the child loves the mother, and were the court to order that the child live with the father then there would be a period of transition for the child. the paternal family would help the child work through that, and (k) he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.   agreed that the child loves the mother, and were the court to order that the child live with the father then there would be a period of transition for the child. the paternal family would help the child work through that, and (k) he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.   he takes medication to assist with his back pain. this is under the direction of a doctor, and they have worked to find pain relief which does not make him drowsy.
the paternal uncle  he visits the father once a fortnight, and used to visit as much as possible when the children were there, (b) he did not contact the mother directly to spend time with the child. this was because he thought, given the situation between the mother and the father, it was most appropriate to make arrangements with the father, (c) he cannot recall if he witnessed the child fall off a bunk bed while in the father’s care, (d) the child has fun with the father, the paternal grandmother, and the half-brother, (e) he was present for the incident at the pool, however he cannot recall the child being upset, (f) there has been conflict in the paternal family, especially between the paternal grandfather and paternal grandmother, (g) the father has asked him for parenting advice in the past. he did not recommended that the father take the child to the doctor for her eczema, as he presumed that the mother would do so if needed as she was in her care more, and (h) he did not discuss the contents of his affidavit with the father while composing it, nor did the father tell him what to include.   he did not contact the mother directly to spend time with the child. this was because he thought, given the situation between the mother and the father, it was most appropriate to make arrangements with the father, (c) he cannot recall if he witnessed the child fall off a bunk bed while in the father’s care, (d) the child has fun with the father, the paternal grandmother, and the half-brother, (e) he was present for the incident at the pool, however he cannot recall the child being upset, (f) there has been conflict in the paternal family, especially between the paternal grandfather and paternal grandmother, (g) the father has asked him for parenting advice in the past. he did not recommended that the father take the child to the doctor for her eczema, as he presumed that the mother would do so if needed as she was in her care more, and (h) he did not discuss the contents of his affidavit with the father while composing it, nor did the father tell him what to include.   he cannot recall if he witnessed the child fall off a bunk bed while in the father’s care, (d) the child has fun with the father, the paternal grandmother, and the half-brother, (e) he was present for the incident at the pool, however he cannot recall the child being upset, (f) there has been conflict in the paternal family, especially between the paternal grandfather and paternal grandmother, (g) the father has asked him for parenting advice in the past. he did not recommended that the father take the child to the doctor for her eczema, as he presumed that the mother would do so if needed as she was in her care more, and (h) he did not discuss the contents of his affidavit with the father while composing it, nor did the father tell him what to include.   the child has fun with the father, the paternal grandmother, and the half-brother, (e) he was present for the incident at the pool, however he cannot recall the child being upset, (f) there has been conflict in the paternal family, especially between the paternal grandfather and paternal grandmother, (g) the father has asked him for parenting advice in the past. he did not recommended that the father take the child to the doctor for her eczema, as he presumed that the mother would do so if needed as she was in her care more, and (h) he did not discuss the contents of his affidavit with the father while composing it, nor did the father tell him what to include.   he was present for the incident at the pool, however he cannot recall the child being upset, (f) there has been conflict in the paternal family, especially between the paternal grandfather and paternal grandmother, (g) the father has asked him for parenting advice in the past. he did not recommended that the father take the child to the doctor for her eczema, as he presumed that the mother would do so if needed as she was in her care more, and (h) he did not discuss the contents of his affidavit with the father while composing it, nor did the father tell him what to include.   there has been conflict in the paternal family, especially between the paternal grandfather and paternal grandmother, (g) the father has asked him for parenting advice in the past. he did not recommended that the father take the child to the doctor for her eczema, as he presumed that the mother would do so if needed as she was in her care more, and (h) he did not discuss the contents of his affidavit with the father while composing it, nor did the father tell him what to include.   the father has asked him for parenting advice in the past. he did not recommended that the father take the child to the doctor for her eczema, as he presumed that the mother would do so if needed as she was in her care more, and (h) he did not discuss the contents of his affidavit with the father while composing it, nor did the father tell him what to include.   he did not discuss the contents of his affidavit with the father while composing it, nor did the father tell him what to include.
mr l
the icl’s case  child dispute conference memorandum dated 1 february 2021 (exhibit icl-1), (b) section 69zw report from dated 7 july 2022 (exhibit icl-2), (c) section 69zw report from dated 11 november 2022 (exhibit icl-3), (d) affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019 (exhibit icl-4), (e) affidavit of dr q filed 7 november 2021 (exhibit icl-5), (f) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022 (exhibit icl-6), (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022 (exhibit icl-7), (h) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023 (exhibit icl-8), (i) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023 (exhibit icl-9), and (j) affidavit of dr hh filed 5 may 2023 (exhibit icl-10), and (k) the case outline filed 21 may 2023.   section 69zw report from dated 7 july 2022 (exhibit icl-2), (c) section 69zw report from dated 11 november 2022 (exhibit icl-3), (d) affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019 (exhibit icl-4), (e) affidavit of dr q filed 7 november 2021 (exhibit icl-5), (f) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022 (exhibit icl-6), (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022 (exhibit icl-7), (h) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023 (exhibit icl-8), (i) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023 (exhibit icl-9), and (j) affidavit of dr hh filed 5 may 2023 (exhibit icl-10), and (k) the case outline filed 21 may 2023.   section 69zw report from dated 11 november 2022 (exhibit icl-3), (d) affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019 (exhibit icl-4), (e) affidavit of dr q filed 7 november 2021 (exhibit icl-5), (f) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022 (exhibit icl-6), (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022 (exhibit icl-7), (h) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023 (exhibit icl-8), (i) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023 (exhibit icl-9), and (j) affidavit of dr hh filed 5 may 2023 (exhibit icl-10), and (k) the case outline filed 21 may 2023.   affidavit of dr q filed 15 april 2019 (exhibit icl-4), (e) affidavit of dr q filed 7 november 2021 (exhibit icl-5), (f) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022 (exhibit icl-6), (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022 (exhibit icl-7), (h) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023 (exhibit icl-8), (i) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023 (exhibit icl-9), and (j) affidavit of dr hh filed 5 may 2023 (exhibit icl-10), and (k) the case outline filed 21 may 2023.   affidavit of dr q filed 7 november 2021 (exhibit icl-5), (f) affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022 (exhibit icl-6), (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022 (exhibit icl-7), (h) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023 (exhibit icl-8), (i) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023 (exhibit icl-9), and (j) affidavit of dr hh filed 5 may 2023 (exhibit icl-10), and (k) the case outline filed 21 may 2023.   affidavit of dr q filed 4 april 2022 (exhibit icl-6), (g) affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022 (exhibit icl-7), (h) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023 (exhibit icl-8), (i) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023 (exhibit icl-9), and (j) affidavit of dr hh filed 5 may 2023 (exhibit icl-10), and (k) the case outline filed 21 may 2023.   affidavit of dr q filed 15 december 2022 (exhibit icl-7), (h) affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023 (exhibit icl-8), (i) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023 (exhibit icl-9), and (j) affidavit of dr hh filed 5 may 2023 (exhibit icl-10), and (k) the case outline filed 21 may 2023.   affidavit of dr q filed 10 april 2023 (exhibit icl-8), (i) affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023 (exhibit icl-9), and (j) affidavit of dr hh filed 5 may 2023 (exhibit icl-10), and (k) the case outline filed 21 may 2023.   affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023 (exhibit icl-9), and (j) affidavit of dr hh filed 5 may 2023 (exhibit icl-10), and (k) the case outline filed 21 may 2023.   affidavit of dr hh filed 5 may 2023 (exhibit icl-10), and (k) the case outline filed 21 may 2023.   the case outline filed 21 may 2023.
dr dd
ms u  the mother pushed for the child’s re-engagement with t support service, and the service accepted the referral only on the basis that there was a consent order made by the court,[12] (b) the child made a statement that someone or something was touching her in her father’s house, and indicated her private parts, (c) she recommended no further sessions in her letter dated 24 june 2022[13] as it could be construed that the child was being lead into disclosing harm, given the lack of clear disclosures to date, (d) the only time the child became distressed when discussing the possibility of not going to the father’s house was in the context of not seeing her brother. the child said she would tell ms u who was touching her if ms u promised her that she would still be allowed to see the half-brother, but she did not specify the sort of touch to which she was referring or when it occurred, and (e) there were inconsistencies in the child’s reporting.   the child made a statement that someone or something was touching her in her father’s house, and indicated her private parts, (c) she recommended no further sessions in her letter dated 24 june 2022[13] as it could be construed that the child was being lead into disclosing harm, given the lack of clear disclosures to date, (d) the only time the child became distressed when discussing the possibility of not going to the father’s house was in the context of not seeing her brother. the child said she would tell ms u who was touching her if ms u promised her that she would still be allowed to see the half-brother, but she did not specify the sort of touch to which she was referring or when it occurred, and (e) there were inconsistencies in the child’s reporting.   she recommended no further sessions in her letter dated 24 june 2022[13] as it could be construed that the child was being lead into disclosing harm, given the lack of clear disclosures to date, (d) the only time the child became distressed when discussing the possibility of not going to the father’s house was in the context of not seeing her brother. the child said she would tell ms u who was touching her if ms u promised her that she would still be allowed to see the half-brother, but she did not specify the sort of touch to which she was referring or when it occurred, and (e) there were inconsistencies in the child’s reporting.   the only time the child became distressed when discussing the possibility of not going to the father’s house was in the context of not seeing her brother. the child said she would tell ms u who was touching her if ms u promised her that she would still be allowed to see the half-brother, but she did not specify the sort of touch to which she was referring or when it occurred, and (e) there were inconsistencies in the child’s reporting.   there were inconsistencies in the child’s reporting.   it can be normal for victims of sexual abuse to report inconsistently, (b) most parents access t support service for the sake of their children, although some do for family law purposes, (c) the child did not report anything indicative of family violence in the mother’s home, (d) she had the report of dr q referred to by the mother in an email dated 3 february 2023[14] on the child’s file, but has not read it due to time constraints, (e) ms u had one phone conversation with the father, and he did not attend any appointments. he was anxious about whether he was supposed to talk with her and said he needed to check with his solicitor, and (f) when asked whether it was normal for a child to not want to disclose sexual assault, stated it is difficult to give a general answer as they may want to do so, but not know how to express it or may not feel safe.   most parents access t support service for the sake of their children, although some do for family law purposes, (c) the child did not report anything indicative of family violence in the mother’s home, (d) she had the report of dr q referred to by the mother in an email dated 3 february 2023[14] on the child’s file, but has not read it due to time constraints, (e) ms u had one phone conversation with the father, and he did not attend any appointments. he was anxious about whether he was supposed to talk with her and said he needed to check with his solicitor, and (f) when asked whether it was normal for a child to not want to disclose sexual assault, stated it is difficult to give a general answer as they may want to do so, but not know how to express it or may not feel safe.   the child did not report anything indicative of family violence in the mother’s home, (d) she had the report of dr q referred to by the mother in an email dated 3 february 2023[14] on the child’s file, but has not read it due to time constraints, (e) ms u had one phone conversation with the father, and he did not attend any appointments. he was anxious about whether he was supposed to talk with her and said he needed to check with his solicitor, and (f) when asked whether it was normal for a child to not want to disclose sexual assault, stated it is difficult to give a general answer as they may want to do so, but not know how to express it or may not feel safe.   she had the report of dr q referred to by the mother in an email dated 3 february 2023[14] on the child’s file, but has not read it due to time constraints, (e) ms u had one phone conversation with the father, and he did not attend any appointments. he was anxious about whether he was supposed to talk with her and said he needed to check with his solicitor, and (f) when asked whether it was normal for a child to not want to disclose sexual assault, stated it is difficult to give a general answer as they may want to do so, but not know how to express it or may not feel safe.   ms u had one phone conversation with the father, and he did not attend any appointments. he was anxious about whether he was supposed to talk with her and said he needed to check with his solicitor, and (f) when asked whether it was normal for a child to not want to disclose sexual assault, stated it is difficult to give a general answer as they may want to do so, but not know how to express it or may not feel safe.   when asked whether it was normal for a child to not want to disclose sexual assault, stated it is difficult to give a general answer as they may want to do so, but not know how to express it or may not feel safe.
dr q
i’ve reflected closely on this, looked at the notes of conversations and things make more sense.   if it was that the mother who had previously notified mr r about mr bb and his criminal offending, this indicated subterfuge on the mother’s part, (b) the content of the mother’s text messages of 11 may 2022 to mr bb’s ex-partner, read to dr q’s during cross-examination, led her to form the view that the mother is in a toxic attachment with mr bb, is complicit in vilification of ms cc even though mr bb pleaded guilty to persistent family violence, and she portrays otherwise to protect herself from the reality. she stated this demonstrated cognitive distortion, because mr bb has admitted the offending, (c) the mother’s maintenance of allegations against the father, when the mother has been told by the paediatrician dr dd, the general practitioners whom she attended with the child fortnightly in 2021, police and css that the father is not a risk, indicates that the mother’s judgment is impaired, (d) this impaired judgment presents risk to the child which is chronic and documented in her reports. holding obsessive views contrary to the evidence, being in a toxic relationship and overtly criticising ms cc, while fostering a loving relationship with mr bb means the child is exposed to serious risk, and (e) even completely discounting family violence on the part of mr bb, dr q considered that the criticisms of the father in the face of no clear evidence is incongruous and puts the child at risk emotionally.   the content of the mother’s text messages of 11 may 2022 to mr bb’s ex-partner, read to dr q’s during cross-examination, led her to form the view that the mother is in a toxic attachment with mr bb, is complicit in vilification of ms cc even though mr bb pleaded guilty to persistent family violence, and she portrays otherwise to protect herself from the reality. she stated this demonstrated cognitive distortion, because mr bb has admitted the offending, (c) the mother’s maintenance of allegations against the father, when the mother has been told by the paediatrician dr dd, the general practitioners whom she attended with the child fortnightly in 2021, police and css that the father is not a risk, indicates that the mother’s judgment is impaired, (d) this impaired judgment presents risk to the child which is chronic and documented in her reports. holding obsessive views contrary to the evidence, being in a toxic relationship and overtly criticising ms cc, while fostering a loving relationship with mr bb means the child is exposed to serious risk, and (e) even completely discounting family violence on the part of mr bb, dr q considered that the criticisms of the father in the face of no clear evidence is incongruous and puts the child at risk emotionally.   the mother’s maintenance of allegations against the father, when the mother has been told by the paediatrician dr dd, the general practitioners whom she attended with the child fortnightly in 2021, police and css that the father is not a risk, indicates that the mother’s judgment is impaired, (d) this impaired judgment presents risk to the child which is chronic and documented in her reports. holding obsessive views contrary to the evidence, being in a toxic relationship and overtly criticising ms cc, while fostering a loving relationship with mr bb means the child is exposed to serious risk, and (e) even completely discounting family violence on the part of mr bb, dr q considered that the criticisms of the father in the face of no clear evidence is incongruous and puts the child at risk emotionally.   this impaired judgment presents risk to the child which is chronic and documented in her reports. holding obsessive views contrary to the evidence, being in a toxic relationship and overtly criticising ms cc, while fostering a loving relationship with mr bb means the child is exposed to serious risk, and (e) even completely discounting family violence on the part of mr bb, dr q considered that the criticisms of the father in the face of no clear evidence is incongruous and puts the child at risk emotionally.   even completely discounting family violence on the part of mr bb, dr q considered that the criticisms of the father in the face of no clear evidence is incongruous and puts the child at risk emotionally.
cross-examination by the mother  that the mother would find it difficult but could tolerate it, and (b) she was supportive of a parallel parenting approach, as it could possibly ameliorate the risks posed to the child in each household, and (c) that the relationship between the child and the mother was strong enough to be maintained if the court ordered that the child spend less time with the mother than she does currently.   she was supportive of a parallel parenting approach, as it could possibly ameliorate the risks posed to the child in each household, and (c) that the relationship between the child and the mother was strong enough to be maintained if the court ordered that the child spend less time with the mother than she does currently.   that the relationship between the child and the mother was strong enough to be maintained if the court ordered that the child spend less time with the mother than she does currently.
dr hh  initially the mother had hoped for a cooperative co-parenting arrangement with the father, but then realised she may not get a response to her communications, (b) they discussed finding a balance between conducting her family law matter and having a ‘switch off’ period, (c) the mother told her that sometimes her support would come from mr bb of a weekend, (d) the mother did not identify any negative aspects of her relationship with mr bb, although that would only have been discussed if the mother raised it with her as her therapeutic role was quite targeted.   they discussed finding a balance between conducting her family law matter and having a ‘switch off’ period, (c) the mother told her that sometimes her support would come from mr bb of a weekend, (d) the mother did not identify any negative aspects of her relationship with mr bb, although that would only have been discussed if the mother raised it with her as her therapeutic role was quite targeted.   the mother told her that sometimes her support would come from mr bb of a weekend, (d) the mother did not identify any negative aspects of her relationship with mr bb, although that would only have been discussed if the mother raised it with her as her therapeutic role was quite targeted.   the mother did not identify any negative aspects of her relationship with mr bb, although that would only have been discussed if the mother raised it with her as her therapeutic role was quite targeted.
legal principles
evaluation and findings  i accept the evidence of dr q that the father and his extended family are likely to provide “good enough care” for the child, (b) it is unlikely the child has been sexually abused in the father’s household and the reports made by the child are more likely explained by the mother’s interpretation and response to it based on her obsessive and overprotective traits, (c) there is another, more plausible explanation for the reports by the child, being that offered by dr q and ms u relating to the effect of repeated questioning around the reports and allegations, and (d) i accept the assessments and views referred to in the reasons below at [206].   it is unlikely the child has been sexually abused in the father’s household and the reports made by the child are more likely explained by the mother’s interpretation and response to it based on her obsessive and overprotective traits, (c) there is another, more plausible explanation for the reports by the child, being that offered by dr q and ms u relating to the effect of repeated questioning around the reports and allegations, and (d) i accept the assessments and views referred to in the reasons below at [206].   there is another, more plausible explanation for the reports by the child, being that offered by dr q and ms u relating to the effect of repeated questioning around the reports and allegations, and (d) i accept the assessments and views referred to in the reasons below at [206].   i accept the assessments and views referred to in the reasons below at [206].   the child progressing to spend significant and substantial time in the mother’s care on a regular basis, and (b) the child being supported with provision of qualified psychotherapy, (c) the immediate opportunity for the child to spend time with her half-brother, as the evidence establishes that ms e will cooperate with the father to enable this, and (d) the mother being restrained from speaking to the child about arrangements contrary to the final orders of the court.   the child being supported with provision of qualified psychotherapy, (c) the immediate opportunity for the child to spend time with her half-brother, as the evidence establishes that ms e will cooperate with the father to enable this, and (d) the mother being restrained from speaking to the child about arrangements contrary to the final orders of the court.   the immediate opportunity for the child to spend time with her half-brother, as the evidence establishes that ms e will cooperate with the father to enable this, and (d) the mother being restrained from speaking to the child about arrangements contrary to the final orders of the court.   the mother being restrained from speaking to the child about arrangements contrary to the final orders of the court.
determination  the child is not exposed to unacceptable risk of either physical or emotional harm in the care of the father,[36] (b) the mother has, by virtue of distorted thinking and impairment, or possibly improper motive, engaged in behaviour that has capacity to alienate the child from the father, (c) the risk to the child of emotional harm if she remains in the primary care of the mother and has limited time with the father is real and significant, (d) there should be orders that reduce the risk of emotional harm presented by the mother and that foster promotion of the child’s relationship with the father and paternal family, (e) there should be orders that protect or mitigate against the very low risk that the child has been exposed to sexual assault or abuse in the father’s home or may be so exposed in the future, (f) there should be restraints that prohibit physical discipline of the child, whether direct or indirect, and (g) the father should continue to improve his parenting and coping skills with the additional demands that he will have for the child as he spends more time with her.   the mother has, by virtue of distorted thinking and impairment, or possibly improper motive, engaged in behaviour that has capacity to alienate the child from the father, (c) the risk to the child of emotional harm if she remains in the primary care of the mother and has limited time with the father is real and significant, (d) there should be orders that reduce the risk of emotional harm presented by the mother and that foster promotion of the child’s relationship with the father and paternal family, (e) there should be orders that protect or mitigate against the very low risk that the child has been exposed to sexual assault or abuse in the father’s home or may be so exposed in the future, (f) there should be restraints that prohibit physical discipline of the child, whether direct or indirect, and (g) the father should continue to improve his parenting and coping skills with the additional demands that he will have for the child as he spends more time with her.   the risk to the child of emotional harm if she remains in the primary care of the mother and has limited time with the father is real and significant, (d) there should be orders that reduce the risk of emotional harm presented by the mother and that foster promotion of the child’s relationship with the father and paternal family, (e) there should be orders that protect or mitigate against the very low risk that the child has been exposed to sexual assault or abuse in the father’s home or may be so exposed in the future, (f) there should be restraints that prohibit physical discipline of the child, whether direct or indirect, and (g) the father should continue to improve his parenting and coping skills with the additional demands that he will have for the child as he spends more time with her.   there should be orders that reduce the risk of emotional harm presented by the mother and that foster promotion of the child’s relationship with the father and paternal family, (e) there should be orders that protect or mitigate against the very low risk that the child has been exposed to sexual assault or abuse in the father’s home or may be so exposed in the future, (f) there should be restraints that prohibit physical discipline of the child, whether direct or indirect, and (g) the father should continue to improve his parenting and coping skills with the additional demands that he will have for the child as he spends more time with her.   there should be orders that protect or mitigate against the very low risk that the child has been exposed to sexual assault or abuse in the father’s home or may be so exposed in the future, (f) there should be restraints that prohibit physical discipline of the child, whether direct or indirect, and (g) the father should continue to improve his parenting and coping skills with the additional demands that he will have for the child as he spends more time with her.   there should be restraints that prohibit physical discipline of the child, whether direct or indirect, and (g) the father should continue to improve his parenting and coping skills with the additional demands that he will have for the child as he spends more time with her.   the father should continue to improve his parenting and coping skills with the additional demands that he will have for the child as he spends more time with her.   i accept the views of dr q referred to at [136] to [138] of these reasons, (ii) the child has already undertaken education with t support service, and has some awareness of risks which will improve as she ages, and (iii) the father’s parenting capacity and protective behaviours are likely to improve.  ) the child has already undertaken education with t support service, and has some awareness of risks which will improve as she ages, and (iii) the father’s parenting capacity and protective behaviours are likely to improve.  i) the father’s parenting capacity and protective behaviours are likely to improve.   any adult from sleeping in the same bedroom as the child, (b) any adult assisting the child with personal hygiene and bathing/showering. as the child is now eight years old, she is likely to be independent as to this and no evidence to the contrary was adduced., (c) any person other than the father from applying eczema creams or administering other treatment for the child’s personal care while she is in the care of the father.   any adult assisting the child with personal hygiene and bathing/showering. as the child is now eight years old, she is likely to be independent as to this and no evidence to the contrary was adduced., (c) any person other than the father from applying eczema creams or administering other treatment for the child’s personal care while she is in the care of the father.   any person other than the father from applying eczema creams or administering other treatment for the child’s personal care while she is in the care of the father.
associate: dated: 6 september 2023
dated: 6 september 2023
[1] exhibit icl-12, exhibit icl-13, and exhibit icl-14.[2] tender bundle 1 on page 398.[3] tender bundle 2 on page 72.[4] tender bundle 2 on page 73[5] tender bundle 2 at page 128.[6] exhibit f-1.[7] exhibit icl-13[8] exhibit icl-14[9] at [114] of these reasons.[10] affidavit of ms u filed 8 may 2023 at [6] and [7].[11] exhibit icl-15.[12] order made 30 november 2021.[13] mother’s court book on pages 121 and 122.[14] exhibit icl-16.[15] exhibit icl-16.[16] exhibit icl-22.[17] exhibit icl-21.[18] exhibit icl-10.[19] exhibit icl-10 on page 11.[20] section 60ca of the act.[21] aldridge &keaton [2009] famcafc 229; (2009) flc 93-421; slater & light [2011] famcafc 1.[22] dieter & dieter [2011] famcafc 82 and marvel & marvel [2010] famcafc 101.[23] section 61da(1) to 61da(4).[24] sections 61b and 65dac.[25] section 65daa of the act.[26] especially at [9], [12], [13] and [14].[27] noting the evidence at [150], [151] and [177] of these reasons.[28] exhibit icl-2; exhibit icl-3; exhibit icl-8; exhibit icl-13; exhibit icl-14; exhibit icl-15; exhibit f-13.[29] as conceded by the father and referred to at [67] of these reasons.[30] report of dr q dated 17 november 2021 at [48].[31] at [15] of these reasons.[32] affidavit of the mother filed 8 may 2023 at [27] and [43]; at [106] of these reasons.[33] at [204] of these reasons.[34] on 14 may 2018, 15 may 2018, 13 january 2020, 3 june 2020, 4 june 2020, 6 june 2020, 8 june 2020, 5 july 2020, 8 july 2020, 10 july 2020, 20 october 2020, 25 january 2021, 9 february 2021, 16 february 2021, 17 february 2021, 23 february 02021, 4 march 2021, 31 march 2021, 9 april 2021, 22 april 2021, 14 july 2021, 28 july 2021, 13 august 2021, 30 august 2021, 8 february 2022, 11 february 2022, 12 august 2022, 10 october 2022, 14 november 2022, 27 november 2022, [35] at [166] of these reasons.[36] preferring the evidence of dr q at [157] to [160] of these reasons.[37] [220] of these reasons[38] at [159] of these reasons. [39] affidavit of the father filed 8 may 2023 at [225].