last updated: 13 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bhakta & konda [2023] fedcfamc2f 1180
orders
the court orders and declares that:
reasons for judgment
judge turnbull
overview
fact / chronology
marriage
wife’s application for annulment
the husband’s application for divorce
that the husband’s application for divorce filed 30 september 2020 be stayed, pending determination of the wife’s petition filed 5 march 2019 with respect to annulment under the marriage act 1955 (country j) section 12(1)(b).
issues for determination
whether or not the order made for a divorce in early 2023 in the family court in country j is recognised in australia under s 104(3) of the act?
a divorce or the annulment of a marriage, or the legal separation of the parties to a marriage, effected in accordance with the law of an overseas jurisdiction shall be recognised as valid in australia where: (a) the respondent was ordinarily resident in the overseas jurisdiction at the relevant date, (b) the applicant or, in a case referred to in paragraph (b) of the definition of applicant in subsection (1), one of the applicants, was ordinarily resident in the overseas jurisdiction at the relevant date and either:   the respondent was ordinarily resident in the overseas jurisdiction at the relevant date, (b) the applicant or, in a case referred to in paragraph (b) of the definition of applicant in subsection (1), one of the applicants, was ordinarily resident in the overseas jurisdiction at the relevant date and either:   the applicant or, in a case referred to in paragraph (b) of the definition of applicant in subsection (1), one of the applicants, was ordinarily resident in the overseas jurisdiction at the relevant date and either:  the ordinary residence of the applicant or of that applicant, as the case may be, had continued for not less than 1 year immediately before the relevant date, or (ii) the last place of cohabitation of the parties to the marriage was in that jurisdiction,  the applicant or the respondent or, in a case referred to in paragraph (b) of the definition of applicant in subsection (1), one of the applicants, was domiciled in the overseas jurisdiction at the relevant date, (d) the respondent was a national of the overseas jurisdiction at the relevant date, (e) the applicant or, in a case referred to in paragraph (b) of the definition of applicant in subsection (1), one of the applicants, was a national of the overseas jurisdiction at the relevant date and either:  the applicant or that applicant, as the case may be, was ordinarily resident in that jurisdiction at that date, or (ii) the applicant or that applicant, as the case may be, had been ordinarily resident in that jurisdiction for a continuous period of 1 year falling, at least in part, within the period of 2 years immediately before the relevant date, or  the applicant or, in a case referred to in paragraph (b) of the definition of applicant in subsection (1), one of the applicants, was a national of, and present in, the overseas jurisdiction at the relevant date and the last place of cohabitation of the parties to the marriage was an overseas jurisdiction the law of which, at the relevant date, did not provide for divorce, the annulment of marriage or the legal separation of the parties to a marriage, as the case may be. (emphasis added)
"respondent" , in relation to a divorce or the annulment of a marriage or the legal separation of the parties to a marriage, means a party to the marriage, not being a party at whose instance the divorce, annulment or legal separation was effected
whether common law rules of private international law requires recognition of the parties divorce pursuant to s 104(5) of the act?
any divorce or any annulment of a marriage, or any legal separation of the parties to a marriage, that would be recognised as valid under the common law rules of private international law but to which none of the preceding provisions of this section applies shall be recognised as valid in australia, and the operation of this subsection shall not be limited by any implication from those provisions.
the present convention shall apply to the recognition in one contracting state of divorces and legal separations obtained in another contracting state which follow judicial or other proceedings officially recognised in that state and which are legally effective there. the convention does not apply to findings of fault or to ancillary orders pronounced on the making of a decree of divorce or legal separation, in particular, it does not apply to orders relating to pecuniary obligations or to the custody of children.
the courts of australia are not presumed to have any knowledge of foreign law. decisions about the content of foreign law create no precedent. that is why foreign law is a question of fact to be proved by expert evidence.
in my opinion, it would be in accordance with the developments i have mentioned and with the trend of legislation—mainly our own but also that of other countries with similar social systems—to recognise divorces given to wives by the courts of their residence wherever a real and substantial connection is shown between the petitioner and the country, or territory, exercising jurisdiction, i use these expressions so as to enable the courts, who must decide each case, to consider both the length and quality of the residence and to take into account such other factors as nationality which may reinforce the connection. equally they would enable the courts (as they habitually do without difficulty) to reject residence of passage or residence, to use the descriptive expression of the older cases, resorted to by persons who properly should seek relief here for the purpose of obtaining relief which our courts would not give.
consideration  apply public policy considerations, as they are relevant to the recognition of the parties’ country j divorce — including that the ‘comity’ or ‘courtesy of nations’ supports the general recognition, as far as practicable, of each other’s laws extending to recognition of divorce orders. (b) consider the notion of reciprocity as identified in travers v holley[24]— that is, if the same facts and circumstances arose in australia as they did in country j, would a divorce have been granted in australia? (c) consider whether there a real and substantive connection between the husband and country j — where the divorce was obtained — and whether the decree for divorce was obtained for genuine reasons and not resorted to solely for the purpose of obtaining the divorce because it was not available to him in australia? i will deal with the first two factors together.   consider the notion of reciprocity as identified in travers v holley[24]— that is, if the same facts and circumstances arose in australia as they did in country j, would a divorce have been granted in australia? (c) consider whether there a real and substantive connection between the husband and country j — where the divorce was obtained — and whether the decree for divorce was obtained for genuine reasons and not resorted to solely for the purpose of obtaining the divorce because it was not available to him in australia? i will deal with the first two factors together.   consider whether there a real and substantive connection between the husband and country j — where the divorce was obtained — and whether the decree for divorce was obtained for genuine reasons and not resorted to solely for the purpose of obtaining the divorce because it was not available to him in australia? i will deal with the first two factors together.
i will deal with the first two factors together.
subject to the provisions of this act a petition for dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce may be presented to the district court by both the parties to a marriage together, whether such marriage was solemnized before or after the commencement of the marriage laws (amendment) act, 1976, on the ground that they have been living separately for a period of one year or more, that they have not been able to live together and that they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved. (emphasis added)
6. point: the evidence let in by the petitioners would show that the petitioners are husband and wife and they are unable to continue the matrimonial relationship as their relationship is irretrievably broken due to difference of opinion. therefore, both of them had taken a decision to have a decree for divorce. there is no collusion between the parties. on consideration of the evidence on record it is found that the petitioners are entitled to get a decree for divorce as sought for. point is therefore found in favour of the petitioners.  esiding ‘separately from 14.12.2018 due to difference of opinion. though several reconciliation efforts were made no positive results could be achieved. the matrimonial relationship is irretrievably broken down. ultimately they had taken a decision to obtain a divorce by mutual consent.[28]
conclusion
associate: dated: 11 september 2023
dated: 11 september 2023
[1] wife’s application for nullity filed 5 march 2019 pursuant to the marriages act 1995. [2] the petition was presented in early 2022, and filed in early 2022. [3] as evidenced by exhibit h1 – two documents which evidence that an original petition came before the family court in city c in early 23.[4] pursuant to paragraph 2 of the order made by this court on 10 august 2021[5] response to divorce of ms konda, filed 2021– section 5 (‘response’).[6] case outline of ms konda, filed 7 june 2021 (‘wife’s case outline’).[7] there has been no updated court documents from the wife to evidence a change of residency – she presumably still resides in australia. [8] affidavit of ms konda, filed 12 march 2021 [2] (‘wife’s affidavit’). [9] affidavit of mr bhakta, filed 8 october 2020 (‘husband’s affidavit’).[10] wife’s case outline (n6) p3. [11] wife’s affidavit (n8) [3]; husband’s affidavit (n10). [12] wife’s affidavit (n8) [7]. [13] annexure c to affidavit – seeking annulment.[14] wife’s affidavit (n8) [5]. [15] response (n5). [16] provided that the marriage is recognised under australian law. recognition as valid is where at time of celebration it is valid under the local laws of that country whereby it is celebrated. [17] convention on recognition of divorces and legal separations, concluded 1 june 1970, [1985] ats 25 (entered into force 24 august 1975 (austrlaia 23 november 1985)); belinda felberg et al, australian family law (oxford university press, 2nd ed, 2015) 44. [18] the court has no updated evidence of the wife’s current residency status. wife’s affidavit (n8) [3], [5], [6]: at the time of the wife’s application the parties were both residing in town d, region e, country j. the wife is an australian citizen with both parties domiciled in australia and were for the year immediately preceding the husband’s application.[19] exhibit h1: page 1 – at no stage are the parties' referred to as ‘applicants’ or ‘respondents’.[20] belinda felberg et al, australian family law (oxford university press, 2nd ed, 2015) 44: embodied in s 104 of the act. convention on recognition of divorces and legal separations (n17).[21] barriga & barriga (no2) [1981] famca 75 [30]. [22] dornom & dornom [1984] famca 40 [6].[23] ibid [12]. [24] (1953) 3 wlr 507.[25] family law act 1975 (cth) s 48(3) (‘fla’).[26] ibid s 48(1).[27] exhibit h1: page 3.[28] exhibit h1: page 2.[29] (1969) 1 a.c. 33.