last updated: 19 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
moyland & shearer [2023] fedcfamc2f 1202
orders
until further order, the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction & overview  2] a party has the right to bring proceedings. parties have choices as to what claims are to be made and how they are to be framed. but limits will be placed upon their ability to effect changes to their pleadings, particularly if litigation is advanced. that is why, in seeking the just resolution of the dispute, reference is made to parties having a sufficient opportunity to identify the issues they seek to agitate. [113] in the past it has been left largely to the parties to prepare for trial and to seek the court's assistance as required. those times are long gone. the allocation of power, between litigants and the courts arises from tradition and from principle and policy. it is recognised by the courts that the resolution of disputes serves the public as a whole, not merely the parties to the proceedings. [114] rule 21 of the court procedure rules recognises the purposes of case management by the courts. it recognises that delay and costs are undesirable and that delay has deleterious effects, not only upon the party to the proceedings in question, but to other litigants. the rule's objectives, as to the timely disposal of cases and the limitation of cost, were to be applied in considering anu's application for amendment. it was significant that the effect of its delay in applying would be that a trial was lost and litigation substantially recommenced. it would impact upon other litigants seeking a resolution of their cases. what was a "just resolution" of anu's claim required serious consideration of these matters, and not merely whether it had an arguable claim to put forward. a just resolution of its claim necessarily had to have regard to the position of aon in defending it. an assumption that costs will always be a sufficient compensation for the prejudice caused by amendment is not reflected in r 21. critically, the matters relevant to a just resolution of anu's claim required anu to provide some explanation for its delay in seeking the amendment if the discretion under r 502(1) was to be exercised in its favour and to the disadvantage of aon. none was provided.
... adherents to that school of thought would think that a party in the position of anu was under an obligation to burn the midnight oil, to move with a degree of haste, and even to "rush it". after all, anu was represented by senior counsel who had delivered a well prepared, lucid and detailed address in order to secure the adjournment from 15 november to 27 november 2006. it was represented also by two junior counsel and a substantial firm of solicitors. it employed at least one solicitor of its own in-house. it was seeking to recover $75 million in a commercial cause which it had chosen to institute in a busy court which had 18 days left of the time fixed for the trial. the amendments should have been ready by the morning of 15 november 2006, or at least it should have been possible to provide them within a few hours thereafter.
his honour: ‑ ‑ ‑ but if the article was favourable to your client i assume you wouldn’t be making this application? mr duane: well, that’s one way of exploring the issues. that’s a good – that’s a good ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: i’m just asking the question that if it was – if the recommendations and the comments, etcetera, were against the father, as i say, presumably ‑ ‑ ‑ mr duane: well ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: ‑ ‑ ‑ the mother wouldn’t be making this application. mr duane: ‑ ‑ ‑ it wouldn’t be necessary because they – in – so the steps are the parties and the court effectively give their approval by way of an order to a particular person as being appropriate and competent to perform the role they’re asked to. and if there are issues that give rise to whether that is the – whether that order ought to be discharged then wherever they come from then that’s where they come from and that’s a different consideration to whether the same sort of material might be able to be used to say the expert was right or wrong.
oral application for discharge of the single expert witness
critically, the matters relevant to a just resolution of anu's claim required anu to provide some explanation for its delay in seeking the amendment if the discretion under r 502(1) was to be exercised in its favour and to the disadvantage of aon. none was provided.
ms dart: i think it [the abc article] was originally an audio file. nevertheless, while i don’t make a formal objection to your honour reading it i’m unclear as to the basis on which the application is made to disqualify [dr b] as an expert. and, in my submission, that needs to be articulated to say there is a news article, there is a media release where an expert hasn’t been identified but has some connection – and i use that broadly – but is more so an expert that works in the family law field and it’s – her answers are unsatisfactory. how did that lead to an application for disqualification in relation to this matter in circumstances where no evidence has been led as to the conduct of the interviews in this case? no evidence has been led or suggested as to any impropriety of the single expert in this case in the manner that she interviewed the parties or the children or in the way that she conducted her assessment and you haven’t been taken to any of the contents of the report that would give rise to – in the circumstances of this case a basis for discharge in the particular circumstance of this case. what you’re left with is there has been a media article in which allegations are made. there may be – or there may not be a complaint. there has certainly been no findings of a regulatory body but on the basis that there might be or on the basis that that was not absolutely disavowed you would remove an expert from this case. and i say the nexus as to disqualification is simply not there. particularly, absent any suggestion about the way that the assessment in this matter was conducted. his honour: perhaps if i just double-check with mr duane. so in terms of “legal principle” what’s the legal principle? is it absent of process? is it procedural unfairness? is it apprehended bias? what is it? mr duane: it’s suitability. so a complete lack of confidence as to the suitability of the expert in circumstances where she has refused to deny that she is the person who is the subject of the article. and that has – and the difficulties that there has been in engaging with her in any examination of whether there are any issues as to competency as a result of the avoidance of the topic. now, she could easily have said, yes, and here is a copy of the complaint. no doubt this is not the first or the last of the difficulties that will arise as a result of this sorry predicament. and instead, there are excuses and dissemination and avoidance, in my submission, and your honour will make findings about it about some simple inquiries that were – that you might – that the court might necessarily wish to embark upon where these issues are raised. there’s just nothing. and it’s that failure to engage ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: no, but how – sorry to interrupt but how did you draw a link between [dr b] and whatever is in this report or this media story? mr duane: well, that probably doesn’t matter. your honour knows ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: well, i would have thought it does because if this witness – as she said, “i can’t draw any link between the complaints that i’m aware of and this article,” that you say that’s her avoiding saying yes i was or no i wasn’t the person named. mr duane: well, she came straight out with it, “i can’t answer it for legal reasons.” you know, her first answer is almost a pre-prepared answer on the topic. a legal defence to answering the question. your honour, it’s common knowledge ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: sorry, what’s common knowledge? mr duane: who the author of the report is. his honour: well, i’m sorry. i hate to ‑ ‑ ‑ mr duane: not common to your honour. his honour: i hate to live in a cave but it’s not common knowledge to me. mr duane: well ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: you know, do i have to make a – you know, some sort of a check with all of the family consultants of the court or what? mr duane: clearly, the – well, clearly, it wasn’t common knowledge to your honour or you would have done something about it or mentioned it in the trial if you thought it was a problem. his honour: i didn’t know anything about any of this until you raised it for the first time and your application seems to be based primarily upon the responses or what you say the evasive responses of [dr b] as opposed to whatever you or your client – but you wouldn’t have been able to speak to her last night when you first became aware of it. whatever the basis was of drawing whatever connections between this article when you became aware of it and flagging it this morning to your colleagues. mr duane: yes. well, she’s very – so my client’s position is that the report writing process was very much against her and that the ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: and – sorry. and where and how is this raised other than now from you? mr duane: well, it would be certainly raised during the course of cross‑examination if we had to get there ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: sorry. mr duane: ‑ ‑ ‑ but, for example, if i can just deal with this in submissions. she gives various opinions which are not explained in terms of the basis for arriving at the opinions. many of them are assessments that rely on her integrity in terms of assessing and putting a label on behaviours. so there was some fairly pejorative descriptions of the mother including a suggestion that she moved – her move to brisbane was manipulative. and ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: sorry, this is – this is getting more into like the usual kinds of queries about whether or not there was a legal basis for the opinion and the connection there. mr duane: but ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: that’s a different thing to running an application now because there was this media story about someone who did or didn’t do (a), (b) or (c) whatever it is. mr duane: well, your honour, it isn’t raised lightly. the contents of the article which you will see ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: i’m [not] suggesting it was. mr duane: ‑ ‑ ‑ when they were raised were raised for squarely the suitability if any – if the things that are set out in the – which are recorded in the articles. so the article deals with one of the two parties taking lengthy recordings of what occurred during therapy. so this isn’t something that the abc – they’re not – we’re not talking about the – i’m assuming there might be the [town c newspaper] or something like that. there might be a small media enterprise making publications. this is a reputable – large reputable organisation that has done an investigation and produced a report and there are recordings. so on the face of it, it is a matter – that they are matters that are worthy of some explanation. and what explanation have you been given? it’s totally unsatisfactory. his honour: sorry, an explanation about what? mr duane: well, if – so one might expect that if the single expert was not the person referred to the – in the article they could simply say so rather than all of what you heard. his honour: well, you’ve kind of ‑ ‑ ‑ mr duane: and ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: ‑ ‑ ‑ mentioned it a number of times so i’ve got that point. mr duane: all right. i will try not to be any more repetitive.
regarding the oral discharge application: summary of dr b’s evidence
...certainly, if your professional conduct or professional ethics had been called into question significantly, you ought to reveal that the court in the course of these proceedings, is that right or not? --- ...well, there is no issue.
your honour, i consider the question is greatly improper. i am prevented by answering by a whole lot of both commonwealth laws and state laws. you might want to know that difficulties with complaints are – is a universal and international problem of which i have spoken about to a senate inquiry [...]. it’s an improper question. his honour: so do i take that as a formal objection to the question ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑i do, your – you do, your honour. right?‑‑‑i am happy to answer questions about this matter, but i think the question is improper, and i am prevented from answering.
mr duane: well, your honour, i’ve been chipping away – that’s all i have been doing – trying to get through the article and trying to get the concession that there is a – about whether or not there is a complaint that has – that is active in relation to the contents of this article. his honour: but i thought [dr b] had already responded to that, namely, she can’t make any connection between the three outstanding complaints, at the moment, relating to therapy and what is or is not in this article. mr duane: well, she can only do that if she knows – as read the article in detail. we’re dancing around this subject, with respect, your honour. she does have ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: i have worked that out. something that i thought and was told might be 10 minutes/might be 15 ‑ ‑ ‑ mr duane: well, i didn’t expect ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: well, we haven’t really got that one. mr duane: i didn’t expect this level of avoidance. his honour: well, it might be characterised by someone else in a different way, but – whatever – ask your questions, but i’m not sure, really, for how much longer. how many more – how much more of the article have you – do you say that you’ve got to traverse, especially having regard to what [dr b] has said?
submissions
submissions: counsel for the mother
ms dart: i think it was originally an audio file. nevertheless, while i don’t make a formal objection to your honour reading it i’m unclear as to the basis on which the application is made to disqualify [dr b] as an expert. and, in my submission, that needs to be articulated to say there is a news article, there is a media release where an expert hasn’t been identified but has some connection – and i use that broadly – but is more so an expert that works in the family law field and it’s – her answers are unsatisfactory. how did that lead to an application for disqualification in relation to this matter in circumstances where no evidence has been led as to the conduct of the interviews in this case? no evidence has been led or suggested as to any impropriety of the single expert in this case in the manner that she interviewed the parties or the children or in the way that she conducted her assessment and you haven’t been taken to any of the contents of the report that would give rise to – in the circumstances of this case a basis for discharge in the particular circumstance of this case. what you’re left with is there has been a media article in which allegations are made. there may be – or there may not be a complaint. there has certainly been no findings of a regulatory body but on the basis that there might be or on the basis that that was not absolutely disavowed you would remove an expert from this case. and i say the nexus as to disqualification is simply not there. particularly, absent any suggestion about the way that the assessment in the matter was conducted.
his honour: perhaps if i just double-check with mr duane. so in terms of “legal principle” what’s the legal principle? is it absent of process? is it procedural unfairness? is it apprehended bias? what is it? mr duane: it’s suitability. so a complete lack of confidence as to the suitability of the expert in circumstances where she has refused to deny that she is the person who is the subject of the article. and that has – and the difficulties that there has been in engaging with her in any examination of whether there are any issues as to competency as a result of the avoidance of the topic. now, she could easily have said, yes, and here is a copy of the complaint. no doubt this is not the first or the last of the difficulties that will arise as a result of this sorry predicament. and instead, there are excuses and dissemination and avoidance, in my submission, and your honour will make findings about it about some simple inquiries that were – that you might – that the court might necessarily wish to embark upon where these issues are raised. there’s just nothing. and it’s that failure to engage ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: no, but how – sorry to interrupt but how did you draw a link between [dr b] and whatever is in this report or this media story? mr duane: well, that probably doesn’t matter. your honour knows ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: well, i would have thought it does because if this witness – as she said, “i can’t draw any link between the complaints that i’m aware of and this article,” that you say that’s her avoiding saying yes i was or no i wasn’t the person named. mr duane: well, she came straight out with it, “i can’t answer it for legal reasons.” you know, her first answer is almost a pre-prepared answer on the topic. a legal defence to answering the question. your honour, it’s common knowledge ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: sorry, what’s common knowledge? mr duane: who the author of the report is. his honour: well, i’m sorry. i hate to ‑ ‑ ‑ mr duane: not common to your honour. his honour: i hate to live in a cave but it’s not common knowledge to me. mr duane: well ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: you know, do i have to make a – you know, some sort of a check with all of the family consultants of the court or what? mr duane: clearly, the – well, clearly, it wasn’t common knowledge to your honour or you would have done something about it or mentioned it in the trial if you thought it was a problem. his honour: i didn’t know anything about any of this until you raised it for the first time and your application seems to be based primarily upon the responses or what you say the evasive responses of [dr b] as opposed to whatever you or your client – but you wouldn’t have been able to speak to her last night when you first became aware of it. whatever the basis was of drawing whatever connections between this article when you became aware of it and flagging it this morning to your colleagues. mr duane: yes. well, she’s very – so my client’s position is that the report writing process was very much against her and that the ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: and – sorry. and where and how is this raised other than now from you? mr duane: well, it would be certainly raised during the course of cross‑examination if we had to get there ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: sorry. mr duane: ‑ ‑ ‑ but, for example, if i can just deal with this in submissions. she gives various opinions which are not explained in terms of the basis for arriving at the opinions. many of them are assessments that rely on her integrity in terms of assessing and putting a label on behaviours. so there was some fairly pejorative descriptions of the mother including a suggestion that she moved – her move to brisbane was manipulative. and ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: sorry, this is – this is getting more into like the usual kinds of queries about whether or not there was a legal basis for the opinion and the connection there. mr duane: but ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: that’s a different thing to running an application now because there was this media story about someone who did or didn’t do (a), (b) or (c) whatever it is.
mr duane: ‑ ‑ ‑ when they were raised were raised for squarely the suitability if any – if the things that are set out in the – which are recorded in the articles. so the article deals with one of the two parties taking lengthy recordings of what occurred during therapy. so this isn’t something that the abc – they’re not – we’re not talking about the – i’m assuming there might be the [town c newspaper] or something like that. there might be a small media enterprise making publications. this is a reputable – large reputable organisation that has done an investigation and produced a report and there are recordings. so on the face of it, it is a matter – that they are matters that are worthy of some explanation. and what explanation have you been given? it’s totally unsatisfactory. his honour: sorry, an explanation about what? mr duane: well, if – so one might expect that if the single expert was not the person referred to the – in the article they could simply say so rather than all of what you heard. his honour: well, you’ve kind of ‑ ‑ ‑ mr duane: and ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: ‑ ‑ ‑ mentioned it a number of times so i’ve got that point. mr duane: all right. i will try not to be any more repetitive. his honour: and i’m trying to – and i understand better than i do at the moment there is what i will call the basis of what you would say – please correct me if i’m wrong. the non-responsive answers, in your view, of [dr b]. yes? mr duane: yes. his honour: and that’s non-responsiveness in relation to ‑ ‑ ‑ mr duane: the article. his honour: sorry, is it sufficient if i just call it the abc article? mr duane: yes. his honour: is – that was the site that it was on, yes? mr duane: yes. his honour: right. the abc article. and then there’s – the other ground that i’m hearing for the first time that you and/or your client have issues about the process of the interviews involving at least the mother, yes? mr duane: yes. it’s the conclusions ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: and – sorry. mr duane: and the conclusions that are reached in the report. his honour: yes, yes. but these are more, sort of, standard questions about reports and, therefore, you know, the dasreef v hawchar issues about the basis of the opinion reached. the reasoning process and the evidence and the sort of link between the – so that’s another arm of the application, is it? mr duane: well, it just goes to that aspect so i think you – it is said of me that i haven’t said any – made any criticisms about the report or said anything that’s in issue or that flows from this. there are two primary factual, sort of, broad descriptions that are very much in issue. one is the conclusion that it was manipulative to go to brisbane and the second is that the mother will not comply with court orders. will not foster relationship with – between the children and their father if they are in brisbane. and the nature of the material in the article would give rise to concerns about whether you would accept where that is challenged, the expert’s opinion over the – over the sworn testimony of the parties. the contents of the report are so troubling that they call into question the whole of the process. his honour: is any of this in the case outline or any of the mother’s material? mr duane: no, because i did not know about this until last night.
his honour: i’m just trying to – i’m just trying to understand can you take me to any paragraph in the case outline that deals with concerns, issues about the family report? sorry, about the expert report either as to process to conclusion. mr duane: well, no, i can’t. i will just take that on notice but i don’t think there is a question that directly deals with those things. his honour: well, certainly. yes. i don’t – i don’t recall there being any such issue raised. mr duane: no, but it’s not uncommon for there to be – i’m not sure that it was – it’s not uncommon for there to be a case which develops and for it to be clear that there is a – this amount of evidence about this particular topic. there were these various opinions that were expressed in the report. at the end of hearing all the evidence you should accept the parties’ evidence rather than the conclusion in the family report. there’s so much in a family report and i certainly would contend that the central components of the family report were in issue. the mother certainly doesn’t ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: just that there won’t – but they won’t articulate it. mr duane: well, it could have been better articulated, your honour. his honour: no, not just better. just done. just to give notice to everyone this is the case that everyone is having to deal with including the court. i wasn’t aware of any and maybe i missed it when i was going through all this on – over the weekend but i didn’t – and i raised with you yesterday morning – was it only yesterday morning? mr duane: it must be an enjoyable process. his honour: i will get a bucket for my joy. that – sorry, respectfully. that i raised with you what the cornerstones of the mother’s case were. mr duane: yes. his honour: and you kindly and delicately, as you always do, you know, doing that or, you know, there’s this issue, there’s this issue and this issue and i don’t recall anything. we will obviously check it on the transcript. mr duane: no, there’s no issue. i didn’t say the family report process was flawed in the ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: or the report itself. mr duane: but i wasn’t addressing you about the family report. i was just addressing you about what the mother’s case is. the consequence of that is that you know my case was genuine, if naïve, move to brisbane that must have called into question the family report writer’s opinion to the contrary. his honour: why? mr duane: because she says it was a manipulative move. his honour: yes, but every expert that’s what they’re paid to do is to do an assessment, make recommendations, whatever. i mean the court obviously is not bound by whatever any expert says but just because says, well, really this is my view – this is what the expert’s view is, therefore, that one – you know, houston we have a problem. well, yes. mr duane: well, it has only really come about because of the knowledge that has come about subsequently. one wouldn’t jump to conclusions about inadequacy of experts without the sort of things that are dealt with in the article. his honour: the benefit of the 2020, you know, rear view mirror now we understand the problem. mr duane: well, specifically in relation to the expert. prior to that one just might leave the topic quietly alone and at the end point to the lack of evidence in support of the conclusion.   the abc article in question does not relate to the current matter before the court, (b) nobody suggests that any of the parties in the current matter went to or received any therapy from dr b, and (c) neither of the parties in the current matter made any complaints that are the subject of the abc article.   nobody suggests that any of the parties in the current matter went to or received any therapy from dr b, and (c) neither of the parties in the current matter made any complaints that are the subject of the abc article.   neither of the parties in the current matter made any complaints that are the subject of the abc article.
mr duane: no, the questions – there are questions as to competency that are raised in the article and ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: so you’re wanting me to draw a direct link between the article and unidentified parties, etcetera, and this matter? mr duane: yes, because the expert refused to do the simple task of saying that’s not me in the article. his honour: right. so is that ... ground one or are there other grounds? ... mr duane: so that the contents of the article raise questions as to whether the witness will bring impartiality and independence or objectivity to the process but because of what is alleged to have occurred in the article. so the contents ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: would you accept though that every report by any expert is going to favour, to some degree – and it’s only a question of degree – pardon me – one side or the other? mr duane: there’s no doubt about that. all one can hope for is that there will be impartiality and the appearance of it prior to entry into the task and that the person who is given that task has that appearance. now, if there are fundamental questions about their capacity to do so on that score by reason of things that have happened in another matter or are alleged to have happened that are not possible to engage in because of the way the witness answered questions. then they go to the heart of what is necessary from an expert aside from competence.
his honour: it just seems – can i just say it just seems curious – i will put it as neutrally as i can – the basis for submissions. hence, my earlier questions before the short break of like you only found out about this article last evening at some stage. someone obviously had been doing some digging some time beforehand but i’ve got no information about when or how that was done or by whom. mr duane: well ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: correct? mr duane: yes. that’s right. so, you know, that process it’s important to differentiate between gossip and evidence and until today there has not been evidence. so until questions were asked all that there was was whether or not what i needed to satisfy myself of was – there was a reasonable basis for making an inquiry. and the inquiry was put in very particular terms. so it is quite important to have a proper basis for these sorts of applications which is what a lot of – between yesterday and this morning was concerned with is that question but it having arisen and the course that the evidence has taken that one – no step could have been taken to remove the expert until the expert gave an answer to the question. no step could have been taken because that would have just been based on hearsay, gossip. however you want to describe it. pretty good gossip or pretty well sourced gossip, one might say, but, nonetheless, not evidence. so it wasn’t possible to take the step prior to today but having done so critical issues concerning competence and objectivity and ethical behaviour generally are the three essential core bases for there being a lack of capacity to continue to perform this extremely important job. his honour: but no questions raised about the report process, whatever, has been raised until this afternoon. correct? mr duane: yes, that’s quite right. so there will be the normal cross-examination but really this is quite different to that.
mr duane: so really that will be the background. once you read the article you will be in a position to consider whether you’re troubled about the central matters that are necessary for an expert to discharge their function. his honour: and you say that it’s imperative that i read the article for the purposes of this application? mr duane: yes, and we’ve, i think, flagged this as being on the voir dire so, you know, it’s – so there isn’t – shouldn’t be any difficulty taking that evidence in for that purpose or that has been received, in any event. and the other last aspect is that the sub (3) of the expert witness’ duties really is – at paragraph (e) is asking the expert to tell the court – and it lists some named things but (ii), in particular:
if the expert witness believes the report prepared by the witness may be inaccurate for any other reason.
now, it would be my submission that the expert ought to inform the court where there are serious professional conduct complaints made about them of substance. sorry, serious professional complaints made about them. when i say “of substance” i mean going to their capacity to be an expert witness. i don’t mean that the report writer was biased because they ought made a recommendation in favour of the other party but these are issues that when you look at the article they go far beyond that and deal with competence and ethical matters. that’s it from me.
his honour: no, but how – sorry to interrupt but how did you draw a link between [dr b] and whatever is in this report or this media story? mr duane: well, that probably doesn’t matter. your honour knows ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: well, i would have thought it does
submissions: counsel for the father
...returning to the question, however, of the discharge of the expert. the application must necessarily only be on the basis of the media article because although it feels much longer when we were here yesterday there was no objection to the receipt of the reports. there was no challenge made to the receiving of the report. there was no challenge made to the professionalism, to the skills or expertise of the expert. what the court is, therefore, left with is a media article. a media article which may or may not have resulted in professional – complaints to professional bodies but one thing we can be certain of it hasn’t resulted and it may never result in findings being made by a professional body. his honour: against whoever was involved. ms dart: against whoever was involved. so your honour needs to assume for the purpose of the article – for the – sorry, the purpose of the application that the person referred to in the article is [dr b]. secondly, you need to assume that the contents of the article are true and correct and fulsome. and, in my submission, the court would approach that with extreme caution. there has been no inquiry, no review of which we’re aware of the allegations that have been raised in appropriate – before an appropriate court or tribunal. it is a long bow, in my submission, to say because [dr b] didn’t deny it was her and because her evidence, on one view, may have been unsatisfactory you, therefore, conclude that she’s in the article – the topic of the article. you, therefore, conclude that the contents of the article itself are true. i don’t step away from the fact that issues raised in that article are matters of concern and the court has acknowledged that in the media release. but how does it relate to the report in this matter if nobody has come to the court and the mother hasn’t in her affidavit material or by way of orders sought or submissions made raised concern about the manner in which it was conducted? the mother doesn’t say that [dr b] was inappropriate in her engagement with her. she doesn’t say that [dr b] made threats. she doesn’t say that [dr b] directed her to act in a certain way or otherwise or that she in any way acted less than professionally. so what we’re left with is the mother who is unhappy with the report. on the heel of the hunt finds out information that may be able to assist her and grabs and attempts to run with it. but, as i say, with some fundamental flaws in the argument that your honour can’t make a finding that [dr b] was the author of – was the subject matter of the report. and your honour cannot make a finding that the contents of that article are true and correct and completely frank. and, in my submission, there is no other basis which is advanced which would suggest that your honour would discharge the expert. your honour has been referred to requirements under the rules. it cannot be said that any of those requirements would expect a expert to disclose to the court if they had been the subject of adverse complaints to a professional body absent findings of professional conduct having been made. there could be no requirement that is inferred by those rules that an expert would need to come to the court and disclose that they are the subject of a media article or they’re the subject of a facebook post or they’re the subject of a social media campaign. how does that fall squarely within the duty of the experts to the court? in my submission, it doesn’t. the court cannot draw an inference that there has been bias on the part of the expert in the circumstance in which she conducted the assessment in this matter to which no complaint is made that would lead to the discharge of the report. it remains unclear as to the precise nature in which the application is made. the application appears to be by reference to the professional rules and an inference that there has been – sorry, the expert code of conduct and that there has been a breach of that duty of the court to be inferred from the media article. and, as i say, your honour identified at the beginning of the matter this appears to be trial by media and that’s what’s you’re asking to do. on the basis of a media article that might be [dr b], might be somebody else, form the conclusion she’s not a fit and proper person to perform the role of an expert in the circumstances of this case absent anything more. and, in my submission, absent anything more the application must be refused. they’re my submissions. his honour: sorry, did you wish to say anything about what i will call the other so-called limb? namely, that in terms of – i mean you already mentioned this earlier on about there’s no complaint in the mother’s material, either affidavit or case outline, about the process during the report or what’s in the report and there was no objection taken when i asked yesterday morning about its submission. so in terms of what i’ve said in a shorthand way about the dasreef v hawchar issues did you wish to say anything about those? ms dart: yes, your honour. i will say this briefly. your honour was taken to two issues in which that contention is made. it’s in relation to the conclusion by [dr b] that the mother was manipulative in her move. and, secondly, that the mother wouldn’t comply with orders of the court. and in the totality of the report that is in excess of 30 pages they’re the complaints that have been made and they’re matters could and should – and if the matter continues would be properly put to [dr b] during cross-examination. if that is the thrust of the complaint though in order to expedite those issues i wouldn’t be heard against those two statements being excised from the report. it’s not a concession that they’re inaccurate but in terms of the evidence that your honour has heard thus far and what you need to determine those two statements, i say, are not going to be determinative of your honour’s determination, in any event.
submissions: the icl
ms cruise: it may be. it may be that i am just not part of whatever has been circulating. so i agree that there is, essentially, very little, if any, nexus between that article and what is raised and the expert evidence that [dr b] has given in these proceedings. and, certainly, nothing has been raised with me before now as to any concerns that arose out of her conducting her interviews including with the children. more significantly, there are two children the subject of these proceedings who cannot be left in the situation in which they find themselves now. they are not effectively supported in relation to very significant concerns about their mental health. they are the subject of intense and ongoing conflict which i cannot see abating in any way and certainly hasn’t before today. and it is my very firm position that your honour must make a determination about what happens for them. one of the very significant concerns that i have is that if it’s the case that this matter cannot conclude in the very near future, or cannot conclude with your honour, it may be delayed, and the children may be another year older than they are now which is a year older than they were when [dr b] met with them. it may be at that time, the court, whoever it is, is presented with an argument that their ages now mean their wishes are determinative, and i think that is a very significant concern. and i’m not going to suggest that it’s a why reason why this has occurred, but it has to be a concern for me as the children’s lawyer. if your honour makes a decision to take the report out of contention in these proceedings, i also agree that your honour has sufficient evidence to make a decision as to what should happen. and i absolutely am convinced and submit to the court that a decision now or in the very near future is in the best interests of both of the children for whom i act. please the court.
submissions in reply – the mother  the operation of s.121 of the act in the circumstances of the current matter and the claims made by the mother against the expert, and dr b’s responses, (b) dr b’s “protection” against the mother’s claims arising from the abc article because of the principle of patient confidentiality, (c) dr b’s general claim for protection against the mother’s claims arising from other legislation or regulatory guidelines, (d) in the light of these individual and combined “defences”, together with the complete anonymity of the persons referred to in the abc article (including the therapist), how it was possible to draw any nexus, let alone a relevant or proximate nexus, between the person and facts in the abc article, on the one hand, and on the other, the facts and circumstances of the current matter. as already recorded, counsel for the mother opined that it simply did not matter that there be any such nexus, (e) the fundamental distinction between a “complaint” and a formal “finding” by either a court or regulatory body. the matter proceeded, and was prosecuted by the mother solely on the basis that a “complaint”, even a very generalised one, against an unknown therapist, was sufficient to disqualify an expert in a completely different matter. if this be or become the new standard for “disqualification”, professionals across the board (including lawyers) had better beware, according to the submissions here, a “complaint” is sufficient to require or warrant the discharge of appointment, and (f) there was unqualified and unchallenged acceptance of the complete accuracy of the abc article. this was on the basis, as counsel asserted, because the abc is a reputable organisation. there was also complete acceptance of the accuracy of the various accounts of the protagonists in the abc article, with no apparent checking whether, for example, any of them had been the subject of any “notoriety” for their litigious history (vexatious or otherwise), and (g) there was no checking, by anyone, of the legality of the recording undertaken and referred to in the abc article, or the editing process.   dr b’s “protection” against the mother’s claims arising from the abc article because of the principle of patient confidentiality, (c) dr b’s general claim for protection against the mother’s claims arising from other legislation or regulatory guidelines, (d) in the light of these individual and combined “defences”, together with the complete anonymity of the persons referred to in the abc article (including the therapist), how it was possible to draw any nexus, let alone a relevant or proximate nexus, between the person and facts in the abc article, on the one hand, and on the other, the facts and circumstances of the current matter. as already recorded, counsel for the mother opined that it simply did not matter that there be any such nexus, (e) the fundamental distinction between a “complaint” and a formal “finding” by either a court or regulatory body. the matter proceeded, and was prosecuted by the mother solely on the basis that a “complaint”, even a very generalised one, against an unknown therapist, was sufficient to disqualify an expert in a completely different matter. if this be or become the new standard for “disqualification”, professionals across the board (including lawyers) had better beware, according to the submissions here, a “complaint” is sufficient to require or warrant the discharge of appointment, and (f) there was unqualified and unchallenged acceptance of the complete accuracy of the abc article. this was on the basis, as counsel asserted, because the abc is a reputable organisation. there was also complete acceptance of the accuracy of the various accounts of the protagonists in the abc article, with no apparent checking whether, for example, any of them had been the subject of any “notoriety” for their litigious history (vexatious or otherwise), and (g) there was no checking, by anyone, of the legality of the recording undertaken and referred to in the abc article, or the editing process.   dr b’s general claim for protection against the mother’s claims arising from other legislation or regulatory guidelines, (d) in the light of these individual and combined “defences”, together with the complete anonymity of the persons referred to in the abc article (including the therapist), how it was possible to draw any nexus, let alone a relevant or proximate nexus, between the person and facts in the abc article, on the one hand, and on the other, the facts and circumstances of the current matter. as already recorded, counsel for the mother opined that it simply did not matter that there be any such nexus, (e) the fundamental distinction between a “complaint” and a formal “finding” by either a court or regulatory body. the matter proceeded, and was prosecuted by the mother solely on the basis that a “complaint”, even a very generalised one, against an unknown therapist, was sufficient to disqualify an expert in a completely different matter. if this be or become the new standard for “disqualification”, professionals across the board (including lawyers) had better beware, according to the submissions here, a “complaint” is sufficient to require or warrant the discharge of appointment, and (f) there was unqualified and unchallenged acceptance of the complete accuracy of the abc article. this was on the basis, as counsel asserted, because the abc is a reputable organisation. there was also complete acceptance of the accuracy of the various accounts of the protagonists in the abc article, with no apparent checking whether, for example, any of them had been the subject of any “notoriety” for their litigious history (vexatious or otherwise), and (g) there was no checking, by anyone, of the legality of the recording undertaken and referred to in the abc article, or the editing process.   in the light of these individual and combined “defences”, together with the complete anonymity of the persons referred to in the abc article (including the therapist), how it was possible to draw any nexus, let alone a relevant or proximate nexus, between the person and facts in the abc article, on the one hand, and on the other, the facts and circumstances of the current matter. as already recorded, counsel for the mother opined that it simply did not matter that there be any such nexus, (e) the fundamental distinction between a “complaint” and a formal “finding” by either a court or regulatory body. the matter proceeded, and was prosecuted by the mother solely on the basis that a “complaint”, even a very generalised one, against an unknown therapist, was sufficient to disqualify an expert in a completely different matter. if this be or become the new standard for “disqualification”, professionals across the board (including lawyers) had better beware, according to the submissions here, a “complaint” is sufficient to require or warrant the discharge of appointment, and (f) there was unqualified and unchallenged acceptance of the complete accuracy of the abc article. this was on the basis, as counsel asserted, because the abc is a reputable organisation. there was also complete acceptance of the accuracy of the various accounts of the protagonists in the abc article, with no apparent checking whether, for example, any of them had been the subject of any “notoriety” for their litigious history (vexatious or otherwise), and (g) there was no checking, by anyone, of the legality of the recording undertaken and referred to in the abc article, or the editing process.   the fundamental distinction between a “complaint” and a formal “finding” by either a court or regulatory body. the matter proceeded, and was prosecuted by the mother solely on the basis that a “complaint”, even a very generalised one, against an unknown therapist, was sufficient to disqualify an expert in a completely different matter. if this be or become the new standard for “disqualification”, professionals across the board (including lawyers) had better beware, according to the submissions here, a “complaint” is sufficient to require or warrant the discharge of appointment, and (f) there was unqualified and unchallenged acceptance of the complete accuracy of the abc article. this was on the basis, as counsel asserted, because the abc is a reputable organisation. there was also complete acceptance of the accuracy of the various accounts of the protagonists in the abc article, with no apparent checking whether, for example, any of them had been the subject of any “notoriety” for their litigious history (vexatious or otherwise), and (g) there was no checking, by anyone, of the legality of the recording undertaken and referred to in the abc article, or the editing process.   there was unqualified and unchallenged acceptance of the complete accuracy of the abc article. this was on the basis, as counsel asserted, because the abc is a reputable organisation. there was also complete acceptance of the accuracy of the various accounts of the protagonists in the abc article, with no apparent checking whether, for example, any of them had been the subject of any “notoriety” for their litigious history (vexatious or otherwise), and (g) there was no checking, by anyone, of the legality of the recording undertaken and referred to in the abc article, or the editing process.   there was no checking, by anyone, of the legality of the recording undertaken and referred to in the abc article, or the editing process.
interrogatories: questions and answers (or lack of them)
176 interrogatories and discovery   interrogatories and discovery are allowed in relation to family law and child support proceedings in the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2). (2) however, interrogatories and discovery are not allowed in relation to any other proceedings in the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), unless the court or a judge declares that it is appropriate, in the interests of the administration of justice, to allow the interrogatories or discovery. (3) in deciding whether to make a declaration under subsection (2), the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge must have regard to: (a) whether allowing the interrogatories or discovery would be likely to contribute to the fair and expeditious conduct of the proceedings, and (b) such other matters (if any) as the court or the judge considers relevant.   however, interrogatories and discovery are not allowed in relation to any other proceedings in the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), unless the court or a judge declares that it is appropriate, in the interests of the administration of justice, to allow the interrogatories or discovery. (3) in deciding whether to make a declaration under subsection (2), the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge must have regard to: (a) whether allowing the interrogatories or discovery would be likely to contribute to the fair and expeditious conduct of the proceedings, and (b) such other matters (if any) as the court or the judge considers relevant.   in deciding whether to make a declaration under subsection (2), the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge must have regard to: (a) whether allowing the interrogatories or discovery would be likely to contribute to the fair and expeditious conduct of the proceedings, and (b) such other matters (if any) as the court or the judge considers relevant.   whether allowing the interrogatories or discovery would be likely to contribute to the fair and expeditious conduct of the proceedings, and (b) such other matters (if any) as the court or the judge considers relevant.   such other matters (if any) as the court or the judge considers relevant.
please provide details in relation to each aspect of this question (e.g: by who, when and how was any notice given, the article provided, etc.). what prompted the mother’s legal representative(s) to make inquiries about the abc article (e.g. by whom, when, how)? please outline the sequence of events (noting the persons involved and the time-line) that led the mother’s legal team to make the application for [dr b’s] discharge. was the mother’s legal representative aware of the article prior to the commencement of the trial? if so, when, by whom, and by what means, did the mother’s legal representative(s) become aware of the abc article? was the belief held prior to the commencement of the trial that the article referred to [dr b]? what was the evidentiary basis for the belief that the abc article referred to [dr b]? was it suspicion, opinion (if so, what, where and by whom)? when was this belief formed? were instructions sought and obtained from the mother prior to any inquiries into the abc article? if so, when, how and by whom. is it accepted by the mother’s legal representatives that (a) there has been no “follow-up” article from the abc (or by anyone else) regarding the original abc article in june 2023, and (b) to the best of everyone’s knowledge and belief, there has been no disciplinary or other proceeding against [dr b], directly or indirectly, as a result of the abc article or otherwise?
we continue to act for the respondent mother in the above matter and thank you for providing the orders made by his honour on 29 august 2023. we apologise for the lateness of this correspondence. we appreciate his honour's comments in relation to the court's desire to deal with this application as expeditiously and appropriately as possible. in providing our response we endeavour to be similarly respectful and keep these objectives at the forefront. we enclose an application in a case in which the mother seeks that the orders made by his honour be vacated in circumstances where the parties have not been provided the opportunity to be heard in relation to the making of such orders. we enclose submissions in support of this application. if, despite the above, his honour determines that the orders should remain in force, we seek that the orders be stayed to enable our client's application to discharge the orders to be properly heard. we confirm that any orders, if not stayed or discharged, will be complied with.   everything that has transpired since approximately lunch time on day two of the trial has been a direct result of the actions of either (or both) the mother and her legal representatives, (b) it is only the mother who has made applications – one oral and one foreshadowed in writing. no one else has done so. as night follows day, as a matter of fact and of logic, because only one person has initiated applications, everyone else (including the court) can only be “responders” to them. the father, the icl, and the court, cannot ignore applications, there can only be responses to them. it also follows that if any responsibility for any delay, possible “oppression”, or cost arises, subject to submissions and the exercise of discretion, it can only lay at the feet of the mother and/or her lawyer, and (c) one of the more remarkable aspects of events since the adjournment of the trial to enable the court to deal with the mother’s oral application is that, notwithstanding the orders of 29th august 2023 stated that “the mother’s legal representative” was to provide an affidavit to confirm answers to the six questions set out in those orders, the responses came (a) in the form of a yet to be filed application seeking to set aside the questions, and (b) submissions were provided but which were stated to be filed on behalf of the mother and not by the mother’s legal representative. put another way: the court directed a legal practitioner to do certain things. that practitioner did not do so. as such, this was direct disobedience or defiance of a court order by a legal practitioner. to state the obvious: this places everyone in a very difficult and delicate situation.   it is only the mother who has made applications – one oral and one foreshadowed in writing. no one else has done so. as night follows day, as a matter of fact and of logic, because only one person has initiated applications, everyone else (including the court) can only be “responders” to them. the father, the icl, and the court, cannot ignore applications, there can only be responses to them. it also follows that if any responsibility for any delay, possible “oppression”, or cost arises, subject to submissions and the exercise of discretion, it can only lay at the feet of the mother and/or her lawyer, and (c) one of the more remarkable aspects of events since the adjournment of the trial to enable the court to deal with the mother’s oral application is that, notwithstanding the orders of 29th august 2023 stated that “the mother’s legal representative” was to provide an affidavit to confirm answers to the six questions set out in those orders, the responses came (a) in the form of a yet to be filed application seeking to set aside the questions, and (b) submissions were provided but which were stated to be filed on behalf of the mother and not by the mother’s legal representative. put another way: the court directed a legal practitioner to do certain things. that practitioner did not do so. as such, this was direct disobedience or defiance of a court order by a legal practitioner. to state the obvious: this places everyone in a very difficult and delicate situation.   one of the more remarkable aspects of events since the adjournment of the trial to enable the court to deal with the mother’s oral application is that, notwithstanding the orders of 29th august 2023 stated that “the mother’s legal representative” was to provide an affidavit to confirm answers to the six questions set out in those orders, the responses came (a) in the form of a yet to be filed application seeking to set aside the questions, and (b) submissions were provided but which were stated to be filed on behalf of the mother and not by the mother’s legal representative. put another way: the court directed a legal practitioner to do certain things. that practitioner did not do so. as such, this was direct disobedience or defiance of a court order by a legal practitioner. to state the obvious: this places everyone in a very difficult and delicate situation.
the “mother’s submissions” refusing to answer interrogatories  s.122(2) of the evidence act 1995 (cth) deals with the issue of “waiver” as set out by the high court in mann v carnell.[40] at [29] in that case, the plurality of the court (gleeson cj, gaudron, gummow and callinan jj) (kirby j agreeing at [155]) said:
waiver may be express or implied. disputes as to implied waiver usually arise from the need to decide whether particular conduct is inconsistent with the maintenance of the confidentiality which the privilege is intended to protect. ... what brings about the waiver is the inconsistency, which the courts, where necessary informed by considerations of fairness, perceive, between the conduct of the client and maintenance of the confidentiality, not some overriding principle of fairness operating at large.   more recently, in expense reduction analysts group pty ltd v armstrong strategic management and marketing pty ltd, the high court discussed the principle of “waiver” in the context of a claim for privilege in relation to certain documents.[41] at [30] and [31] the court said (internal citations omitted):  ] according to its strict legal connotation, waiver is an intentional act done with knowledge whereby a person abandons a right (or privilege) by acting in a manner inconsistent with that right (or privilege). it may be express or implied. in most cases concerning waiver, the area of dispute is whether it is to be implied. in some cases waiver will be imputed by the law with the consequence that a privilege is lost, even though that consequence was not intended by the party losing the privilege. the courts will impute an intention where the actions of a party are plainly inconsistent with the maintenance of the confidentiality which the privilege is intended to protect. [31] in craine v colonial mutual fire insurance co ltd, it was explained that "'[w]aiver' is a doctrine of some arbitrariness introduced by the law to prevent a man in certain circumstances from taking up two inconsistent positions ... it is a conclusion of law when the necessary facts are established. it looks, however, chiefly to the conduct and position of the person who is said to have waived, in order to see whether he has 'approbated' so as to prevent him from 'reprobating'"...   here, during the extensive submissions by counsel for the mother in relation to what i will call her primary (oral) application to discharge the expert, no question of privilege was ever raised by counsel, including when asked questions by the court regarding the matters noted above in relation to the timing of the “discovery” of the abc article (and by whom), and in consequence matters going to delay. in the light of having had the opportunity to raise any issues, for example, regarding privilege during the hearing of that application and not doing so, the mother (or her solicitor) cannot now, after the event, change their position(s) and seek to claim, especially in the most general terms outlined, a general claim for privilege. (d) indeed, the generality of the claim for privilege also militates against it having any applicability here. among many authorities in this regard, in kennedy v wallace, the full federal court (black cj and emmett j) said, at [13]:[42]   indeed, the generality of the claim for privilege also militates against it having any applicability here. among many authorities in this regard, in kennedy v wallace, the full federal court (black cj and emmett j) said, at [13]:[42]
... it is not sufficient for a party merely to assert a claim for privilege nor will an affidavit asserting the purpose for which a document was brought into existence ... be sufficient. ... privilege is [not] “necessarily or conclusively established by resort to any formula or ritual ... whatever the facts may be, it is always for the party claiming privilege to show that the documents for which the claim is made are in fact privileged.   just so here: the onus was and remains upon the mother (and her solicitor) to make good the claim for privilege. as an observation at this stage, and in addition to what has already been stated, simply asking about specific times and persons cannot, without much more, reasonably attract any privilege. the questions during counsel’s submissions, and as sought in the interrogatories, seek no information regarding legal advice. even a discussion “between solicitors” about a publicly available article, cannot, without more, attract privilege. it may be that discussions about what to do with the article for the purposes of the current litigation might attract some privilege. however, in the absence of any affidavit from anyone on the mother’s side, it is simply impossible to make any proper judgment, or claim for privilege. certainly, there is no compliance by the mother or her solicitor with the authorities listed above.
outline of principle
a.5. confidentiality a.5.1. psychologists safeguard the confidentiality of information obtained during their provision of psychological services. considering their legal and organisational requirements, psychologists: (a) make provisions for maintaining confidentiality in the collection, recording, accessing, storage, dissemination, and disposal of information, and (b) take reasonable steps to protect the confidentiality of information after they leave a specific work setting, or cease to provide psychological services. a.5.2. psychologists disclose confidential information obtained in the course of their provision of psychological services only under any one or more of the following circumstances: (a) with the consent of the relevant client or a person with legal authority to act on behalf of the client,   make provisions for maintaining confidentiality in the collection, recording, accessing, storage, dissemination, and disposal of information, and (b) take reasonable steps to protect the confidentiality of information after they leave a specific work setting, or cease to provide psychological services.   take reasonable steps to protect the confidentiality of information after they leave a specific work setting, or cease to provide psychological services.   with the consent of the relevant client or a person with legal authority to act on behalf of the client,   where there is a legal obligation to do so, (c) if there is an immediate and specified risk of harm to an identifiable person or persons that can be averted only by disclosing information ...   if there is an immediate and specified risk of harm to an identifiable person or persons that can be averted only by disclosing information ...
rule 7.18(3)   the expert witness has the following duties: (a) to give an objective and unbiased opinion that is also independent and impartial on matters that are within the expert witness's knowledge and capability, (b) to conduct the expert witness's functions in a timely way, (c) to avoid acting on an instruction or request to withhold or avoid agreement when attending a conference of experts, (d) to consider all material facts, including those that may detract from the expert witness's opinion, (e) to tell the court: (i) if a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, and (ii) if the expert witness believes that the report prepared by the expert witness is based on incomplete research or inaccurate or incomplete information, or is incomplete or may be inaccurate, for any reason,   to give an objective and unbiased opinion that is also independent and impartial on matters that are within the expert witness's knowledge and capability, (b) to conduct the expert witness's functions in a timely way, (c) to avoid acting on an instruction or request to withhold or avoid agreement when attending a conference of experts, (d) to consider all material facts, including those that may detract from the expert witness's opinion, (e) to tell the court: (i) if a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, and (ii) if the expert witness believes that the report prepared by the expert witness is based on incomplete research or inaccurate or incomplete information, or is incomplete or may be inaccurate, for any reason,   to conduct the expert witness's functions in a timely way, (c) to avoid acting on an instruction or request to withhold or avoid agreement when attending a conference of experts, (d) to consider all material facts, including those that may detract from the expert witness's opinion, (e) to tell the court: (i) if a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, and (ii) if the expert witness believes that the report prepared by the expert witness is based on incomplete research or inaccurate or incomplete information, or is incomplete or may be inaccurate, for any reason,   to avoid acting on an instruction or request to withhold or avoid agreement when attending a conference of experts, (d) to consider all material facts, including those that may detract from the expert witness's opinion, (e) to tell the court: (i) if a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, and (ii) if the expert witness believes that the report prepared by the expert witness is based on incomplete research or inaccurate or incomplete information, or is incomplete or may be inaccurate, for any reason,   to consider all material facts, including those that may detract from the expert witness's opinion, (e) to tell the court: (i) if a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, and (ii) if the expert witness believes that the report prepared by the expert witness is based on incomplete research or inaccurate or incomplete information, or is incomplete or may be inaccurate, for any reason,   to tell the court: (i) if a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, and (ii) if the expert witness believes that the report prepared by the expert witness is based on incomplete research or inaccurate or incomplete information, or is incomplete or may be inaccurate, for any reason,   if a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, and (ii) if the expert witness believes that the report prepared by the expert witness is based on incomplete research or inaccurate or incomplete information, or is incomplete or may be inaccurate, for any reason,  ) if the expert witness believes that the report prepared by the expert witness is based on incomplete research or inaccurate or incomplete information, or is incomplete or may be inaccurate, for any reason,   to produce a written report that complies with rules 7.21 and 7.22.
rule 7.22   an expert’s report must: (a) state the reasons for the expert witness’s conclusions, and (b) include a statement about the methodology used in the production of the report, and (c) include the material referred to in subrule (2) in support of the expert witness’s conclusions. (2) for the purposes of paragraph (1)(c), a expert’s report must include the following in support of the expert witness’s conclusions: (a) the expert witness's qualifications, (b) the literature or other material used in making the report, (c) the relevant facts, matters and assumptions on which the opinions in the report are based, (d) a statement about the facts in the report that are within the expert witness's knowledge, (e) details about any tests, experiments, examinations or investigations relied on by the expert witness and, if they were carried out by another person, details of that person's qualifications and experience, (f) if there is a range of opinion on the matters dealt with in the report--a summary of the range of opinion and the basis for the expert witness's opinion, (g) a summary of the conclusions reached, (h) if necessary, a disclosure that: (i) a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.   state the reasons for the expert witness’s conclusions, and (b) include a statement about the methodology used in the production of the report, and (c) include the material referred to in subrule (2) in support of the expert witness’s conclusions.   include a statement about the methodology used in the production of the report, and (c) include the material referred to in subrule (2) in support of the expert witness’s conclusions.   include the material referred to in subrule (2) in support of the expert witness’s conclusions.   for the purposes of paragraph (1)(c), a expert’s report must include the following in support of the expert witness’s conclusions: (a) the expert witness's qualifications, (b) the literature or other material used in making the report, (c) the relevant facts, matters and assumptions on which the opinions in the report are based, (d) a statement about the facts in the report that are within the expert witness's knowledge, (e) details about any tests, experiments, examinations or investigations relied on by the expert witness and, if they were carried out by another person, details of that person's qualifications and experience, (f) if there is a range of opinion on the matters dealt with in the report--a summary of the range of opinion and the basis for the expert witness's opinion, (g) a summary of the conclusions reached, (h) if necessary, a disclosure that: (i) a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.   the expert witness's qualifications, (b) the literature or other material used in making the report, (c) the relevant facts, matters and assumptions on which the opinions in the report are based, (d) a statement about the facts in the report that are within the expert witness's knowledge, (e) details about any tests, experiments, examinations or investigations relied on by the expert witness and, if they were carried out by another person, details of that person's qualifications and experience, (f) if there is a range of opinion on the matters dealt with in the report--a summary of the range of opinion and the basis for the expert witness's opinion, (g) a summary of the conclusions reached, (h) if necessary, a disclosure that: (i) a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.   the literature or other material used in making the report, (c) the relevant facts, matters and assumptions on which the opinions in the report are based, (d) a statement about the facts in the report that are within the expert witness's knowledge, (e) details about any tests, experiments, examinations or investigations relied on by the expert witness and, if they were carried out by another person, details of that person's qualifications and experience, (f) if there is a range of opinion on the matters dealt with in the report--a summary of the range of opinion and the basis for the expert witness's opinion, (g) a summary of the conclusions reached, (h) if necessary, a disclosure that: (i) a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.   the relevant facts, matters and assumptions on which the opinions in the report are based, (d) a statement about the facts in the report that are within the expert witness's knowledge, (e) details about any tests, experiments, examinations or investigations relied on by the expert witness and, if they were carried out by another person, details of that person's qualifications and experience, (f) if there is a range of opinion on the matters dealt with in the report--a summary of the range of opinion and the basis for the expert witness's opinion, (g) a summary of the conclusions reached, (h) if necessary, a disclosure that: (i) a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.   a statement about the facts in the report that are within the expert witness's knowledge, (e) details about any tests, experiments, examinations or investigations relied on by the expert witness and, if they were carried out by another person, details of that person's qualifications and experience, (f) if there is a range of opinion on the matters dealt with in the report--a summary of the range of opinion and the basis for the expert witness's opinion, (g) a summary of the conclusions reached, (h) if necessary, a disclosure that: (i) a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.   details about any tests, experiments, examinations or investigations relied on by the expert witness and, if they were carried out by another person, details of that person's qualifications and experience, (f) if there is a range of opinion on the matters dealt with in the report--a summary of the range of opinion and the basis for the expert witness's opinion, (g) a summary of the conclusions reached, (h) if necessary, a disclosure that: (i) a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.   if there is a range of opinion on the matters dealt with in the report--a summary of the range of opinion and the basis for the expert witness's opinion, (g) a summary of the conclusions reached, (h) if necessary, a disclosure that: (i) a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.   a summary of the conclusions reached, (h) if necessary, a disclosure that: (i) a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.   if necessary, a disclosure that: (i) a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.   a particular question or issue falls outside the expert witness's expertise, or (ii) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.  ) the report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and the details of any qualification, or (iii) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.  i) the expert witness's opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is required or because of any other reason.
79 exception: opinions based on specialised knowledge   if a person has specialised knowledge based on the person’s training, study or experience, the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion of that person that is wholly or substantially based on that knowledge. (2) to avoid doubt, and without limiting subsection (1): (a) a reference in that subsection to specialised knowledge includes a reference to specialised knowledge of child development and child behaviour (including specialised knowledge of the impact of sexual abuse on children and their development and behaviour during and following the abuse), and (b) a reference in that subsection to an opinion of a person includes, if the person has specialised knowledge of the kind referred to in paragraph (a), a reference to an opinion relating to either or both of the following:   to avoid doubt, and without limiting subsection (1): (a) a reference in that subsection to specialised knowledge includes a reference to specialised knowledge of child development and child behaviour (including specialised knowledge of the impact of sexual abuse on children and their development and behaviour during and following the abuse), and (b) a reference in that subsection to an opinion of a person includes, if the person has specialised knowledge of the kind referred to in paragraph (a), a reference to an opinion relating to either or both of the following:   a reference in that subsection to specialised knowledge includes a reference to specialised knowledge of child development and child behaviour (including specialised knowledge of the impact of sexual abuse on children and their development and behaviour during and following the abuse), and (b) a reference in that subsection to an opinion of a person includes, if the person has specialised knowledge of the kind referred to in paragraph (a), a reference to an opinion relating to either or both of the following:   a reference in that subsection to an opinion of a person includes, if the person has specialised knowledge of the kind referred to in paragraph (a), a reference to an opinion relating to either or both of the following:  the development and behaviour of children generally, (ii) the development and behaviour of children who have been victims of sexual offences, or offences similar to sexual offences.  ) the development and behaviour of children who have been victims of sexual offences, or offences similar to sexual offences.   hg v the queen (especially the discussion by gleeson cj, at [36] – [44] regarding the admissibility of opinion evidence from a psychologist,[46] (b) dasreef v hawchar (especially at [30] and following of the plurality judgment discussing s.79 and opinion evidence), (c) honeysett v the queen (regarding the admission of opinion evidence and the interface between ss.76 and 79, beginning at [10] regarding the voir dire, and at [20] – [25] regarding “opinion evidence under the evidence act”).[47]   dasreef v hawchar (especially at [30] and following of the plurality judgment discussing s.79 and opinion evidence), (c) honeysett v the queen (regarding the admission of opinion evidence and the interface between ss.76 and 79, beginning at [10] regarding the voir dire, and at [20] – [25] regarding “opinion evidence under the evidence act”).[47]   honeysett v the queen (regarding the admission of opinion evidence and the interface between ss.76 and 79, beginning at [10] regarding the voir dire, and at [20] – [25] regarding “opinion evidence under the evidence act”).[47]  ] when i consider the mother's allegations and the evidence she has filed in support, i observe that she makes no real complaint that psychologist a was biased or that there was an apprehension of bias on her part, although she may attempt to characterise certain of her complaints as such. certainly, the complaints made by her in her earlier affidavit material would not meet the high bar necessary to support the discharge of an experienced single expert witness. all of her earlier complaints could properly be put to psychologist a through cross-examination at the trial, which would be the usual process for dealing with such grievances. [63] i also observe that notwithstanding her grievances with psychologist a, which are set out in detail in her trial affidavit, the mother elected not to put any clarifying questions to psychologist a at the time of publication of her primary report, nor did she bring an application for psychologist a's discharge. [64] further, in her trial affidavit, the mother relies on certain aspects of psychologist a's report which are critical of the father. litigants cannot have it both ways: one cannot simultaneously rely upon the critiques of the other party and seek to discharge the report in its entirety. [65] the complexion of the mother's complaints against psychologist a only take on a more concerning tone following the publication of the abc article about "dr julie". i am left to wonder why, if the mother held these specific and more serious concerns about psychologist a's conduct prior to her becoming aware of the abc article, they were not set out in her trial affidavit, which was filed on 28 april 2023, which as i have already observed, otherwise comprehensively set out her views of psychologist a's method and report. [66] for the parties' benefit, i read the abc article and listened to the associated podcast at the time they were published, as i would any news reporting that relates to family court issues. i agree the report raises serious concern about the alleged conduct of the subject psychologist.71 i do not in any way seek to minimise or trivialise those concerns. however, i offer the following comments about the abc article: [67] first, i do not know whether the subject psychologist provided her consent to be recorded, which may give rise to an argument about the legality of the recording. [68] second, it is apparent that only short soundbites from the recordings were used for the purpose of the abc article. accordingly, i have no context for those aspects of the recordings that were included in the podcast and article, nor do i know whether the recordings were edited in any way for impact or effect. [69] third, i do not know whether the subject psychologist has obtained legal advice about the abc article or any remedies that person may have available to them, if any. the answer to this question may impact on them commenting on the abc article in part or in its entirety. 7[0] fourth, the subject psychologist was conducting family therapy outside of the family court process, which is distinctly different to the role psychologist a has been appointed to undertake in these proceedings, in which she is the court appointed single expert witness.72 this appointment carries with it an obligation to discharge her responsibilities in a manner consistent with the rules, the australian standards of practice for family assessments and reporting73 together with her professional obligations arising pursuant to the australian psychological society code of ethics. [71] to the best of my knowledge, and on the evidence before the court, the allegations made against the psychologist the subject of the abc article are currently allegations only. the subject psychologist may have a complaint or multiple complaints made against them with ahpra. however, that person is entitled to due process. they have a right to respond to those complaints in a manner that is procedurally fair to the complainants but also to the psychologist themselves: procedural fairness is not the sole purview of one party. [72] it may be argued that a family court report writer holds a unique and powerful position within a family court case. this is true to an extent, but proceedings are not determined by single expert witness reports alone.[49] as important as a single expert witness might be to a proceedings, they may be no more or less important than parties having access to competent and experienced counsel, who are in many ways, equally as invaluable to the court. [73] the sad reality is that family court proceedings are often complex because we deal with highly emotive situations, often with traumatised parents and children, with complex family dynamics. when i was in practice and was involved with the legal practice board through my appointment as senior counsel, i understood the legal practice board received a large volume of complaints about family law professionals. the proper administration of justice may significantly be impacted in this court if solicitors or counsel were precluded from acting where they had unresolved complaints made about them at the legal practice complaints committee ("the lpcc"). [74] this court does not require solicitors or counsel to disclose to this court when complaints are made about them to the lpcc nor in respect to the status of any such complaint, it is the outcome of said complaints, or where interim restrictions are put in place pending the finalisation of a complaint that are of significance. [75] to be clear, i strongly believe people should have a right to make a complaint to a professional's regulatory body, it maintains accountability and should serve to enhance the public's confidence in the profession and the family law system more broadly. [76] however, it appears to me that it would be manifestly unjust to restrict a family law professional, be it a single expert witness or a legal practitioner, who appears regularly before this court from working in their chosen profession in circumstances where any complaints made against them had not been finalised, particularly where this court does not know if that individual has been afforded procedural fairness or exhausted any legal remedies that may be available to them in respect to the complaint. [77] based on the evidence provided by the icl, there is no legal impediment to psychologist a practicing as a psychologist. if that changes, i have every confidence that psychologist a would notify this court promptly. [78] i do not consider it the role of this court to use these proceedings to unearth the identify of "dr julie". that issue is appropriately left to the relevant regulatory body, and should it come to it, the relevant disciplinary tribunal. [79] my job, as is the job of every other judicial officer in this court, is to focus on the specific proceedings before it, and deal with the facts and circumstances that are in issue in those proceedings. in this particular case, it is also to ensure an expeditious trial given the mental health concerns raised about the children. [80] i do not consider that the interests of justice will be compromised if i do not accede to the mother's application. whilst the mother has, only after the publication of the abc article, raised more serious concerns about psychologist a's conduct, there is no:   suggestion that psychologist a has failed to discharge her duties in accordance with the orders made by the court, (b) dispute about her experience, or her expertise nor is there any claim, supported by the evidence currently before the court, that psychologist a has acted in a biased manner or in a way which is reasonably likely to have created an apprehension of bias, and (c) there is no assertion of any substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinions espoused by psychologist a, or that a contrary opinion may be necessary for determining the issues in dispute, or that there may be matters not known to psychologist a, which are necessary to determine the issues in dispute.   dispute about her experience, or her expertise nor is there any claim, supported by the evidence currently before the court, that psychologist a has acted in a biased manner or in a way which is reasonably likely to have created an apprehension of bias, and (c) there is no assertion of any substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinions espoused by psychologist a, or that a contrary opinion may be necessary for determining the issues in dispute, or that there may be matters not known to psychologist a, which are necessary to determine the issues in dispute.   there is no assertion of any substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinions espoused by psychologist a, or that a contrary opinion may be necessary for determining the issues in dispute, or that there may be matters not known to psychologist a, which are necessary to determine the issues in dispute.  ] further, i do not consider the mother will be prejudiced if i do not make orders as sought by her. in fact, with the trial some few weeks away, i consider the parties and the children more likely to be adversely prejudiced if i were to make an order discharging psychologist a, as that is likely to result in the trial being vacated so that the parties, the icl and the court can consider whether a further single expert witness should be appointed. [82] i have not lost sight of the mother's complaints about psychologist a, or how the abc article would have impacted any parent involved in family court proceedings where a single expert witness has been appointed. however, all of the mother's allegations can be properly put to psychologist a during cross-examination. i will then be in an informed position to make findings about psychologist a's evidence, including if necessary, her conduct in these proceedings, which is my concern. the impact of those findings will self-evidently inform what weight i consider should be placed on her report and her evidence more broadly. further, if this court has concern about psychologist a's conduct following the conclusion of the evidence, appropriate consequences may follow, which include allowing one or both parties to make a complaint to ahpra themselves, or in fact, making such a referral itself.
consideration and disposition  the mother seeks to have the court draw some relevant nexus between the anonymised therapist referred to in the abc article and dr b. in part, this was on the basis that it was, somehow, “common knowledge” that she was the therapist referred to in the article, accepting that counsel for the mother did not have this “common knowledge” himself until the evening before the application was made, and that the court and the icl were similarly ignorant about it, and remained completely ignorant of it until the application was raised after lunch on the second day of the trial, and (b) the mother also seeks that the court draw an adverse inference against dr b (i) for not directly denying (or perhaps “not admitting”) that she is the therapist referred to in the abc article, and in turn, (ii) because she referred to various legal grounds that prevented her from answering such questions (e.g. s.121 of the act, the principle of “confidentiality”), and (c) it may be generally inferred also that, in some not fully articulated way, there has not been complete compliance by dr b with certain parts of rule 7.18 of this court’s rules.   the mother also seeks that the court draw an adverse inference against dr b (i) for not directly denying (or perhaps “not admitting”) that she is the therapist referred to in the abc article, and in turn, (ii) because she referred to various legal grounds that prevented her from answering such questions (e.g. s.121 of the act, the principle of “confidentiality”), and (c) it may be generally inferred also that, in some not fully articulated way, there has not been complete compliance by dr b with certain parts of rule 7.18 of this court’s rules.   it may be generally inferred also that, in some not fully articulated way, there has not been complete compliance by dr b with certain parts of rule 7.18 of this court’s rules.   by posing the simple question – “what if the abc is wrong”, and/or “what if the mother is wrong” – about the inference to be drawn from an anonymised article, exposes to a significant degree, the obvious difficulty for the mother in relying upon an inference (her “best evidence”) which is both contestable and otherwise unable to be established on the balance of probabilities, or at all. it is a simple statement of long-held principle that courts operate and decide matters on facts that are plainly established. the burden is upon the mother to establish the formal nexus between the anonymised personæ in the abc article and dr b. in my view, it is impossible to establish that nexus. such nexus cannot be established on the basis of the extremely flimsy evidence, and unsupported assertions (e.g. so-called “common knowledge”), propounded here, (b) counsel for the mother even conceded (noted above) that, until dr b’s evidence, there was “no evidence” to link dr b with the abc article. given that there was neither denial nor confirmation by dr b but rather a range of reasonable claims available to her, how that link was made after her evidence, and in the face of it, was never explained. it effectively became something of a mantra as the foundation for the application, namely, the inference that “it must be her because she [dr b] did not deny it was her.” this is rather like the old story of taking it as an admission when a person is asked whether “you have stopped beating your partner”. any answer to such a question damns the person immediately, (c) thus, at its highest, the mother was seeking to have the court draw an adverse inference against dr b, and further, that there should be a formal finding that the un-named therapist referred to in the article was, in fact, dr b. again, how one makes the leap of faith from the anonymised article and the anonymised personæ referred to in it, to dr b, was not relevantly explained. respectfully, in the absence of actual evidence, rather than some inference involving anonymous protagonists, this and other arguments discussed below, came awfully close to the notorious “vibe” submission from the iconic australian film, the castle, (d) the so-called “common knowledge” contention used to attempt to draw (or to bolster) some further or related inference against dr b must also fail, and not only because counsel did not know of this “common knowledge” until the night before the application – and the court and the icl likewise. it must also fail because there was no compliance with, or reference to, s.144 of the evidence act, which deals with “matters of common knowledge.” if a party proposes to refer to such matters, there must be compliance with the evidence act. this did not occur here at all, (e) the contention that the court should somehow draw some further (or to bolster) adverse inference because dr b chose not to respond as counsel for the mother wished was both novel and troubling. it was as if this expert, or indeed any witness, must be denied any protection available to them. it would be a complete inversion of both process and substance if possible or otherwise common and available “defences” (to speak in general terms) were to be denied to any witness, expert or not. it would be even more perverse to argue, as the mother did here, that reliance upon a range of statutory (i.e. s.121 of the act) and other “protections” (e.g. the ethical principle of “confidentiality” set out in the guidelines issued by the australian psychology association) should be used as some form of “admission”, but only by inference, to support the mother’s claim. on the mother’s case, any inference, or complaint, without any proper process or finding, or disciplinary action by an appropriate body, is sufficient to require the discharge of an expert against whose reports there is no formal challenge, (f) each of the completely flawed arguments outlined, and dismissed or refuted, above must also be understood in the crucial context where (i) in her trial affidavit, the mother did not raise a single issue about dr b’s reports, either as to process, language or conclusion/recommendations, and (ii) both of dr b’s reports were admitted into evidence on the first day of the trial without any expression of concern, or any opposition. in the face of the conduct of the mother (i.e her legal “team”) at the trial in these respects, and then, in the face of that conduct, run the oral application (without leave) to discharge the expert on the basis of some inference that “should” be drawn from anonymised protagonists, showed how impoverished, if not frail and brittle, the evidence relied upon was, (g) the concerns and criticisms expressed by cohen j in jenkins & grothe at [67] – [77], set out above, apply with equal force, gravity and concern here, (h) it is not the role of this court to act as some sort of disciplinary or regulatory tribunal of experts. still less is it the role of this court to pre-empt any regulatory or disciplinary body, in the event that such a course unfolds regarding any expert. any expert will usually and ordinarily be subject to proper process to investigate any complaint, including a proper opportunity to be heard and to raise any relevant defence. again i stress the important distinction between “complaint” and “finding” from a disciplinary or regulatory body. if the court was to act upon the abc article here as urged by the mother, leaving to one side the lack of evidence regarding any possible editing of recordings referred to and used in the article (as well as the possible illegality of the recording), it would lower the bar to an almost non-existent or unintelligible level. as propounded by the mother, an inference (not even a complaint) from an anonymised article will be sufficient to discharge an expert. no court could seriously countenance such a course. and as the cases from western australia point out, it is not unheard of for complaints to be made against lawyers. there is no requirement for any such complaints to be made to a court before any appearance. a complaint, by definition, does not necessarily lead to some finding of negligence, or worse, and (i) at perhaps the most basic procedural level, there was never any leave sought either (a) to dispense with the rules regarding the filing of an application in a proceeding, and or (b) to proceed with an oral application without either a formalised application and or supporting affidavit. under the rules (e.g. 1.33), failure to comply with the rules can lead to the matter being dismissed, either in part or in whole. the application before the court was breath-taking in its failure to provide the most basic information, which remains outstanding. it was no less remarkable because it presumed upon the court permitting it to proceeding, without even seeking leave to proceed. to be fair, counsel for the mother noted that the application was subject to any other direction of the court, but there remained no application or leave to proceed.   counsel for the mother even conceded (noted above) that, until dr b’s evidence, there was “no evidence” to link dr b with the abc article. given that there was neither denial nor confirmation by dr b but rather a range of reasonable claims available to her, how that link was made after her evidence, and in the face of it, was never explained. it effectively became something of a mantra as the foundation for the application, namely, the inference that “it must be her because she [dr b] did not deny it was her.” this is rather like the old story of taking it as an admission when a person is asked whether “you have stopped beating your partner”. any answer to such a question damns the person immediately, (c) thus, at its highest, the mother was seeking to have the court draw an adverse inference against dr b, and further, that there should be a formal finding that the un-named therapist referred to in the article was, in fact, dr b. again, how one makes the leap of faith from the anonymised article and the anonymised personæ referred to in it, to dr b, was not relevantly explained. respectfully, in the absence of actual evidence, rather than some inference involving anonymous protagonists, this and other arguments discussed below, came awfully close to the notorious “vibe” submission from the iconic australian film, the castle, (d) the so-called “common knowledge” contention used to attempt to draw (or to bolster) some further or related inference against dr b must also fail, and not only because counsel did not know of this “common knowledge” until the night before the application – and the court and the icl likewise. it must also fail because there was no compliance with, or reference to, s.144 of the evidence act, which deals with “matters of common knowledge.” if a party proposes to refer to such matters, there must be compliance with the evidence act. this did not occur here at all, (e) the contention that the court should somehow draw some further (or to bolster) adverse inference because dr b chose not to respond as counsel for the mother wished was both novel and troubling. it was as if this expert, or indeed any witness, must be denied any protection available to them. it would be a complete inversion of both process and substance if possible or otherwise common and available “defences” (to speak in general terms) were to be denied to any witness, expert or not. it would be even more perverse to argue, as the mother did here, that reliance upon a range of statutory (i.e. s.121 of the act) and other “protections” (e.g. the ethical principle of “confidentiality” set out in the guidelines issued by the australian psychology association) should be used as some form of “admission”, but only by inference, to support the mother’s claim. on the mother’s case, any inference, or complaint, without any proper process or finding, or disciplinary action by an appropriate body, is sufficient to require the discharge of an expert against whose reports there is no formal challenge, (f) each of the completely flawed arguments outlined, and dismissed or refuted, above must also be understood in the crucial context where (i) in her trial affidavit, the mother did not raise a single issue about dr b’s reports, either as to process, language or conclusion/recommendations, and (ii) both of dr b’s reports were admitted into evidence on the first day of the trial without any expression of concern, or any opposition. in the face of the conduct of the mother (i.e her legal “team”) at the trial in these respects, and then, in the face of that conduct, run the oral application (without leave) to discharge the expert on the basis of some inference that “should” be drawn from anonymised protagonists, showed how impoverished, if not frail and brittle, the evidence relied upon was, (g) the concerns and criticisms expressed by cohen j in jenkins & grothe at [67] – [77], set out above, apply with equal force, gravity and concern here, (h) it is not the role of this court to act as some sort of disciplinary or regulatory tribunal of experts. still less is it the role of this court to pre-empt any regulatory or disciplinary body, in the event that such a course unfolds regarding any expert. any expert will usually and ordinarily be subject to proper process to investigate any complaint, including a proper opportunity to be heard and to raise any relevant defence. again i stress the important distinction between “complaint” and “finding” from a disciplinary or regulatory body. if the court was to act upon the abc article here as urged by the mother, leaving to one side the lack of evidence regarding any possible editing of recordings referred to and used in the article (as well as the possible illegality of the recording), it would lower the bar to an almost non-existent or unintelligible level. as propounded by the mother, an inference (not even a complaint) from an anonymised article will be sufficient to discharge an expert. no court could seriously countenance such a course. and as the cases from western australia point out, it is not unheard of for complaints to be made against lawyers. there is no requirement for any such complaints to be made to a court before any appearance. a complaint, by definition, does not necessarily lead to some finding of negligence, or worse, and (i) at perhaps the most basic procedural level, there was never any leave sought either (a) to dispense with the rules regarding the filing of an application in a proceeding, and or (b) to proceed with an oral application without either a formalised application and or supporting affidavit. under the rules (e.g. 1.33), failure to comply with the rules can lead to the matter being dismissed, either in part or in whole. the application before the court was breath-taking in its failure to provide the most basic information, which remains outstanding. it was no less remarkable because it presumed upon the court permitting it to proceeding, without even seeking leave to proceed. to be fair, counsel for the mother noted that the application was subject to any other direction of the court, but there remained no application or leave to proceed.   thus, at its highest, the mother was seeking to have the court draw an adverse inference against dr b, and further, that there should be a formal finding that the un-named therapist referred to in the article was, in fact, dr b. again, how one makes the leap of faith from the anonymised article and the anonymised personæ referred to in it, to dr b, was not relevantly explained. respectfully, in the absence of actual evidence, rather than some inference involving anonymous protagonists, this and other arguments discussed below, came awfully close to the notorious “vibe” submission from the iconic australian film, the castle, (d) the so-called “common knowledge” contention used to attempt to draw (or to bolster) some further or related inference against dr b must also fail, and not only because counsel did not know of this “common knowledge” until the night before the application – and the court and the icl likewise. it must also fail because there was no compliance with, or reference to, s.144 of the evidence act, which deals with “matters of common knowledge.” if a party proposes to refer to such matters, there must be compliance with the evidence act. this did not occur here at all, (e) the contention that the court should somehow draw some further (or to bolster) adverse inference because dr b chose not to respond as counsel for the mother wished was both novel and troubling. it was as if this expert, or indeed any witness, must be denied any protection available to them. it would be a complete inversion of both process and substance if possible or otherwise common and available “defences” (to speak in general terms) were to be denied to any witness, expert or not. it would be even more perverse to argue, as the mother did here, that reliance upon a range of statutory (i.e. s.121 of the act) and other “protections” (e.g. the ethical principle of “confidentiality” set out in the guidelines issued by the australian psychology association) should be used as some form of “admission”, but only by inference, to support the mother’s claim. on the mother’s case, any inference, or complaint, without any proper process or finding, or disciplinary action by an appropriate body, is sufficient to require the discharge of an expert against whose reports there is no formal challenge, (f) each of the completely flawed arguments outlined, and dismissed or refuted, above must also be understood in the crucial context where (i) in her trial affidavit, the mother did not raise a single issue about dr b’s reports, either as to process, language or conclusion/recommendations, and (ii) both of dr b’s reports were admitted into evidence on the first day of the trial without any expression of concern, or any opposition. in the face of the conduct of the mother (i.e her legal “team”) at the trial in these respects, and then, in the face of that conduct, run the oral application (without leave) to discharge the expert on the basis of some inference that “should” be drawn from anonymised protagonists, showed how impoverished, if not frail and brittle, the evidence relied upon was, (g) the concerns and criticisms expressed by cohen j in jenkins & grothe at [67] – [77], set out above, apply with equal force, gravity and concern here, (h) it is not the role of this court to act as some sort of disciplinary or regulatory tribunal of experts. still less is it the role of this court to pre-empt any regulatory or disciplinary body, in the event that such a course unfolds regarding any expert. any expert will usually and ordinarily be subject to proper process to investigate any complaint, including a proper opportunity to be heard and to raise any relevant defence. again i stress the important distinction between “complaint” and “finding” from a disciplinary or regulatory body. if the court was to act upon the abc article here as urged by the mother, leaving to one side the lack of evidence regarding any possible editing of recordings referred to and used in the article (as well as the possible illegality of the recording), it would lower the bar to an almost non-existent or unintelligible level. as propounded by the mother, an inference (not even a complaint) from an anonymised article will be sufficient to discharge an expert. no court could seriously countenance such a course. and as the cases from western australia point out, it is not unheard of for complaints to be made against lawyers. there is no requirement for any such complaints to be made to a court before any appearance. a complaint, by definition, does not necessarily lead to some finding of negligence, or worse, and (i) at perhaps the most basic procedural level, there was never any leave sought either (a) to dispense with the rules regarding the filing of an application in a proceeding, and or (b) to proceed with an oral application without either a formalised application and or supporting affidavit. under the rules (e.g. 1.33), failure to comply with the rules can lead to the matter being dismissed, either in part or in whole. the application before the court was breath-taking in its failure to provide the most basic information, which remains outstanding. it was no less remarkable because it presumed upon the court permitting it to proceeding, without even seeking leave to proceed. to be fair, counsel for the mother noted that the application was subject to any other direction of the court, but there remained no application or leave to proceed.   the so-called “common knowledge” contention used to attempt to draw (or to bolster) some further or related inference against dr b must also fail, and not only because counsel did not know of this “common knowledge” until the night before the application – and the court and the icl likewise. it must also fail because there was no compliance with, or reference to, s.144 of the evidence act, which deals with “matters of common knowledge.” if a party proposes to refer to such matters, there must be compliance with the evidence act. this did not occur here at all, (e) the contention that the court should somehow draw some further (or to bolster) adverse inference because dr b chose not to respond as counsel for the mother wished was both novel and troubling. it was as if this expert, or indeed any witness, must be denied any protection available to them. it would be a complete inversion of both process and substance if possible or otherwise common and available “defences” (to speak in general terms) were to be denied to any witness, expert or not. it would be even more perverse to argue, as the mother did here, that reliance upon a range of statutory (i.e. s.121 of the act) and other “protections” (e.g. the ethical principle of “confidentiality” set out in the guidelines issued by the australian psychology association) should be used as some form of “admission”, but only by inference, to support the mother’s claim. on the mother’s case, any inference, or complaint, without any proper process or finding, or disciplinary action by an appropriate body, is sufficient to require the discharge of an expert against whose reports there is no formal challenge, (f) each of the completely flawed arguments outlined, and dismissed or refuted, above must also be understood in the crucial context where (i) in her trial affidavit, the mother did not raise a single issue about dr b’s reports, either as to process, language or conclusion/recommendations, and (ii) both of dr b’s reports were admitted into evidence on the first day of the trial without any expression of concern, or any opposition. in the face of the conduct of the mother (i.e her legal “team”) at the trial in these respects, and then, in the face of that conduct, run the oral application (without leave) to discharge the expert on the basis of some inference that “should” be drawn from anonymised protagonists, showed how impoverished, if not frail and brittle, the evidence relied upon was, (g) the concerns and criticisms expressed by cohen j in jenkins & grothe at [67] – [77], set out above, apply with equal force, gravity and concern here, (h) it is not the role of this court to act as some sort of disciplinary or regulatory tribunal of experts. still less is it the role of this court to pre-empt any regulatory or disciplinary body, in the event that such a course unfolds regarding any expert. any expert will usually and ordinarily be subject to proper process to investigate any complaint, including a proper opportunity to be heard and to raise any relevant defence. again i stress the important distinction between “complaint” and “finding” from a disciplinary or regulatory body. if the court was to act upon the abc article here as urged by the mother, leaving to one side the lack of evidence regarding any possible editing of recordings referred to and used in the article (as well as the possible illegality of the recording), it would lower the bar to an almost non-existent or unintelligible level. as propounded by the mother, an inference (not even a complaint) from an anonymised article will be sufficient to discharge an expert. no court could seriously countenance such a course. and as the cases from western australia point out, it is not unheard of for complaints to be made against lawyers. there is no requirement for any such complaints to be made to a court before any appearance. a complaint, by definition, does not necessarily lead to some finding of negligence, or worse, and (i) at perhaps the most basic procedural level, there was never any leave sought either (a) to dispense with the rules regarding the filing of an application in a proceeding, and or (b) to proceed with an oral application without either a formalised application and or supporting affidavit. under the rules (e.g. 1.33), failure to comply with the rules can lead to the matter being dismissed, either in part or in whole. the application before the court was breath-taking in its failure to provide the most basic information, which remains outstanding. it was no less remarkable because it presumed upon the court permitting it to proceeding, without even seeking leave to proceed. to be fair, counsel for the mother noted that the application was subject to any other direction of the court, but there remained no application or leave to proceed.   the contention that the court should somehow draw some further (or to bolster) adverse inference because dr b chose not to respond as counsel for the mother wished was both novel and troubling. it was as if this expert, or indeed any witness, must be denied any protection available to them. it would be a complete inversion of both process and substance if possible or otherwise common and available “defences” (to speak in general terms) were to be denied to any witness, expert or not. it would be even more perverse to argue, as the mother did here, that reliance upon a range of statutory (i.e. s.121 of the act) and other “protections” (e.g. the ethical principle of “confidentiality” set out in the guidelines issued by the australian psychology association) should be used as some form of “admission”, but only by inference, to support the mother’s claim. on the mother’s case, any inference, or complaint, without any proper process or finding, or disciplinary action by an appropriate body, is sufficient to require the discharge of an expert against whose reports there is no formal challenge, (f) each of the completely flawed arguments outlined, and dismissed or refuted, above must also be understood in the crucial context where (i) in her trial affidavit, the mother did not raise a single issue about dr b’s reports, either as to process, language or conclusion/recommendations, and (ii) both of dr b’s reports were admitted into evidence on the first day of the trial without any expression of concern, or any opposition. in the face of the conduct of the mother (i.e her legal “team”) at the trial in these respects, and then, in the face of that conduct, run the oral application (without leave) to discharge the expert on the basis of some inference that “should” be drawn from anonymised protagonists, showed how impoverished, if not frail and brittle, the evidence relied upon was, (g) the concerns and criticisms expressed by cohen j in jenkins & grothe at [67] – [77], set out above, apply with equal force, gravity and concern here, (h) it is not the role of this court to act as some sort of disciplinary or regulatory tribunal of experts. still less is it the role of this court to pre-empt any regulatory or disciplinary body, in the event that such a course unfolds regarding any expert. any expert will usually and ordinarily be subject to proper process to investigate any complaint, including a proper opportunity to be heard and to raise any relevant defence. again i stress the important distinction between “complaint” and “finding” from a disciplinary or regulatory body. if the court was to act upon the abc article here as urged by the mother, leaving to one side the lack of evidence regarding any possible editing of recordings referred to and used in the article (as well as the possible illegality of the recording), it would lower the bar to an almost non-existent or unintelligible level. as propounded by the mother, an inference (not even a complaint) from an anonymised article will be sufficient to discharge an expert. no court could seriously countenance such a course. and as the cases from western australia point out, it is not unheard of for complaints to be made against lawyers. there is no requirement for any such complaints to be made to a court before any appearance. a complaint, by definition, does not necessarily lead to some finding of negligence, or worse, and (i) at perhaps the most basic procedural level, there was never any leave sought either (a) to dispense with the rules regarding the filing of an application in a proceeding, and or (b) to proceed with an oral application without either a formalised application and or supporting affidavit. under the rules (e.g. 1.33), failure to comply with the rules can lead to the matter being dismissed, either in part or in whole. the application before the court was breath-taking in its failure to provide the most basic information, which remains outstanding. it was no less remarkable because it presumed upon the court permitting it to proceeding, without even seeking leave to proceed. to be fair, counsel for the mother noted that the application was subject to any other direction of the court, but there remained no application or leave to proceed.   each of the completely flawed arguments outlined, and dismissed or refuted, above must also be understood in the crucial context where (i) in her trial affidavit, the mother did not raise a single issue about dr b’s reports, either as to process, language or conclusion/recommendations, and (ii) both of dr b’s reports were admitted into evidence on the first day of the trial without any expression of concern, or any opposition. in the face of the conduct of the mother (i.e her legal “team”) at the trial in these respects, and then, in the face of that conduct, run the oral application (without leave) to discharge the expert on the basis of some inference that “should” be drawn from anonymised protagonists, showed how impoverished, if not frail and brittle, the evidence relied upon was, (g) the concerns and criticisms expressed by cohen j in jenkins & grothe at [67] – [77], set out above, apply with equal force, gravity and concern here, (h) it is not the role of this court to act as some sort of disciplinary or regulatory tribunal of experts. still less is it the role of this court to pre-empt any regulatory or disciplinary body, in the event that such a course unfolds regarding any expert. any expert will usually and ordinarily be subject to proper process to investigate any complaint, including a proper opportunity to be heard and to raise any relevant defence. again i stress the important distinction between “complaint” and “finding” from a disciplinary or regulatory body. if the court was to act upon the abc article here as urged by the mother, leaving to one side the lack of evidence regarding any possible editing of recordings referred to and used in the article (as well as the possible illegality of the recording), it would lower the bar to an almost non-existent or unintelligible level. as propounded by the mother, an inference (not even a complaint) from an anonymised article will be sufficient to discharge an expert. no court could seriously countenance such a course. and as the cases from western australia point out, it is not unheard of for complaints to be made against lawyers. there is no requirement for any such complaints to be made to a court before any appearance. a complaint, by definition, does not necessarily lead to some finding of negligence, or worse, and (i) at perhaps the most basic procedural level, there was never any leave sought either (a) to dispense with the rules regarding the filing of an application in a proceeding, and or (b) to proceed with an oral application without either a formalised application and or supporting affidavit. under the rules (e.g. 1.33), failure to comply with the rules can lead to the matter being dismissed, either in part or in whole. the application before the court was breath-taking in its failure to provide the most basic information, which remains outstanding. it was no less remarkable because it presumed upon the court permitting it to proceeding, without even seeking leave to proceed. to be fair, counsel for the mother noted that the application was subject to any other direction of the court, but there remained no application or leave to proceed.   the concerns and criticisms expressed by cohen j in jenkins & grothe at [67] – [77], set out above, apply with equal force, gravity and concern here, (h) it is not the role of this court to act as some sort of disciplinary or regulatory tribunal of experts. still less is it the role of this court to pre-empt any regulatory or disciplinary body, in the event that such a course unfolds regarding any expert. any expert will usually and ordinarily be subject to proper process to investigate any complaint, including a proper opportunity to be heard and to raise any relevant defence. again i stress the important distinction between “complaint” and “finding” from a disciplinary or regulatory body. if the court was to act upon the abc article here as urged by the mother, leaving to one side the lack of evidence regarding any possible editing of recordings referred to and used in the article (as well as the possible illegality of the recording), it would lower the bar to an almost non-existent or unintelligible level. as propounded by the mother, an inference (not even a complaint) from an anonymised article will be sufficient to discharge an expert. no court could seriously countenance such a course. and as the cases from western australia point out, it is not unheard of for complaints to be made against lawyers. there is no requirement for any such complaints to be made to a court before any appearance. a complaint, by definition, does not necessarily lead to some finding of negligence, or worse, and (i) at perhaps the most basic procedural level, there was never any leave sought either (a) to dispense with the rules regarding the filing of an application in a proceeding, and or (b) to proceed with an oral application without either a formalised application and or supporting affidavit. under the rules (e.g. 1.33), failure to comply with the rules can lead to the matter being dismissed, either in part or in whole. the application before the court was breath-taking in its failure to provide the most basic information, which remains outstanding. it was no less remarkable because it presumed upon the court permitting it to proceeding, without even seeking leave to proceed. to be fair, counsel for the mother noted that the application was subject to any other direction of the court, but there remained no application or leave to proceed.   it is not the role of this court to act as some sort of disciplinary or regulatory tribunal of experts. still less is it the role of this court to pre-empt any regulatory or disciplinary body, in the event that such a course unfolds regarding any expert. any expert will usually and ordinarily be subject to proper process to investigate any complaint, including a proper opportunity to be heard and to raise any relevant defence. again i stress the important distinction between “complaint” and “finding” from a disciplinary or regulatory body. if the court was to act upon the abc article here as urged by the mother, leaving to one side the lack of evidence regarding any possible editing of recordings referred to and used in the article (as well as the possible illegality of the recording), it would lower the bar to an almost non-existent or unintelligible level. as propounded by the mother, an inference (not even a complaint) from an anonymised article will be sufficient to discharge an expert. no court could seriously countenance such a course. and as the cases from western australia point out, it is not unheard of for complaints to be made against lawyers. there is no requirement for any such complaints to be made to a court before any appearance. a complaint, by definition, does not necessarily lead to some finding of negligence, or worse, and (i) at perhaps the most basic procedural level, there was never any leave sought either (a) to dispense with the rules regarding the filing of an application in a proceeding, and or (b) to proceed with an oral application without either a formalised application and or supporting affidavit. under the rules (e.g. 1.33), failure to comply with the rules can lead to the matter being dismissed, either in part or in whole. the application before the court was breath-taking in its failure to provide the most basic information, which remains outstanding. it was no less remarkable because it presumed upon the court permitting it to proceeding, without even seeking leave to proceed. to be fair, counsel for the mother noted that the application was subject to any other direction of the court, but there remained no application or leave to proceed.   at perhaps the most basic procedural level, there was never any leave sought either (a) to dispense with the rules regarding the filing of an application in a proceeding, and or (b) to proceed with an oral application without either a formalised application and or supporting affidavit. under the rules (e.g. 1.33), failure to comply with the rules can lead to the matter being dismissed, either in part or in whole. the application before the court was breath-taking in its failure to provide the most basic information, which remains outstanding. it was no less remarkable because it presumed upon the court permitting it to proceeding, without even seeking leave to proceed. to be fair, counsel for the mother noted that the application was subject to any other direction of the court, but there remained no application or leave to proceed.
associate: dated: 15 september 2023
dated: 15 september 2023
[1] aon risk services australia limited v australian national university (2009) 230 clr 175 (“aon v anu”)[2] it might also be noted that lawyers, for example, not infrequently have different and various “complaints” made against them from time to time. there is no requirement that they not be entitled to appear in court and to continue their professional life while-ever there is no relevant finding and disciplinary finding against them that would preclude the continuation of their professional lives. the same general comments apply to other professions, such as medical practitioners, who also reasonably frequently have complaints filed against them. it is only upon a finding by a disciplinary body, and relevantly if and when some sanction is imposed, is there any formal restriction upon their practice.[3] see t 190.[4] t 199.[5] see t 120 – 124.[6] among other places, see generally rr.1.33 and 1.34.[7] the abc article, together with a very brief media release by this court, both of which were published on 19th june 2023, were provisionally admitted into evidence.[8] for example, presumably it had not come to the attention of the mother’s lawyers at or around the time of dr b’s second report in early august. to state the obvious: had the mother’s lawyers been aware of the article at that time, and the application not made until day 2 of the trial in late august, extremely serious issues arise.[9] see t 189 – 192.[10] dasreef v hawchar [2011] hca 21; (2011) 243 clr 588.[11] dr b’s evidence is at t 169 – 186.[12] t 171.[13] t 173.[14] t 175.[15] t 176. “ahpra” is the australian health practitioner regulation agency; it is discussed briefly later in these reasons.[16] t 179.[17] t 180.[18] t 181.[19] t 182.[20] t 183.[21] t 183.[22] t 185.[23] t 187.[24] t 189 – 190.[25] t 190 – 191.[26] t 192 – 193. [27] t 194 – 195. [28] t 195 – 196.[29] t 199.[30] t 199, as already noted, the complete text of this exchange between the court and counsel for the mother is set out earlier in these reasons.[31] t 200.[32] t 201.[33] t 203.[34] t 190.[35] t 204 – 206. [36] t 207.[37] t 209 – 210 [38] one might also have expected that other standard texts would have been consulted or referenced, such as expert evidence: law, practice, procedure and advocacy fifth edition (i. freckleton and h. selby) (sydney: thomson reuters, 2020). chapter 15 deals with psychological and psychiatric evidence. earlier editions of this tome did likewise and included a list of professional associations and their respective ethical codes and guidelines. some “midnight oil” burning, as suggested in aon v anu, might have assisted, if not have been reasonably expected. it does not seem that any relevant “oil” was burnt or the night owls disturbed.[39] t 7.[40] mann v carnell [1999] hca 66; (1999) 201 clr 1.[41] expense reduction analysts group pty ltd v armstrong strategic management and marketing pty ltd [2013] hca 46; (2013) 250 clr 303.[42] kennedy v wallace [2004] fcafc 337; (2004) 142 fcr 185.[43] dealing generally with the submissions seriatim, “we” are here generally only about half-way through them. it rather causes one to ponder what might have been – if only the mother’s lawyer had answered the six questions, these reasons would have been well and truly finished![44] re w and w [2001] famca 216; (2001) 28 fam lr 45.[45] there are suggestions that this code of ethics, may have been revised, but it is somewhat unclear. there is also a code of practice but it also seems that one cannot access this code unless one is a member of this society. for current purposes, it is sufficient to highlight that “confidentiality” is an important part of the code of ethics for the society. article 4 of this code outlines principles regarding “privacy.”[46] hg v the queen [1999] hca 2; (1999) 197 clr 414.[47] honeysett v the queen (2014) 253 clr 122.[48] mortimer & mortimer (discharge of single expert witness) [2023] fcwa 177; jenkins & grothe (discharge of single expert witness) [2023] fcwa 160.[49] see hall and hall [1979] famca 73; (1979) flc 90-713, 78,819 (evatt cj, asche sj and hogan j); muldoon & carlyle [2012] famcafc 135; (2012) flc 93-513 [105] (bryant cj, finn and strickland jj). see generally albert & plowman [2020] famcafc 23 (aldridge, watts & austin jj).