last updated: 27 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
barbary & harrison [2023] fedcfamc2f 1455
orders
the court orders that:  that the court record only be inspected by mr barbary’s legal advisor, ms gracer. (b) that ms gracer not divulge any information that she obtains from the court record to mr barbary or any other person other than mr barbary’s legal advisors, save for informing him as to whether or not there is relevant information on the court record, and (c) that leave is required before: (i) divulging the specifics of any information received by ms gracer from the court record to mr barbary, and (ii) copying any and/or using any documents off the court record.   that ms gracer not divulge any information that she obtains from the court record to mr barbary or any other person other than mr barbary’s legal advisors, save for informing him as to whether or not there is relevant information on the court record, and (c) that leave is required before: (i) divulging the specifics of any information received by ms gracer from the court record to mr barbary, and (ii) copying any and/or using any documents off the court record.   that leave is required before: (i) divulging the specifics of any information received by ms gracer from the court record to mr barbary, and (ii) copying any and/or using any documents off the court record.   divulging the specifics of any information received by ms gracer from the court record to mr barbary, and (ii) copying any and/or using any documents off the court record.  ) copying any and/or using any documents off the court record.
the court notes:
ex-tempore reasons for judgment
judge turnbull . with the permission of the court, a person with a proper interest:  in the proceeding, or (ii) in information obtainable from the court record in the proceeding,  ) in information obtainable from the court record in the proceeding,   the purpose for which the access is sought, (b) whether the access sought is reasonable for that purpose, (c) the need for security of court personnel, parties, children, and witnesses, (d) any limits or conditions that should be imposed on access to, or use of, the court record.   the need for security of court personnel, parties, children, and witnesses, (d) any limits or conditions that should be imposed on access to, or use of, the court record.   any limits or conditions that should be imposed on access to, or use of, the court record.
...if the court determines that a person has a requisite proper interest, it is within the discretion of the court to grant access to the entire court record/file.[1]
14. further, at [99], the full court said that:
rule 24.13 requires only that the person have a proper interest in the case or information obtainable from the court record. no other limitation is placed upon circumstances in which the court may grant a person access to the court record. in carter & carter the full court considered an appeal against an order by a judge at first instance, dismissing-other than in relation to the consent orders made between parties—an application by a child of those parents to search, or have access to, the court record in relation to the issues of his parents’ divorce and the property and parenting orders made between them. in that case, the child’s parents, who were the parties to the proceedings, consented to him being granted permission to inspect the court record. it is apparent from the reasons of the full court that the judge, at first instance, summarised the purpose of inspection and access to have been: to enable the applicant to know what happened, to assist an understanding of what happened in relation to his family and relationships after the parental separation, to enable the applicant to know which of the parents was, by virtue of the order in the proceedings, supposed to do what, to enable him to ascertain answers to questions such as why he had not been provided with independent legal representation, to enable him, (having received treatment as an adult for mental illness) the benefit of being able to access the information thought to have been held on the court file. it appears from the reasons of the full court that, despite having found that the applicant had a proper interest in the proceedings, the trial judge refused him access to the court record because of concerns which included: reservations about the benefit he might have obtained from inspecting the file, and, in essence, concerns that it was unlikely that having access to and inspecting the file would give him the answers that he sought. the full court allowed the appeal. in doing so, the reasons included that: the provides the criteria by which an application is to be considered and does not entitle the decision to be based on matters not relevant to its terms, the applicant’s stated purpose was prima facie reasonable, the trial judge erred by having regard to irrelevant matters, the correct application of the rule should have been that, once proper interest was established, the court should have considered whether access to the record was reasonable – and not whether an applicant would benefit from such access.[3] the court held further that a primary judge is required to identify the purpose or purposes for which access to the court record is requested and, having done so, to determine whether access to the same is reasonable for that purpose or purposes,[4] and that a focus on an absence of benefit, flowing from access to the court record, is an irrelevant consideration in the exercise of discretion.
associate: dated: 18 september 2023
dated: 18 september 2023
[1] nevins & urwin [2021] fedcfamc1f 342 [13] quoting oates & q and anor [2010] famcafc 202.