last updated: 6 november 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
riggs & camm [2023] fedcfamc2f 1266
orders
amended pursuant to rule 10.13(1) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)
the court declares that:
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background
whether to proceed in the absence of the respondent
sending a copy of the documents by way of the documents being forwarded to the respondent care of services australia (child support) at [...] with a letter enclosed to services australia (child support) requesting that the said documents be forwarded to the respondent at the last address last recorded by them, or any other agency of the commonwealth, state or territory.
the sensible letter
you should get legal advice about this case. the steps that you need to take depend upon which of these options below that you choose. your options to resolve this case. 1. you agree that you are the father cs will accept a statutory declaration signed by you saying that you are the father. please sign the statutory declaration form in front of an authorised witness. the authorised witnesses are listed on the back of the form. once completed, return the witnessed statutory declaration to me by return email or take a photo of each page and email to me at [solicitor’s email address]. 2. you and the child have a nata accredited dna test victoria legal aid (vla) can arrange a dna test at a cost of $500.00. my client will agree to a dna test on this basis: if you are on a centrelink benefit, then vla will pay for the dna test but you must first provide me written proof that you get a benefit. if you are not on a centrelink benefit, then vla will initially pay for the dna test on condition that you refund vla $500.00 within 14 days if the test results prove you are the father. you are to sign and return to us the enclosed form by email or by written email confirmation saying that you agree to this arrangement. if you wish to discuss, please call me on [solicitor’s phone number]. once the above steps are complete, i will contact the dna testing laboratory about the test. the laboratory will then make arrangements directly with you for the test. if the dna test results prove you are not the father, then the case will end. vla will seek no payment from you for the cost of the dna test. if the dna test results show that you are the father, then you will sign a declaration saying that you are the father within 14 days. 3. you do not respond or refuse a dna test my client will have no choice but to start a court case for a declaration that you are the father. my client will also seek a court order that you pay her legal costs of about $2,448.00. this is an option of last resort that i hope we can avoid. please tell me which of the above three options you choose by [early] 2023. after this date my client will have no choice but to go ahead with option three.
these proceedings
advice to the respondent of pregnancy and birth
whether to dispense with service
whether to make the orders sought
associate: dated: 2 october 2023
dated: 2 october 2023