last updated: 10 november 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
odetta & odetta [2023] fedcfamc2f 1280
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy  the interest of [the husband]in the real property situated at [address] in the state of victoria more pai1icularly described in certificate of title volume [...] folio [...].
2. there be liberty to apply generally. and the court declares pursuant to section 15(3)(a) of the confiscatfon act 1997 that the prope1ty specified in paragraph 1 of this order be ·restrained for the following purpose: (a) to satisfy any order for restitution or compensation that may be made under the sentencing act 1991.   to satisfy any order for restitution or compensation that may be made under the sentencing act 1991.
79b notification of proceeds of crime orders etc.   if: (a) a person makes an application for an order, under this part, with respect to: (i) the property of the parties to a marriage or either of them, or (ii) the maintenance of a party to a marriage, and (b) the person knows that the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them is covered by: (i) a proceeds of crime order, or (ii) a forfeiture application,   a person makes an application for an order, under this part, with respect to: (i) the property of the parties to a marriage or either of them, or (ii) the maintenance of a party to a marriage, and (b) the person knows that the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them is covered by: (i) a proceeds of crime order, or (ii) a forfeiture application,   the property of the parties to a marriage or either of them, or (ii) the maintenance of a party to a marriage, and  ) the maintenance of a party to a marriage, and   the person knows that the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them is covered by: (i) a proceeds of crime order, or (ii) a forfeiture application,   a proceeds of crime order, or (ii) a forfeiture application,  ) a forfeiture application,
the person must: (c) disclose in the application the proceeds of crime order or forfeiture application, and (d) give to the court a sealed copy of that order or application.   disclose in the application the proceeds of crime order or forfeiture application, and (d) give to the court a sealed copy of that order or application.   give to the court a sealed copy of that order or application.   a person who does not comply with subsection (1) commits an offence punishable, on conviction, by a fine not exceeding 50 penalty units. (3) if: (a) a person is a party to property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings under this part, and (b) the person is notified by the proceeds of crime authority that the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them is covered by: (i) a proceeds of crime order, or (iii) a forfeiture application,   if: (a) a person is a party to property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings under this part, and (b) the person is notified by the proceeds of crime authority that the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them is covered by: (i) a proceeds of crime order, or (iii) a forfeiture application,   a person is a party to property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings under this part, and (b) the person is notified by the proceeds of crime authority that the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them is covered by: (i) a proceeds of crime order, or (iii) a forfeiture application,   the person is notified by the proceeds of crime authority that the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them is covered by: (i) a proceeds of crime order, or (iii) a forfeiture application,   a proceeds of crime order, or (iii) a forfeiture application,  i) a forfeiture application,
the person must: (c) notify the registry manager in writing of the proceeds of crime order or forfeiture application, and (d) give the registry manager: (i) a copy of the notification referred to in paragraph (b) (if the notification is in writing), and (ii) a copy of the proceeds of crime order or forfeiture application (if the notification is accompanied by a copy of the order or application).   notify the registry manager in writing of the proceeds of crime order or forfeiture application, and (d) give the registry manager: (i) a copy of the notification referred to in paragraph (b) (if the notification is in writing), and (ii) a copy of the proceeds of crime order or forfeiture application (if the notification is accompanied by a copy of the order or application).   give the registry manager: (i) a copy of the notification referred to in paragraph (b) (if the notification is in writing), and (ii) a copy of the proceeds of crime order or forfeiture application (if the notification is accompanied by a copy of the order or application).   a copy of the notification referred to in paragraph (b) (if the notification is in writing), and (ii) a copy of the proceeds of crime order or forfeiture application (if the notification is accompanied by a copy of the order or application).  ) a copy of the proceeds of crime order or forfeiture application (if the notification is accompanied by a copy of the order or application).   a person who does not comply with subsection (3) commits an offence punishable, on conviction, by a fine not exceeding 50 penalty units.
79c court to stay property or spousal maintenance proceedings affected by proceeds of crime orders etc.   a court in which property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings are pending must stay those proceedings if notified under section 79b in relation to the proceedings.  ) the court may, before staying proceedings under subsection (1), invite or require the proceeds of crime authority to make submissions relating to staying the proceedings.   a court must, on the application of the proceeds of crime authority, stay property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings under this part if the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them is covered by: (a) a proceeds of crime order, or (b) a forfeiture application. (3) a court must notify the proceeds of crime authority if the court stays property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings under subsection (1) or (2). (4) the proceeds of crime authority must notify the registry manager if: (a) a proceeds of crime order ceases to be in force, or (b) a forfeiture application is finally determined. (5) for the purposes of subsection (4), a forfeiture application is taken to be finally determined when: (a) the application is withdrawn, or (b) if the application is successful—the resulting forfeiture order comes into force, or (c) if the application is unsuccessful—the time within which an appeal can be made has expired and any appeals have been finally determined or otherwise disposed of.   a proceeds of crime order, or (b) a forfeiture application.   a forfeiture application.   a court must notify the proceeds of crime authority if the court stays property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings under subsection (1) or (2). (4) the proceeds of crime authority must notify the registry manager if: (a) a proceeds of crime order ceases to be in force, or (b) a forfeiture application is finally determined. (5) for the purposes of subsection (4), a forfeiture application is taken to be finally determined when: (a) the application is withdrawn, or (b) if the application is successful—the resulting forfeiture order comes into force, or (c) if the application is unsuccessful—the time within which an appeal can be made has expired and any appeals have been finally determined or otherwise disposed of.   the proceeds of crime authority must notify the registry manager if: (a) a proceeds of crime order ceases to be in force, or (b) a forfeiture application is finally determined. (5) for the purposes of subsection (4), a forfeiture application is taken to be finally determined when: (a) the application is withdrawn, or (b) if the application is successful—the resulting forfeiture order comes into force, or (c) if the application is unsuccessful—the time within which an appeal can be made has expired and any appeals have been finally determined or otherwise disposed of.   a proceeds of crime order ceases to be in force, or (b) a forfeiture application is finally determined.   a forfeiture application is finally determined.   for the purposes of subsection (4), a forfeiture application is taken to be finally determined when: (a) the application is withdrawn, or (b) if the application is successful—the resulting forfeiture order comes into force, or (c) if the application is unsuccessful—the time within which an appeal can be made has expired and any appeals have been finally determined or otherwise disposed of.   the application is withdrawn, or (b) if the application is successful—the resulting forfeiture order comes into force, or (c) if the application is unsuccessful—the time within which an appeal can be made has expired and any appeals have been finally determined or otherwise disposed of.   if the application is successful—the resulting forfeiture order comes into force, or (c) if the application is unsuccessful—the time within which an appeal can be made has expired and any appeals have been finally determined or otherwise disposed of.   if the application is unsuccessful—the time within which an appeal can be made has expired and any appeals have been finally determined or otherwise disposed of.
79d lifting a stay   a court that stayed the property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings under section 79c must wholly or partially lift the stay if: (a) either party to the proceedings makes an application for the stay to be lifted and the proceeds of crime authority consents to such an application, or (b) the proceeds of crime authority makes an application for the stay to be lifted. (2) a court that stayed the property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings under section 79c may, on its own motion, wholly or partially lift the stay if the proceeds of crime authority consents to such a motion. (3) giving the registry manager written notice of the proceeds of crime authority’s consent under this section is taken to be the giving of that consent, unless the court requires the authority to appear in the proceedings. the notice may be given by the authority or by a party to the proceedings.   either party to the proceedings makes an application for the stay to be lifted and the proceeds of crime authority consents to such an application, or (b) the proceeds of crime authority makes an application for the stay to be lifted.   the proceeds of crime authority makes an application for the stay to be lifted.   a court that stayed the property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings under section 79c may, on its own motion, wholly or partially lift the stay if the proceeds of crime authority consents to such a motion. (3) giving the registry manager written notice of the proceeds of crime authority’s consent under this section is taken to be the giving of that consent, unless the court requires the authority to appear in the proceedings. the notice may be given by the authority or by a party to the proceedings.   giving the registry manager written notice of the proceeds of crime authority’s consent under this section is taken to be the giving of that consent, unless the court requires the authority to appear in the proceedings. the notice may be given by the authority or by a party to the proceedings.
79e intervention by proceeds of crime authority   the proceeds of crime authority may intervene in any property settlement or spousal maintenance proceedings in relation to which a court is notified under section 79b, or in any proceedings under section 79c or 79d in which the authority is not already a party. (2) if the proceeds of crime authority intervenes, the authority is taken to be a party to the proceedings with all the rights, duties and liabilities of a party.   if the proceeds of crime authority intervenes, the authority is taken to be a party to the proceedings with all the rights, duties and liabilities of a party.
associate: dated: 5 october 2023
dated: 5 october 2023