last updated: 8 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kamber & tackett [2023] fedcfamc2f 1250
orders
by consent and on a final basis the court orders that:  on the children’s birthdays (if they are not already in the care of the father) as follows: (i) in the event the children’s birthdays fall on a school day, the children will spend 2 hours with the father from the conclusion of school, with the father to collect the children from school and deliver the children to the mother at the conclusion of time, and (ii) in the event the children’s birthdays do not fall on a school day, the children will spend 4 hours with the father at such times as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 10 am to 2 pm. (iii) in the event y’s birthday falls on a day on which changeover is to occur during the school holiday period, then notwithstanding any other order to the contrary, changeover will occur at 2 pm. (b) on the father’s birthday as follows: (i) in the event the father’s birthday falls on a school day, the children will spend time with the father from the conclusion of school to 6 pm, with the father to collect the children from school and deliver the children to the mother at the conclusion of time, and (ii) in the event the father’s birthday does not fall on a school day, the children will spend time with the father from 9 am to 5 pm.   in the event the children’s birthdays fall on a school day, the children will spend 2 hours with the father from the conclusion of school, with the father to collect the children from school and deliver the children to the mother at the conclusion of time, and (ii) in the event the children’s birthdays do not fall on a school day, the children will spend 4 hours with the father at such times as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 10 am to 2 pm. (iii) in the event y’s birthday falls on a day on which changeover is to occur during the school holiday period, then notwithstanding any other order to the contrary, changeover will occur at 2 pm.  ) in the event the children’s birthdays do not fall on a school day, the children will spend 4 hours with the father at such times as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 10 am to 2 pm. (iii) in the event y’s birthday falls on a day on which changeover is to occur during the school holiday period, then notwithstanding any other order to the contrary, changeover will occur at 2 pm.  i) in the event y’s birthday falls on a day on which changeover is to occur during the school holiday period, then notwithstanding any other order to the contrary, changeover will occur at 2 pm.   on the father’s birthday as follows: (i) in the event the father’s birthday falls on a school day, the children will spend time with the father from the conclusion of school to 6 pm, with the father to collect the children from school and deliver the children to the mother at the conclusion of time, and (ii) in the event the father’s birthday does not fall on a school day, the children will spend time with the father from 9 am to 5 pm.   in the event the father’s birthday falls on a school day, the children will spend time with the father from the conclusion of school to 6 pm, with the father to collect the children from school and deliver the children to the mother at the conclusion of time, and (ii) in the event the father’s birthday does not fall on a school day, the children will spend time with the father from 9 am to 5 pm.  ) in the event the father’s birthday does not fall on a school day, the children will spend time with the father from 9 am to 5 pm.   on the children’s birthdays (if they are not already in the care of the mother that afternoon) as follows: (i) in the event the children’s birthdays fall on a school day, the children will spend 2 hours with the mother from the conclusion of school, with the mother to collect the children from school and deliver the children to the father at the conclusion of time, and (ii) in the event the children’s birthdays do not fall on a school day, the children will spend 4 hours with the mother at such times as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 10 am to 2 pm. (b) on the mother’s birthday as follows: (i) in the event the mother’s birthday falls on a school day, the children will spend time with the mother from the conclusion of school to 6 pm, with the mother to collect the children from school and deliver the children to the father at the conclusion of time, and (ii) in the event the mother’s birthday does not fall on a school day, the children will spend time with the mother from 9 am to 5 pm.   in the event the children’s birthdays fall on a school day, the children will spend 2 hours with the mother from the conclusion of school, with the mother to collect the children from school and deliver the children to the father at the conclusion of time, and (ii) in the event the children’s birthdays do not fall on a school day, the children will spend 4 hours with the mother at such times as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 10 am to 2 pm.  ) in the event the children’s birthdays do not fall on a school day, the children will spend 4 hours with the mother at such times as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 10 am to 2 pm.   on the mother’s birthday as follows: (i) in the event the mother’s birthday falls on a school day, the children will spend time with the mother from the conclusion of school to 6 pm, with the mother to collect the children from school and deliver the children to the father at the conclusion of time, and (ii) in the event the mother’s birthday does not fall on a school day, the children will spend time with the mother from 9 am to 5 pm.   in the event the mother’s birthday falls on a school day, the children will spend time with the mother from the conclusion of school to 6 pm, with the mother to collect the children from school and deliver the children to the father at the conclusion of time, and (ii) in the event the mother’s birthday does not fall on a school day, the children will spend time with the mother from 9 am to 5 pm.  ) in the event the mother’s birthday does not fall on a school day, the children will spend time with the mother from 9 am to 5 pm.   school terms and school holidays will be defined as published by the school that y attends, (b) the “first day” of each school holiday period is deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of each school term that students are required to attend school, and (c) the “last day” of each school holiday period is deemed to be the commencement of school on the first day of each new school term that students are required to attend school.   the “first day” of each school holiday period is deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of each school term that students are required to attend school, and (c) the “last day” of each school holiday period is deemed to be the commencement of school on the first day of each new school term that students are required to attend school.   the “last day” of each school holiday period is deemed to be the commencement of school on the first day of each new school term that students are required to attend school.   where changeover is to occur from the conclusion of school, then at school.   during school terms once each tuesday, thursday and sunday that the children are in the care of the other party at such time as may be mutually agreed between the parties in writing, and failing agreement at 6 pm, (b) in addition to the above, each party will facilitate telephone calls with the children at such other times as agreed between the parties, including but not limited to occasions when either of the children is unwell, there has been a special occasion or event at school, or if the children request to call the other parent.   in addition to the above, each party will facilitate telephone calls with the children at such other times as agreed between the parties, including but not limited to occasions when either of the children is unwell, there has been a special occasion or event at school, or if the children request to call the other parent.   of all changes to his/her residential address, mobile telephone number(s), landline telephone number(s) and email address within 24 hours of all changes to the same, (b) as soon as reasonably practicable, upon becoming aware of any of the children being involved in a medical emergency, (c) each party shall keep the other party informed at the earliest opportunity of all medical and health issues affecting each of the children including any and all medical treatment that has been obtained, sought or is required for each of the children and provide to the other parent the contact details for each of the children’s treaters, (d) of all medical appointments made for the children not less than 7 days prior to such appointments or if 7 days’ notice is not possible, then immediately upon making the appointment for the child.   as soon as reasonably practicable, upon becoming aware of any of the children being involved in a medical emergency, (c) each party shall keep the other party informed at the earliest opportunity of all medical and health issues affecting each of the children including any and all medical treatment that has been obtained, sought or is required for each of the children and provide to the other parent the contact details for each of the children’s treaters, (d) of all medical appointments made for the children not less than 7 days prior to such appointments or if 7 days’ notice is not possible, then immediately upon making the appointment for the child.   each party shall keep the other party informed at the earliest opportunity of all medical and health issues affecting each of the children including any and all medical treatment that has been obtained, sought or is required for each of the children and provide to the other parent the contact details for each of the children’s treaters, (d) of all medical appointments made for the children not less than 7 days prior to such appointments or if 7 days’ notice is not possible, then immediately upon making the appointment for the child.   of all medical appointments made for the children not less than 7 days prior to such appointments or if 7 days’ notice is not possible, then immediately upon making the appointment for the child.   the party proposing overseas travel gives to the other party, at least 3 months in advance of the proposed travel, written details of the names and places outside of the commonwealth of australia where it is proposed the children will be travelling (being countries, cities and towns), and (b) the party proposing overseas travel gives to the other party, at least 3 months in advance of the proposed travel, written details of the proposed departure and arrival dates to and from each country to which it is intended travel will occur, and (c) not less than 2 weeks in advance of the proposed travel, the party taking or sending the children outside of the commonwealth of australia must provide to the other party a photocopy of all return airline and/or shipping tickets for the children evidencing the children’s return to the commonwealth of australia together with copies of all written itineraries, (d) not less than 1 month in advance of the proposed travel, the party taking or sending the children outside of the commonwealth of australia must provide to the other party written notice of the contact telephone numbers and addresses of all places where the children will be staying overnight when outside of the commonwealth of australia, (e) the party proposing overseas travel must ensure the children travelling outside of the commonwealth of australia are covered by a valid travel insurance policy for the duration of travel outside of australia, and a copy of such policy shall be provided to the other party not less than 2 weeks prior to the proposed travel.   the party proposing overseas travel gives to the other party, at least 3 months in advance of the proposed travel, written details of the proposed departure and arrival dates to and from each country to which it is intended travel will occur, and (c) not less than 2 weeks in advance of the proposed travel, the party taking or sending the children outside of the commonwealth of australia must provide to the other party a photocopy of all return airline and/or shipping tickets for the children evidencing the children’s return to the commonwealth of australia together with copies of all written itineraries, (d) not less than 1 month in advance of the proposed travel, the party taking or sending the children outside of the commonwealth of australia must provide to the other party written notice of the contact telephone numbers and addresses of all places where the children will be staying overnight when outside of the commonwealth of australia, (e) the party proposing overseas travel must ensure the children travelling outside of the commonwealth of australia are covered by a valid travel insurance policy for the duration of travel outside of australia, and a copy of such policy shall be provided to the other party not less than 2 weeks prior to the proposed travel.   not less than 2 weeks in advance of the proposed travel, the party taking or sending the children outside of the commonwealth of australia must provide to the other party a photocopy of all return airline and/or shipping tickets for the children evidencing the children’s return to the commonwealth of australia together with copies of all written itineraries, (d) not less than 1 month in advance of the proposed travel, the party taking or sending the children outside of the commonwealth of australia must provide to the other party written notice of the contact telephone numbers and addresses of all places where the children will be staying overnight when outside of the commonwealth of australia, (e) the party proposing overseas travel must ensure the children travelling outside of the commonwealth of australia are covered by a valid travel insurance policy for the duration of travel outside of australia, and a copy of such policy shall be provided to the other party not less than 2 weeks prior to the proposed travel.   not less than 1 month in advance of the proposed travel, the party taking or sending the children outside of the commonwealth of australia must provide to the other party written notice of the contact telephone numbers and addresses of all places where the children will be staying overnight when outside of the commonwealth of australia, (e) the party proposing overseas travel must ensure the children travelling outside of the commonwealth of australia are covered by a valid travel insurance policy for the duration of travel outside of australia, and a copy of such policy shall be provided to the other party not less than 2 weeks prior to the proposed travel.   the party proposing overseas travel must ensure the children travelling outside of the commonwealth of australia are covered by a valid travel insurance policy for the duration of travel outside of australia, and a copy of such policy shall be provided to the other party not less than 2 weeks prior to the proposed travel.   any education providers that are involved with the children, (b) any educational specialist involved with the children, and (c) any medical/allied health care providers including but not limited to therapists, counsellors, psychologists and/or psychiatrists.   any educational specialist involved with the children, and (c) any medical/allied health care providers including but not limited to therapists, counsellors, psychologists and/or psychiatrists.   any medical/allied health care providers including but not limited to therapists, counsellors, psychologists and/or psychiatrists.
on a final basis the court orders that:
parental responsibility
spend time arrangements – school terms   on a fortnightly basis from the conclusion of school (or 3 pm if not a school day) on thursday until the commencement of school (or 9 am if not a school day) the following monday. (b) in the event of a public holiday, pupil free day, if the school is closed, if either child is unwell or any other day that the children do not attend school in person on the thursday referred to in order 23(a) then changeover shall occur at 3 pm that day. (c) in the event of a public holiday, pupil free day, if the school is closed, if either child is unwell or any other day that the children do not attend school in person on the monday referred to in order 23(a) then changeover shall occur at 9 am that day.   in the event of a public holiday, pupil free day, if the school is closed, if either child is unwell or any other day that the children do not attend school in person on the thursday referred to in order 23(a) then changeover shall occur at 3 pm that day. (c) in the event of a public holiday, pupil free day, if the school is closed, if either child is unwell or any other day that the children do not attend school in person on the monday referred to in order 23(a) then changeover shall occur at 9 am that day.   in the event of a public holiday, pupil free day, if the school is closed, if either child is unwell or any other day that the children do not attend school in person on the monday referred to in order 23(a) then changeover shall occur at 9 am that day.
spend time arrangements – school holidays   with each parent for half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods and failing agreement: (i) in even numbered years, with the father for the first and with the mother for the second half, (ii) in odd numbered years, with the father for the second half and with the mother for the first half. (b) during the term 4 school holiday period commencing in 2023 with each of the parties for half of the holidays as follows: (i) from the conclusion of the last day of school until 2 pm on 20 december 2023 with the father, (ii) from 2 pm on 20 december 2023 to 5 pm on 3 january 2024 with the mother, (iii) from 5 pm on 3 january 2024 to 5pm on 17 january 2024 with the father, (iv) from 5 pm on 17 january 2024 to 5 pm on 24 january 2024 with the mother, and (v) the remainder of the holidays to be spent equally between the father and the mother with the father for the first half and the mother for the second half.   in even numbered years, with the father for the first and with the mother for the second half, (ii) in odd numbered years, with the father for the second half and with the mother for the first half.  ) in odd numbered years, with the father for the second half and with the mother for the first half.   during the term 4 school holiday period commencing in 2023 with each of the parties for half of the holidays as follows: (i) from the conclusion of the last day of school until 2 pm on 20 december 2023 with the father, (ii) from 2 pm on 20 december 2023 to 5 pm on 3 january 2024 with the mother, (iii) from 5 pm on 3 january 2024 to 5pm on 17 january 2024 with the father, (iv) from 5 pm on 17 january 2024 to 5 pm on 24 january 2024 with the mother, and (v) the remainder of the holidays to be spent equally between the father and the mother with the father for the first half and the mother for the second half.   from the conclusion of the last day of school until 2 pm on 20 december 2023 with the father, (ii) from 2 pm on 20 december 2023 to 5 pm on 3 january 2024 with the mother, (iii) from 5 pm on 3 january 2024 to 5pm on 17 january 2024 with the father, (iv) from 5 pm on 17 january 2024 to 5 pm on 24 january 2024 with the mother, and (v) the remainder of the holidays to be spent equally between the father and the mother with the father for the first half and the mother for the second half.  ) from 2 pm on 20 december 2023 to 5 pm on 3 january 2024 with the mother, (iii) from 5 pm on 3 january 2024 to 5pm on 17 january 2024 with the father, (iv) from 5 pm on 17 january 2024 to 5 pm on 24 january 2024 with the mother, and (v) the remainder of the holidays to be spent equally between the father and the mother with the father for the first half and the mother for the second half.  i) from 5 pm on 3 january 2024 to 5pm on 17 january 2024 with the father, (iv) from 5 pm on 17 january 2024 to 5 pm on 24 january 2024 with the mother, and (v) the remainder of the holidays to be spent equally between the father and the mother with the father for the first half and the mother for the second half.  ) from 5 pm on 17 january 2024 to 5 pm on 24 january 2024 with the mother, and (v) the remainder of the holidays to be spent equally between the father and the mother with the father for the first half and the mother for the second half.   the remainder of the holidays to be spent equally between the father and the mother with the father for the first half and the mother for the second half.   in odd numbered years: (i) with the mother from the commencement of school holidays until 2 pm on 20 december, (ii) with the father from 2 pm on 20 december until 5 pm on 15 january, and thereafter (iii) with the mother for the remainder of the school holidays. (b) in even numbered years: (i) with the father from the commencement of school holidays until 2 pm on 20 december, (ii) with the mother from 2 pm on 20 december until 5 pm on 15 january, and thereafter (iii) with the father for the remainder of the school holidays.   with the mother from the commencement of school holidays until 2 pm on 20 december, (ii) with the father from 2 pm on 20 december until 5 pm on 15 january, and thereafter (iii) with the mother for the remainder of the school holidays.  ) with the father from 2 pm on 20 december until 5 pm on 15 january, and thereafter (iii) with the mother for the remainder of the school holidays.  i) with the mother for the remainder of the school holidays.   in even numbered years: (i) with the father from the commencement of school holidays until 2 pm on 20 december, (ii) with the mother from 2 pm on 20 december until 5 pm on 15 january, and thereafter (iii) with the father for the remainder of the school holidays.   with the father from the commencement of school holidays until 2 pm on 20 december, (ii) with the mother from 2 pm on 20 december until 5 pm on 15 january, and thereafter (iii) with the father for the remainder of the school holidays.  ) with the mother from 2 pm on 20 december until 5 pm on 15 january, and thereafter (iii) with the father for the remainder of the school holidays.  i) with the father for the remainder of the school holidays.   for half of school holidays during the term 1 and 3 school holiday periods as agreed and failing agreement: (i) in even numbered years, with the father for the first half and with the mother for the second half, (ii) in odd numbered years, with the father for the second half and with the mother for the first half. (b) during the term 2 holidays with the father in years ending in an even number and with the mother in years ending in an odd number.   in even numbered years, with the father for the first half and with the mother for the second half, (ii) in odd numbered years, with the father for the second half and with the mother for the first half.   during the term 2 holidays with the father in years ending in an even number and with the mother in years ending in an odd number.
mother’s day/father’s day   with the father on the father’s day weekend from 5 pm on the day before father’s day until the conclusion of school the following monday, and (b) with the mother on mother’s day weekend from 5 pm on the day before mother’s day until the conclusion of school the following monday.   with the mother on mother’s day weekend from 5 pm on the day before mother’s day until the conclusion of school the following monday.
y’s medical condition when travelling   ensure that they always travel with a dose of prescribed medication and ensure it can be and is stored in accordance with the pharmaceutical guidelines, and (b) make enquiries as to the availability of medical practitioners available and capable of canulation in the area of intended travel and notify the other party prior to travel.   make enquiries as to the availability of medical practitioners available and capable of canulation in the area of intended travel and notify the other party prior to travel.
overseas travel  the mother will cause the children’s passports to be released to the father not less than 1 week prior to any period of intended travel by the father with the children (as may be agreed between the parties in accordance with these orders), and (b) the father will return the children’s passports to the mother not less than 1 week after the conclusion of such travel.   the father will return the children’s passports to the mother not less than 1 week after the conclusion of such travel.
children’s belongings
attendance at school and sport events
extra-curricular activities  the mother shall seek the father’s input prior to making such decisions, (b) the mother shall advise the father of the decisions made, and (c) the mother shall provide to the father all details of extra-curricular activities that the children are enrolled in, including but not limited to the name and contact information for the teacher/provider, the location and frequency of the activity.   the mother shall advise the father of the decisions made, and (c) the mother shall provide to the father all details of extra-curricular activities that the children are enrolled in, including but not limited to the name and contact information for the teacher/provider, the location and frequency of the activity.   the mother shall provide to the father all details of extra-curricular activities that the children are enrolled in, including but not limited to the name and contact information for the teacher/provider, the location and frequency of the activity.
ancillary orders
reasons for judgment
introduction
issues  whether either party perpetrated family violence during the relationship, (b) whether the father perpetrated family violence post-separation and whether he has demonstrated insight into his conduct, (c) whether the parents having equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the children, (d) the time that the children should spend with each parent, and (e) what orders should be made to manage issues including the surnames of the children, international travel, attendance at medical appointments, attendance of the parents at school, sporting and extra-curricular events and the children’s enrolment in extra-curricular activities.   whether the father perpetrated family violence post-separation and whether he has demonstrated insight into his conduct, (c) whether the parents having equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the children, (d) the time that the children should spend with each parent, and (e) what orders should be made to manage issues including the surnames of the children, international travel, attendance at medical appointments, attendance of the parents at school, sporting and extra-curricular events and the children’s enrolment in extra-curricular activities.   whether the parents having equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the children, (d) the time that the children should spend with each parent, and (e) what orders should be made to manage issues including the surnames of the children, international travel, attendance at medical appointments, attendance of the parents at school, sporting and extra-curricular events and the children’s enrolment in extra-curricular activities.   the time that the children should spend with each parent, and (e) what orders should be made to manage issues including the surnames of the children, international travel, attendance at medical appointments, attendance of the parents at school, sporting and extra-curricular events and the children’s enrolment in extra-curricular activities.   what orders should be made to manage issues including the surnames of the children, international travel, attendance at medical appointments, attendance of the parents at school, sporting and extra-curricular events and the children’s enrolment in extra-curricular activities.
evidence  amended initiating application filed 28 june 2021, (b) affidavit of mr kamber filed 3 april 2023, (c) affidavit of ms d filed 20 april 2023, and (d) affidavit of ms e fled 11 april 2023.   affidavit of mr kamber filed 3 april 2023, (c) affidavit of ms d filed 20 april 2023, and (d) affidavit of ms e fled 11 april 2023.   affidavit of ms d filed 20 april 2023, and (d) affidavit of ms e fled 11 april 2023.   affidavit of ms e fled 11 april 2023.   further amended response to initiating application filed 12 april 2023, (b) affidavit of ms tackett filed 12 april 2023, and (c) affidavit of mr f filed 12 april 2023.   affidavit of ms tackett filed 12 april 2023, and (c) affidavit of mr f filed 12 april 2023.   affidavit of mr f filed 12 april 2023.
background
the parents
the children
the parents’ relationships with the children
... would want a bit more time for himself went [sic] with his mother, and agreed that when he gets older, he may want 50/50 time.[11]
ms e
mr f
the family consultant  diminishing the confidence the children would have in their parents’ abilities to reach compromise, for example as with y’s health needs,[13] (b) ongoing struggles to communicate effectively, leading to frequent impasses and conflict between the parents,[14] (c) such ongoing struggles to communicate extending to attending on and receiving advice from health professionals and acting in a co-operative way in relation to that advice,[15] (d) a competitive approach to parenting and discussing parenting,[16] and (e) parenting which is characterised by distrust and nit-picking. while there are examples of good parenting, these are not consistent and the parenting arrangement is characterised by undermining.[17]   ongoing struggles to communicate effectively, leading to frequent impasses and conflict between the parents,[14] (c) such ongoing struggles to communicate extending to attending on and receiving advice from health professionals and acting in a co-operative way in relation to that advice,[15] (d) a competitive approach to parenting and discussing parenting,[16] and (e) parenting which is characterised by distrust and nit-picking. while there are examples of good parenting, these are not consistent and the parenting arrangement is characterised by undermining.[17]   such ongoing struggles to communicate extending to attending on and receiving advice from health professionals and acting in a co-operative way in relation to that advice,[15] (d) a competitive approach to parenting and discussing parenting,[16] and (e) parenting which is characterised by distrust and nit-picking. while there are examples of good parenting, these are not consistent and the parenting arrangement is characterised by undermining.[17]   a competitive approach to parenting and discussing parenting,[16] and (e) parenting which is characterised by distrust and nit-picking. while there are examples of good parenting, these are not consistent and the parenting arrangement is characterised by undermining.[17]   parenting which is characterised by distrust and nit-picking. while there are examples of good parenting, these are not consistent and the parenting arrangement is characterised by undermining.[17]
whilst the frequent bickering, name calling, and domineering have undoubtedly been unpleasant for the mother they are not assessed to be so sufficient as to outweigh the benefits for the children spending significant time with the father.[19]  very instance creates a further opportunity to undermine the mother as a mother, as a parent, and sometimes as a person, but it seems to be predominantly about parenting and her capacity to make decisions for the children.[20]
the father expressed a strong sensitivity to threats, real or perceived to his capacity to connect with his children resulting in recurrent impasses and standoffs with the mother.[22]
family violence
2017 - march 2019
march 2019
16 april 2019
march 2020
april 2020
... [mr kamber] appeared full of rage. his eyes were wild, intense and focussed on me. his jaw and body were coiled and tense. i did not want to leave the room where i was concerned about trying to calm [x] down. i did not feel that i could talk to [mr kamber] in that state. i felt i had no other option but to seek the assistance of the police to try to deescalate the situation.
july 2020
discussion on competing allegations
communication
summary of contentions
y’s birthday party
i was very surprised and disturbed to receive your group message to [ms m], [ms n] and me on [chat group]. firstly, given this was something i had been organising with them for a weekend on which the children are with me it is highly inappropriate to insert yourself into the arrangements... ... in accordance with clauses 18 and 19 of our consent orders, you are not currently able to attend the party.
... then i would be grateful if you would simply send a group message to [ms n], [ms m] and me saying that you won’t be able to attend after all but that we should go ahead as we have arranged.
... it makes clear that the orders you insisted upon and the evidence put to the court by your lawyer was false, this is quite disturbing and will surely be observed negatively by her honour in any future court appearances should they be required. ... given though that you are showing a mature ability to co-operate, i will not stand in the childrens way by blocking this, despite the orders. in this case i will let you attend [y]’s birthday ... (emphasis in bold added)
if you don’t create an awkward situation as you did with [y]’s birthday party, then i suspect we’ll be fine. i know you won’t admit it (leopards, spots etc), but that was all your responsibility.
y’s birthday
covid-19 pandemic
just one further thought on this for now - it would be good if the receiving parent were to do a rat just before the kids were due to come into their care. i’m very happy to do so, and share the results with you. are you able to agree to this?
i note that in the situation where i was a close contact, with no symptoms, and a negative pcr test on day 6 you didn’t consider testing “not otherwise necessary”. quite the opposite, you attempted to control my behaviour coerce me into sharing private medical information with you and threatened to breach our court orders, causing me incredible stress and anxiety. this is domestic violence.
conflict over school holiday time
you are once again blackmailing me and controlling and manipulating the children’s access to their father for your own selfish purposes.
parent-teacher interviews 2023
treatment after injury
medical condition
sport
unfortunately [ms tackett] has told the school it isn’t safe for [y], and has shown them the treatment plan as evidence for this. the school cannot enrol her given this without your confirmation. i’m so sad for [y] being given the idea that she is more fragile than she is, that she is limited from doing the activities she wants to do that are safe for her to do. please can you reply to this email confirming it is perfectly safe for her to commence training. ... please reply to this. please help my little girl not grow up afraid and limited by imaginary concerns. (emphasis as per original)
excellent news - i now have written confirmation from [y]’s specialist that it is indeed suitable and safe for her to start [playing sport].
... [dr c] and [ms p] have made clear to me the limitations that should genuinely apply to [y] and those that should not during a meeting in january this year. you have interpreted previous meetings with them incorrectly and appear to be training [y] to be far more risk averse and scared than is necessary. this is sad and damaging to a little girl trying to build her confidence in the world.   “daddy said the doctor said it’s fine for me to do [sports] [sic]”, (b) “i just like the sound of the words ‘[sports]’ [sic]”, (c) “daddy showed us videos of people doing [sports] [sic]”, and   “i just like the sound of the words ‘[sports]’ [sic]”, (c) “daddy showed us videos of people doing [sports] [sic]”, and   “daddy showed us videos of people doing [sports] [sic]”, and
x’s asthma and treatment
i would like to give [x] a little longer to practice holding something under his tongue for a longer period before commencing full treatment.[39]
the children being told by you that they aren’t capable is undermining their development with respect to self confidence and independence. luckily this is still supported when in my care, but i urge you to see our children as the capable young people they are and support them appropriately, rather than limiting their independence.[40]
... i’ve given him venting [sic] each time, but it sounds like it might be a good idea to start him back on [medication] again. could you please confirm that you’ll do this? two puffs once a day, plus ventolin for relief.
after a back and forth, the father stated:
i am quite capable of caring for our children and making medical decisions that are in their best interests based on the information available. ... [ms tackett], we must each accept that as separated parents each of us is free to make parenting choices we see fit. you and i won’t always agree on what these decisions should be. however it is really quite inappropriate to attempt to control the other parent or demand action from them in the way you are doing. it is a form of coercive control that i wish you would desist from.
the father expressed a strong sensitivity to threats, real or perceived to his capacity to connect with his children resulting in recurrent impasses and standoffs with the mother.[42]
music lessons
you made an arrangement that effects me but also but couldn’t be bothered or were too disrespectful or too disinterested in co-parenting to tell me about it.   has claimed that you are telling him the owner of the [instrument] wants it back. i note that you haven’t actually communicated this to me. i also note that it is manipulating the children to tell them such things, implying that i am somehow denying the owner the return of the item when you haven’t even communicated this. i’m actually not sure it’s true.
you were clearly incapable of showing any patience here and instead chose to rush ahead with your own arrangements. [x] will continue to have lessons with [mr s].
the impact of the father’s communication on the mother’s parenting
it sounds like he won’t be told. he won’t even accept information or a suggestion that he doesn’t agree with, which is going to make the parenting impossible, because every instance creates a further opportunity to undermine the mother as a mother, as a parent, and sometimes as a person, but it seems to be predominantly about parenting and her capacity to make decisions for the children. so it’s almost like a dogged refusal to cooperate.[46]
dr barnett sc: the fact that there has been abysmal communication by my client, the majority of which occurred prior to you seeing the family, doesn’t change those benefits that you had accepted from me or that you had given evidence about for the children in both parents being involved in these decisions? [ms g]: well, it does change it, in that if the mother continues to be exposed to – and it’s not just the frequency. that’s one thing. but it’s the magnitude of denigration and undermining of her parenting every time she wants to exchange medical information or health information or educational information. then she is not an equal partner. she can’t be an equal partner whilst she’s being subjected to that. so we’re now looking at a situation where it can’t be equal parenting because there’s an imbalance of power there. whilst the father continues to denigrate her and use a parenting app which is supposed to assist communication to continue to denigrate her, means that she is not going to be an equal partner in making decisions. she will, over time, i would expect, either not communicate, not argue for her children and advocate for them when she thinks she needs to, and acquiesce to his demands because it’s not an equal footing.[47]
the law  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
primary considerations  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
meaningful relationship
... should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents ...[48]
... presented as confident and happy and were observed to have a strong and respectful relationship with both parents. both identified that the mother and father parented differently but appeared to take an optimistic view of this suggesting it offered them different opportunities.[51]
additional considerations
the children’s views (and weight to be attributed)
nature of the relationship between the children and each parent
parent participation in making decisions for the children, spending time and communicating with the children
impact of each parent’s proposal on the children’s spend time arrangements
degree to which each parent has met the needs of the children
demonstration of commitment to parenthood by each parent
family violence
orders that will least likely result in further proceedings
risk assessment: discussion
ms kennedy: and you would, i imagine from those answers, understand that his behaviours and attitudes are things that the children need to be shielded from so that they’re not exposed to that sort of abhorrent behaviour going forward? [ms g]: i would agree.
ms kennedy: in terms of the spend-time arrangements and flowing from the evidence that i have taken you to, i would suggest, [ms g], that you would have real concerns about the children’s exposure to the father’s attitude to their mother and his behaviour in general is something that the children would need less exposure to going forward? [ms g]: i would agree. ms kennedy: is it the case that you would support the mother’s proposal that the time the children spend with their father is reduced? [ms g]: the order – yes.[54]   discussing with x the forms that need to be completed for the parents to divorce, (b) asking the children if the parents should separate, (c) speaking to the children about an overseas trip before discussing same with the mother, (d) encouraging y to participate in sports even when it was apparent that the mother had serious reservations, and (e) x feeling responsible for pleasing the father in nominating that he wanted time to be fair and equal.   asking the children if the parents should separate, (c) speaking to the children about an overseas trip before discussing same with the mother, (d) encouraging y to participate in sports even when it was apparent that the mother had serious reservations, and (e) x feeling responsible for pleasing the father in nominating that he wanted time to be fair and equal.   speaking to the children about an overseas trip before discussing same with the mother, (d) encouraging y to participate in sports even when it was apparent that the mother had serious reservations, and (e) x feeling responsible for pleasing the father in nominating that he wanted time to be fair and equal.   encouraging y to participate in sports even when it was apparent that the mother had serious reservations, and (e) x feeling responsible for pleasing the father in nominating that he wanted time to be fair and equal.   x feeling responsible for pleasing the father in nominating that he wanted time to be fair and equal.
parental responsibility
dr barnett sc: isn’t part of the problem, though, if there’s sole parental responsibility, that requires the mother to communicate more with the father in providing, as you would have seen from the mother’s minute of order, it provides for certain types of communication as a requirement because she’s holding the determination, and so there’s an exclusion of the father by the greater need to communicate between the parties and the other, and isn’t that likely to increase the conflict? [ms g]: well, if she is sole communicator, yes, she does, she has the sole responsibility of communicating that information, but then she also has the potential to duck and cover after she has delivered it. i mean, she doesn’t have to continue to engage with him around those decisions because either he wishes to discuss it respectfully, if we’re talking about education, if he doesn’t wish to discuss it respectfully, then she can end it right there. in terms of medical, she has to be in a position, yes, of delivering it, but then, again, once she has delivered the information, she can stop communication there. i mean, she should not be subjected to ongoing verbal abuse and denigration in the course of just day-to-day parenting. and it sound, you know, it’s this ongoing nit-picking every little thing.[56]
appointment of a parenting coordinator
improvement of communication and consequential increase in the father’s time
the father’s time with the children  g]: but on balance, i would have to say, if we go back to [x]’s comments, you know, it’s about being fair to mum and dad, not about what he may really want. his primary focus is on what’s fair for the parents. and this happens when children are placed in ongoing high-conflict situations with their parents. they learn to stop thinking and feeling for themselves and they think and foremost about what the parents might want or how the parents might react. and over the long-term that has huge detrimental effects on their development and their mental health.[57]   the orders will minimise the interaction between the parents, (b) the orders will allow the father to have contact with the children’s school, (c) the orders will provide for a weekday afternoon where the father can organise the children to attend an extra-curricular activity or assist with homework, and (d) the orders will provide a lengthy gap in the periods of time spent by the children, which will provide the children and the mother with respite from having to respond to the father’s presence in their life.   the orders will allow the father to have contact with the children’s school, (c) the orders will provide for a weekday afternoon where the father can organise the children to attend an extra-curricular activity or assist with homework, and (d) the orders will provide a lengthy gap in the periods of time spent by the children, which will provide the children and the mother with respite from having to respond to the father’s presence in their life.   the orders will provide for a weekday afternoon where the father can organise the children to attend an extra-curricular activity or assist with homework, and (d) the orders will provide a lengthy gap in the periods of time spent by the children, which will provide the children and the mother with respite from having to respond to the father’s presence in their life.   the orders will provide a lengthy gap in the periods of time spent by the children, which will provide the children and the mother with respite from having to respond to the father’s presence in their life.
school holidays  from the end of school until 20 december, (b) from 20 december until 15 january, and (c) for the remainder of the school holiday period.   from 20 december until 15 january, and (c) for the remainder of the school holiday period.   for the remainder of the school holiday period.
mother’s day/father’s day
overnight stays away from home
ancillary matters
notification of y’s medical condition
... will ensure that all safety precautions and medical protocols are followed as recommended by [y]’s treater, [dr c] to ensure that treatment for [y]’s [medical condition] is available.
... will ensure that all safety precautions and medical protocols are followed as recommended by [y]’s treater, [dr c] (or any other treating expert including the nurse practitioner working with [dr c]), or any other treating expert, to ensure that treatment for [y]’s [medical condition] is available. (amendments underlined)
the children’s belongings
the children’s names
injunctions
restraint on location
medical treatment
attendance at school and sports events
conclusion
associate: dated: 29 september 2023
dated: 29 september 2023
[1] transcript 2 may 2023, p.21 lines 9–10.[2] transcript 1 may 2023, p.23 lines 3–7.[3] ibid p.23 lines 30–35.[4] transcript 2 may 2023, p.51 lines 29–34.[5] family report [104].[6] transcript 1 may 2023, p.23 lines 30–35.[7] family report [71].[8] ibid [89].[9] ibid [97]. [10] ibid [82].[11] ibid [84].[12] ibid. [13] ibid [104].[14] ibid [102].[15] transcript 13 june 2023, p.12 line 33 to p.13 line 2.[16] family report [63].[17] transcript 13 june 2023, p.12 lines 15–28.[18] family report [83].[19] ibid [102]. [20] transcript 13 june 2023, p.50 lines 19–22.[21] ibid p.36 lines 5–7.[22] family report [106].[23] transcript 1 may 2023, p.29 lines 16–38.[24] ibid p.26 lines 8–9.[25] ibid p.26 lines 22–26.[26] transcript 2 may 2023, p.53 line 26 to p.57 line 2.[27] transcript 1 may 2023, p.27 lines 6–14.[28] ibid p.26 lines 11–20.[29] ibid p.55 line 42 to p.56 line 3.[30] ibid p.56 lines 17–28.[31] ibid p.59 lines 7–10.[32] ibid p.58 lines 15–17.[33] ibid p.60 lines 5–7.[34] ibid p.60 line 44.[35] transcript 2 may 2023, p.20 lines 11–14.[36] ibid p.16 lines 8–9.[37] transcript 1 may 2023, p.54 lines 35–46.[38] family report [104].[39] exhibit m11.[40] ibid.[41] transcript 13 june 2023, p.53 line 38 to p.54 line 2.[42] family report [106].[43] transcript 1 may 2023, p.33 lines 26–46.[44] ibid p. 34 line 35 to p.35 line 4.[45] ibid p.35 lines 41–45.[46] transcript 13 june 2023, p.50 lines 17–22.[47] ibid p.57 lines 26–41.[48] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) flc 93-405 at [118(c)].[49] [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[50] ibid at [132], citing mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [26].[51] family report [105].[52] transcript 13 june 2023, p.18 lines 1–16.[53] ibid p.12 lines 17–20.[54] ibid p.54 lines 11–13, lines 33–34.[55] boyle & zahur and anor [2017] famcafc 263; (2017) flc 93-814 at [22]. [56] transcript 13 june 2023, p.57 line 43 to p.58 line 11.[57] ibid p.58 lines 29–37.