last updated: 10 november 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
scaletta & scaletta [2023] fedcfamc2f 1290
orders
on a final basis, the court orders that:  do all acts and things to discharge any existing loan account secured by the suburb c property and refinance such loans in his own name, and (b) pay the wife’s solicitor’s trust account the sum of $1,811,187.   pay the wife’s solicitor’s trust account the sum of $1,811,187.   in payment of such sum as is required to discharge any liability secured by the property, (b) in payment of the agent’s fees and commissions and costs of sale, (c) in payment of any adjustments as to council and/or water rates, and (d) as to the balance: (i) 58.3 per cent to the wife, and (ii) 41.7 per cent to the husband.   in payment of the agent’s fees and commissions and costs of sale, (c) in payment of any adjustments as to council and/or water rates, and (d) as to the balance: (i) 58.3 per cent to the wife, and (ii) 41.7 per cent to the husband.   in payment of any adjustments as to council and/or water rates, and (d) as to the balance: (i) 58.3 per cent to the wife, and (ii) 41.7 per cent to the husband.   as to the balance: (i) 58.3 per cent to the wife, and (ii) 41.7 per cent to the husband.   58.3 per cent to the wife, and (ii) 41.7 per cent to the husband.  ) 41.7 per cent to the husband.   the parties shall appoint a real estate agent as agreed, but failing agreement, the wife shall nominate three real estate agents and the husband shall, within seven days of receipt of the nominations, select one and such selection shall bind the parties (“the agent”). if the husband fails to make a nomination in the prescribed time, the wife shall make the nomination from one of the three named agents and that nomination shall bind the parties, (b) the parties shall appoint a solicitor to act on the sale as agreed, but failing agreement, the wife shall nominate three suitably qualified solicitors or conveyancers to the husband and the husband shall make a selection within seven days of receiving the nominations and such nomination shall bind the parties. if the husband fails to make a nomination in the prescribed time, the wife shall make the nomination and that nomination shall bind the parties, (c) except as otherwise agreed in writing, the property is to be sold “as is”, (d) if the parties cannot agree to the terms of the contract of sale, the completion period shall be 42 days after exchange, (e) if the parties cannot agree on the listing price or price guide, the guide shall be as recommended by the agent, (f) the method of sale, whether by private treaty, public auction or otherwise, shall be as recommended by the agent, (g) the reserve price for any auction shall be as recommended by the agent or $3,600,000 whichever is the lower, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, the parties may negotiate with the highest bidder and, provided that the bidder agrees to pay a sum which is not more than 5 per cent below the reserve, the parties shall sell the property for that price, (i) if the property remains unsold seven days after an auction, the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to re-list the property for sale by private treaty, and (j) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the agent including making the key available to the agent, signing all documents requested by the agent to sell the property, executing a contract for sale in the form prepared by the solicitors having the conduct of the sale at the sale price, allowing inspections of the property at all reasonable times as requested by the agent and not doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected.   the parties shall appoint a solicitor to act on the sale as agreed, but failing agreement, the wife shall nominate three suitably qualified solicitors or conveyancers to the husband and the husband shall make a selection within seven days of receiving the nominations and such nomination shall bind the parties. if the husband fails to make a nomination in the prescribed time, the wife shall make the nomination and that nomination shall bind the parties, (c) except as otherwise agreed in writing, the property is to be sold “as is”, (d) if the parties cannot agree to the terms of the contract of sale, the completion period shall be 42 days after exchange, (e) if the parties cannot agree on the listing price or price guide, the guide shall be as recommended by the agent, (f) the method of sale, whether by private treaty, public auction or otherwise, shall be as recommended by the agent, (g) the reserve price for any auction shall be as recommended by the agent or $3,600,000 whichever is the lower, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, the parties may negotiate with the highest bidder and, provided that the bidder agrees to pay a sum which is not more than 5 per cent below the reserve, the parties shall sell the property for that price, (i) if the property remains unsold seven days after an auction, the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to re-list the property for sale by private treaty, and (j) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the agent including making the key available to the agent, signing all documents requested by the agent to sell the property, executing a contract for sale in the form prepared by the solicitors having the conduct of the sale at the sale price, allowing inspections of the property at all reasonable times as requested by the agent and not doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected.   except as otherwise agreed in writing, the property is to be sold “as is”, (d) if the parties cannot agree to the terms of the contract of sale, the completion period shall be 42 days after exchange, (e) if the parties cannot agree on the listing price or price guide, the guide shall be as recommended by the agent, (f) the method of sale, whether by private treaty, public auction or otherwise, shall be as recommended by the agent, (g) the reserve price for any auction shall be as recommended by the agent or $3,600,000 whichever is the lower, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, the parties may negotiate with the highest bidder and, provided that the bidder agrees to pay a sum which is not more than 5 per cent below the reserve, the parties shall sell the property for that price, (i) if the property remains unsold seven days after an auction, the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to re-list the property for sale by private treaty, and (j) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the agent including making the key available to the agent, signing all documents requested by the agent to sell the property, executing a contract for sale in the form prepared by the solicitors having the conduct of the sale at the sale price, allowing inspections of the property at all reasonable times as requested by the agent and not doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected.   if the parties cannot agree to the terms of the contract of sale, the completion period shall be 42 days after exchange, (e) if the parties cannot agree on the listing price or price guide, the guide shall be as recommended by the agent, (f) the method of sale, whether by private treaty, public auction or otherwise, shall be as recommended by the agent, (g) the reserve price for any auction shall be as recommended by the agent or $3,600,000 whichever is the lower, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, the parties may negotiate with the highest bidder and, provided that the bidder agrees to pay a sum which is not more than 5 per cent below the reserve, the parties shall sell the property for that price, (i) if the property remains unsold seven days after an auction, the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to re-list the property for sale by private treaty, and (j) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the agent including making the key available to the agent, signing all documents requested by the agent to sell the property, executing a contract for sale in the form prepared by the solicitors having the conduct of the sale at the sale price, allowing inspections of the property at all reasonable times as requested by the agent and not doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected.   if the parties cannot agree on the listing price or price guide, the guide shall be as recommended by the agent, (f) the method of sale, whether by private treaty, public auction or otherwise, shall be as recommended by the agent, (g) the reserve price for any auction shall be as recommended by the agent or $3,600,000 whichever is the lower, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, the parties may negotiate with the highest bidder and, provided that the bidder agrees to pay a sum which is not more than 5 per cent below the reserve, the parties shall sell the property for that price, (i) if the property remains unsold seven days after an auction, the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to re-list the property for sale by private treaty, and (j) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the agent including making the key available to the agent, signing all documents requested by the agent to sell the property, executing a contract for sale in the form prepared by the solicitors having the conduct of the sale at the sale price, allowing inspections of the property at all reasonable times as requested by the agent and not doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected.   the method of sale, whether by private treaty, public auction or otherwise, shall be as recommended by the agent, (g) the reserve price for any auction shall be as recommended by the agent or $3,600,000 whichever is the lower, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, the parties may negotiate with the highest bidder and, provided that the bidder agrees to pay a sum which is not more than 5 per cent below the reserve, the parties shall sell the property for that price, (i) if the property remains unsold seven days after an auction, the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to re-list the property for sale by private treaty, and (j) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the agent including making the key available to the agent, signing all documents requested by the agent to sell the property, executing a contract for sale in the form prepared by the solicitors having the conduct of the sale at the sale price, allowing inspections of the property at all reasonable times as requested by the agent and not doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected.   the reserve price for any auction shall be as recommended by the agent or $3,600,000 whichever is the lower, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, the parties may negotiate with the highest bidder and, provided that the bidder agrees to pay a sum which is not more than 5 per cent below the reserve, the parties shall sell the property for that price, (i) if the property remains unsold seven days after an auction, the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to re-list the property for sale by private treaty, and (j) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the agent including making the key available to the agent, signing all documents requested by the agent to sell the property, executing a contract for sale in the form prepared by the solicitors having the conduct of the sale at the sale price, allowing inspections of the property at all reasonable times as requested by the agent and not doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected.   if the property is passed in at auction, the parties may negotiate with the highest bidder and, provided that the bidder agrees to pay a sum which is not more than 5 per cent below the reserve, the parties shall sell the property for that price, (i) if the property remains unsold seven days after an auction, the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to re-list the property for sale by private treaty, and (j) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the agent including making the key available to the agent, signing all documents requested by the agent to sell the property, executing a contract for sale in the form prepared by the solicitors having the conduct of the sale at the sale price, allowing inspections of the property at all reasonable times as requested by the agent and not doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected.   if the property remains unsold seven days after an auction, the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to re-list the property for sale by private treaty, and (j) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the agent including making the key available to the agent, signing all documents requested by the agent to sell the property, executing a contract for sale in the form prepared by the solicitors having the conduct of the sale at the sale price, allowing inspections of the property at all reasonable times as requested by the agent and not doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected.   the parties shall co-operate in every way with the agent including making the key available to the agent, signing all documents requested by the agent to sell the property, executing a contract for sale in the form prepared by the solicitors having the conduct of the sale at the sale price, allowing inspections of the property at all reasonable times as requested by the agent and not doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected.   the husband shall pay as and when they fall due all council rates, water rates and home building insurance for the suburb c property, (b) the husband shall have exclusive occupation of the suburb c property, and (c) neither party may further encumber the suburb c property other than with the written consent of the other party.   the husband shall have exclusive occupation of the suburb c property, and (c) neither party may further encumber the suburb c property other than with the written consent of the other party.   neither party may further encumber the suburb c property other than with the written consent of the other party.
joint property  transfer the property known and situated in country e to the wife, and (b) close any bank account in the parties’ joint names in country e with the whole of the balance to be paid to the wife.   close any bank account in the parties’ joint names in country e with the whole of the balance to be paid to the wife.
general orders  d bank, (b) any other australian or overseas bank or lending facility or brokerage, (c) new south wales land registry services, (d) any agency of country e for the purpose of giving effect to orders 11 and 12 herein, (e) any real estate agent or solicitor or conveyancer acting on the sale of the suburb c property, (f) any overseas attorney or suitably qualified person acting on the transfer of the country e property, and (g) any accountant or tax agent retained by a party to administer that party’s financial and/or taxation affairs.   any other australian or overseas bank or lending facility or brokerage, (c) new south wales land registry services, (d) any agency of country e for the purpose of giving effect to orders 11 and 12 herein, (e) any real estate agent or solicitor or conveyancer acting on the sale of the suburb c property, (f) any overseas attorney or suitably qualified person acting on the transfer of the country e property, and (g) any accountant or tax agent retained by a party to administer that party’s financial and/or taxation affairs.   new south wales land registry services, (d) any agency of country e for the purpose of giving effect to orders 11 and 12 herein, (e) any real estate agent or solicitor or conveyancer acting on the sale of the suburb c property, (f) any overseas attorney or suitably qualified person acting on the transfer of the country e property, and (g) any accountant or tax agent retained by a party to administer that party’s financial and/or taxation affairs.   any agency of country e for the purpose of giving effect to orders 11 and 12 herein, (e) any real estate agent or solicitor or conveyancer acting on the sale of the suburb c property, (f) any overseas attorney or suitably qualified person acting on the transfer of the country e property, and (g) any accountant or tax agent retained by a party to administer that party’s financial and/or taxation affairs.   any real estate agent or solicitor or conveyancer acting on the sale of the suburb c property, (f) any overseas attorney or suitably qualified person acting on the transfer of the country e property, and (g) any accountant or tax agent retained by a party to administer that party’s financial and/or taxation affairs.   any overseas attorney or suitably qualified person acting on the transfer of the country e property, and (g) any accountant or tax agent retained by a party to administer that party’s financial and/or taxation affairs.   any accountant or tax agent retained by a party to administer that party’s financial and/or taxation affairs.
procedural orders
reasons for judgment
judge eldershaw:
introduction
documents
applications
lay witnesses
the preparation, execution and filing of this affidavit, my financial statement, my balance sheet and other documents has been delayed mainly by my inability, directly relating to my deteriorating health, to provide my current lawyers and barrister with information and documents they have requested to finalise the documents. i have spent the majority of the last 4 days at my lawyers office providing instructions and obtaining information to ensure that the contents of this affidavit, my financial statement and the balance sheet are as accurate as possible. the whole process has left me completely exhausted and at times i would fall asleep sitting in the chair in my lawyers office. as i am not computer literate and do not have at home, or if i do i can not find, any of the source documents required, my lawyers have had to contact other parties and/or undertake searches to ensure the financial and factual information i have set out in this affidavit is accurate. by way of example i attended upon [d bank] which is located one block from my lawyers office. i walked to and from the branch with the assistance of my cane. the walk to and from the branch took me approximately 40 minutes in total whereas a person in good health could walk to and from the branch from my lawyers office in 10 minutes. i lost my cane prior to arriving at my solicitors office. a secretarial member of staff drove me to the entry of [a shopping centre] and i slowly walked back. both those simple tasks of attending at the [d bank] branch left me completely exhausted. in addition, my eyesight has deteriorated to the point that even with reading glasses i have difficulty in reading any documents.
corporate entities
g pty ltd
h pty ltd (in liquidation)  in mid-2018, a liquidator was first appointed to h pty ltd, (b) in mid-2021, the liquidator filed a statement of claim in the district court seeking relief against the husband and g pty ltd for, inter alia, insolvent trading and uncommercial transactions, (c) in mid-2022, the liquidator sent a letter to f pty ltd asking f pty ltd and the husband to provide an explanation regarding certain payments towards f pty ltd’s mortgage by h pty ltd, (d) the husband and g pty ltd denied that the liquidator was entitled to the relief sought, (e) f pty ltd denies any obligation to reimburse h pty ltd in respect of the mortgage payments, and (f) the parties to the deed settled the dispute on a without admissions basis, with the settlement sum of $135,000.   in mid-2021, the liquidator filed a statement of claim in the district court seeking relief against the husband and g pty ltd for, inter alia, insolvent trading and uncommercial transactions, (c) in mid-2022, the liquidator sent a letter to f pty ltd asking f pty ltd and the husband to provide an explanation regarding certain payments towards f pty ltd’s mortgage by h pty ltd, (d) the husband and g pty ltd denied that the liquidator was entitled to the relief sought, (e) f pty ltd denies any obligation to reimburse h pty ltd in respect of the mortgage payments, and (f) the parties to the deed settled the dispute on a without admissions basis, with the settlement sum of $135,000.   in mid-2022, the liquidator sent a letter to f pty ltd asking f pty ltd and the husband to provide an explanation regarding certain payments towards f pty ltd’s mortgage by h pty ltd, (d) the husband and g pty ltd denied that the liquidator was entitled to the relief sought, (e) f pty ltd denies any obligation to reimburse h pty ltd in respect of the mortgage payments, and (f) the parties to the deed settled the dispute on a without admissions basis, with the settlement sum of $135,000.   the husband and g pty ltd denied that the liquidator was entitled to the relief sought, (e) f pty ltd denies any obligation to reimburse h pty ltd in respect of the mortgage payments, and (f) the parties to the deed settled the dispute on a without admissions basis, with the settlement sum of $135,000.   f pty ltd denies any obligation to reimburse h pty ltd in respect of the mortgage payments, and (f) the parties to the deed settled the dispute on a without admissions basis, with the settlement sum of $135,000.   the parties to the deed settled the dispute on a without admissions basis, with the settlement sum of $135,000.
f pty ltd
background
initial contributions
mid-2010
march 2014: transfer of suburb c property to wife
town s incident
...[the husband]: “shut up. you’re sounding like my ex [ms n] [”]. he then violently stopped the car and shouted at me “get out, get out of the car”. i was afraid. i tried to calm him down. he then drove us to [suburb c]. when we arrived at [suburb c], [the husband] argued with me. he pushed me in the kitchen and hit me with his hands across my face. i cried. he hurt me. some hours later, [the husband] said “i’m sorry.”
home loan refinancing
gun incident
“you already bought food at christmas. you are asking for money again. i gave you money at christmas. you are a spender bitch like my ex [ms n].”
i said words to the effect:
“but i have worked for you for no money all these years.” e husband] replied in words to the effect:
“get out. i want you out of here. leave now!”
i left [the husband] and went downstairs to the loungeroom. i then heard [the husband] telephone his friend [mr z]. i went to the stairs and i heard speak to his friend [mr z] words to the effect:
“you know [mr z], after the new year i will transfer my assets and the house to my kids so [ms scaletta] can't get anything when we separate”. i then went back upstairs to the kitchen where [the husband] was seated near the kitchen. i saw a shocked look on [the husband’s] face. i said to him words to the effect: “i heard what you told [mr z]. i am very disappointed with you. i never thought you would do this to me.” [the husband] said to me “i did not say that to [mr z].” i went to the bedroom. i was sitting on the bed crying and [the husband] walked in with a gun. he pointed the gun at my face. [the husband] said to me “you see this, you see this” whilst pointing the gun in my face. i was very frightened and shaking. i froze. [the husband] then started to walk away and as he was walking away [the husband] said “i will shoot myself.” i closed the bedroom door. i called life line respect. they told me to leave the house and to call the police. i did not call the police as i was scared. i left [suburb c] and went to my sister [ms aa]’s house in [suburb bb]. i lived with my sister for [several] months. during this period i found a job with the [cc company]. i also sought assistance from a psychologist as i was traumatized from the gun incident. whilst living at my sister's home, [the husband] tried to reconcile with me although i was reluctant to do so. i returned to live at [suburb c] with [the husband]. initially he was apologetic for the way he had treated me but then he became abusive toward me again and shouted abuse at me from time to time and would make me scared. prior to our separation i moved into the spare bedroom for some week until i left the marriage with only my clothes in [late] 2020 and when [the husband] kicked me out during another argument. [the husband] said to me words to the effect of “you stupid bitch get out.” i sought treatment from my psychologist for a number of weeks. i remain traumatized by the gun incident. after we separated i moved in with my sister, [ms dd] and my brother-in-law [mr ee] in their home at [suburb bb] until i could find a place to live that i could afford. as well as moving in with them i sought help from a psychologist [ms ff] for about 3 sessions. i continued working [at] “[cc company]”. e husband]: “...what did you do with the money i already gave you “ [the wife]: “i spent it” [the husband]: “on what? “ [the wife]: “food” [the husband]: “that was $500, why do you need more money? “ i was unaware as to what [the wife] had done with monies i had given her, she had never accounted to me or provided receipts or details as to what had been purchased and except for conversation like that set out above, i did not ask her. it was not that kind of relationship. i deny that i ever said to her words concerning spending too much money or that the [the wife] said words to the effect that she had worked for me for no money all these years or that i told her to get out of the house. i do remember the argument and i do remember being very upset. i went to the [business] and drank excessively. later that day [the wife] came to the [business] because i could not unlock the car and i rang her up. she came to unlock the car. i do remember i was very drunk that night. i do not recall whether or not i had a conversation with [mr z] on that day concerning separation or transfer of assets. however, the house was then and still is in the name of [the wife] and could not be transferred without [the wife’s] consent. the next morning, i was taken to hospital. [the wife] rang the ambulance to take me there. i refer to paragraph 40. this happened on the same day, that is the day before i went to hospital. i did have a gun which i had had from [previous employment]. i did not point the gun at [the wife]. i did say that i would shoot myself. i then left the house, never having pointed the gun at the [the wife]. i drove to [suburb gg] with the idea of shooting myself. i did not do so. i drove home. i put the gun in the glovebox of the car. i locked the car and left. i later discovered that the gun, a pistol, was missing from the glovebox and i presumed that [the wife] had removed it. i asked her, “where is the gun?” and she said, “i took it”. i repeat i never pointed the gun at her or threatened her with it. the threat was about myself. further with respect to paragraph 40, i have never pointed a gun at [the wife], i have never taken a firearm and used it to scare, harass or intimidate any person. [the wife] was becoming more and more anxious at that time and explosive in her communication. it was becoming difficult to talk to her as she would scream or make some sort of allegation about my conduct which was fabrication. i recall when an incident of this nature occurred, i would go to the bedroom and a conversation would take place to the following effect: [the husband]: “...we need to think about this relationship. maybe we need some time apart. we need to change how you feel. you know i have been incredibly ill” [the wife]: “i can’t cope anymore, i don 'i know why. i just can't. i'm going to stay with my sister for a while.”
no.... i’m scared because i can’t sleep. i’m always crying, and i want to ask for help... i always hear the news the people that die, and there’s a gun in my place, and that’s what’s always in my head. i’m seeing it when i close my eyes.
lease of business   as consideration for the lessor's execution of this lease, the lessee agrees at its sole cost and expense to: diligently, properly and in a good and workmanlike manner perform any work required, engage certified and licenced contractors and seek any consent required from any public authorities to ensure the structural components in the premises is compliant with any and all codes, laws, and regulations relevant to the operation of a [business], including but not limited to purchasing, refurbishing and installing [fittings], dispensers and above and below ground [fittings], prior to the commencement of any construction of any of the lessee's work, submit to the lessor for approval a complete plan and specifications of the lessee's works, and refurbish, repair, maintain all structural components of the premises in a good and workmanlike manner every 10 years after the lease commencing date to keep the premises in a good and operational condition and [the] [h pty ltd business]. (b) the lessee agrees and acknowledges that any costs incurred by the lessee under this clause is consideration for the lessor's entering into this lease and not a set off or deduction from any of the lessee's obligations to pay rent, outgoings or any other payments required under this lease. (c) this clause is an essential clause of the lease   the lessee agrees and acknowledges that any costs incurred by the lessee under this clause is consideration for the lessor's entering into this lease and not a set off or deduction from any of the lessee's obligations to pay rent, outgoings or any other payments required under this lease. (c) this clause is an essential clause of the lease   this clause is an essential clause of the lease
late 2021: sale of suburb q .] further with respect to paragraph 47, after [suburb q] was sold which settled in september 2021, i refurbished the [business] for the sum of approximately $386,000.00. i refer to annexure “a” to the applicant’s affidavit which my solicitors provided to [the wife’s] solicitors. on settlement of [suburb q], i was given two cheques, one in the amount of $650,000.00 and the second was in the amount of $1,052,957.04. when i received those two cheques i cashed the smaller cheque in the sum of $650,000.00. i paid approximately $386,000.00 in respect of renovations to the [business]. that left an amount of approximately $264,000.00. i kept that money for a while and made monthly payments to [d bank] in respect of the mortgage on [suburb c] as well using some on living and other expenses. the bigger cheque i paid into a commonwealth bank term deposit account in the name of [f pty ltd]. the documents showing the payments received were provided to [the wife’s] solicitors by vl macri lawyers. [...] after [suburb q] settled, the settlement cheque of $ 1,052,957.04 was put into a term deposit in [f pty ltd’s] name with commonwealth bank. on maturity i transferred those proceeds to [d bank] where the joint home loan was held. there were three sub-accounts – a home loan and two other sub-accounts. [in] or about [mid] 2022, i used approximately $308,521.78 to pay off one sub account and [d bank] opened up an account for the balance of the term deposit. [in october] 2022 i paid out the second sub-account in the sum of $296,555.42. the balance of the home loan amount is approximately that stated in the applicant’s balance sheet of $500,465.42. the [d bank] receipts which i had, have been provided to [the wife’s] solicitors. i attended at [d bank] [suburb hh] and [suburb u] branches [in late] 2023 and was able to ascertain that there are three accounts held by [d bank] obtained a bank statement true copies of which are annexed hereto and marked “e”.
cheque no 1
...kept that money for a while and made monthly payments to [d bank] in respect of the mortgage on [suburb c] as well as using some on living and other expenses....   there are no invoices or receipts, (b) the lessee entered into possession of l street in late 2021 with a right of quiet enjoyment, two weeks before the husband received cheque no 1, and (c) clause 37 of the lease provides that the lessee, at its sole cost and expense, would do the types of work that the husband says he undertook including: (i) purchasing, refurbishing and installing new fittings and storage tanks, and (ii) ensuring regulatory compliance of all structural components relevant to the operation of a business.   the lessee entered into possession of l street in late 2021 with a right of quiet enjoyment, two weeks before the husband received cheque no 1, and (c) clause 37 of the lease provides that the lessee, at its sole cost and expense, would do the types of work that the husband says he undertook including: (i) purchasing, refurbishing and installing new fittings and storage tanks, and (ii) ensuring regulatory compliance of all structural components relevant to the operation of a business.   clause 37 of the lease provides that the lessee, at its sole cost and expense, would do the types of work that the husband says he undertook including: (i) purchasing, refurbishing and installing new fittings and storage tanks, and (ii) ensuring regulatory compliance of all structural components relevant to the operation of a business.   purchasing, refurbishing and installing new fittings and storage tanks, and (ii) ensuring regulatory compliance of all structural components relevant to the operation of a business.  ) ensuring regulatory compliance of all structural components relevant to the operation of a business.   “00” for the period between the time the husband received cheque no 1 in october 2021 and the discharge of that sub account in july 2022 record that one payment of $1,416 was made in october 2021, and (b) “01” for the period in october 2021 and the discharge of that sub account in october 2022 record that payments were made to the account in october 2021 of $1,346, february 2022 of $1,209, august 2022 of $1,486, september 2022 of $1,576 and october 2022 of $1,669.   “01” for the period in october 2021 and the discharge of that sub account in october 2022 record that payments were made to the account in october 2021 of $1,346, february 2022 of $1,209, august 2022 of $1,486, september 2022 of $1,576 and october 2022 of $1,669.
cheque no 2   an opening balance in july 2023 of $800,00. the sum of $308,521 and $800,000 is $1,108,521. this is more than cheque 2, suggesting an accumulation of interest in the term deposit, (b) that in october 2022, $296,555 was transferred from the account. there is no dispute that this discharged the “01” sub account, (c) in november 2022, $142,469 was transferred from the account. this is the sum of $135,000 paid to the liquidator pursuant to the deed and the husband’s legal fees of $7,469 relating to the district court proceedings, as recorded in exhibit h-3. after this transfer, the balance of the account was $362,870, and (d) the balance of the account as at august 2023 was $361,441, with the difference since november 2022 represented by withholding tax and credit interest.   that in october 2022, $296,555 was transferred from the account. there is no dispute that this discharged the “01” sub account, (c) in november 2022, $142,469 was transferred from the account. this is the sum of $135,000 paid to the liquidator pursuant to the deed and the husband’s legal fees of $7,469 relating to the district court proceedings, as recorded in exhibit h-3. after this transfer, the balance of the account was $362,870, and (d) the balance of the account as at august 2023 was $361,441, with the difference since november 2022 represented by withholding tax and credit interest.   in november 2022, $142,469 was transferred from the account. this is the sum of $135,000 paid to the liquidator pursuant to the deed and the husband’s legal fees of $7,469 relating to the district court proceedings, as recorded in exhibit h-3. after this transfer, the balance of the account was $362,870, and (d) the balance of the account as at august 2023 was $361,441, with the difference since november 2022 represented by withholding tax and credit interest.   the balance of the account as at august 2023 was $361,441, with the difference since november 2022 represented by withholding tax and credit interest.
sale of suburb u
cash
if i put all the cash in the bank, i will have to pay a lot of tax. i have about $300,000 cash in the tube here.
...during a conversation in about 2019, i did say words to the effect “we’ve now got $60,000 to $80,000 in there.” that money was used to pay expenses relating to the [business] from time to time and we would also use it for personal expenses or use it for the purpose of paying creditors... i deny the conversation claimed by the wife. i have never has $300,000 cash at home other than the $650,000 in respect of the sale proceeds of [suburb q] ...  e wife]: ...i know its tough but i cannot understand you. we both know you have that nearly 300 thousand hidden away but didn’t pay bills that are important to make your everyday living worry less [the husband]: where do you think the last 12/15 months house payments came from [the wife]: ...we both know and the statement will show its coming from the rent and the remaining money from the sale of the flat.
you have kept most of the cash of the [business] and only uses some from it sometimes you will not finished 300 that quick. (emphasis added)
husband’s inheritance   the husband’s mother died in 2022, (b) the husband and his sister are the executors of the estate and its beneficiaries in equal shares, (c) the application for probate was publicised on the supreme court of new south wales website in 2023, (d) in mid-2023, the husband and his sister deposed to an affidavit of executors, (e) the gross value of the estate was $920,000 with no creditors. the estate comprises a residential property with a stated value of $750,000, cash funds of $40,000 and shares in a public company with a stated value of $4,000, and (f) in mid-2023, the supreme court of new south wales granted probate.   the husband and his sister are the executors of the estate and its beneficiaries in equal shares, (c) the application for probate was publicised on the supreme court of new south wales website in 2023, (d) in mid-2023, the husband and his sister deposed to an affidavit of executors, (e) the gross value of the estate was $920,000 with no creditors. the estate comprises a residential property with a stated value of $750,000, cash funds of $40,000 and shares in a public company with a stated value of $4,000, and (f) in mid-2023, the supreme court of new south wales granted probate.   the application for probate was publicised on the supreme court of new south wales website in 2023, (d) in mid-2023, the husband and his sister deposed to an affidavit of executors, (e) the gross value of the estate was $920,000 with no creditors. the estate comprises a residential property with a stated value of $750,000, cash funds of $40,000 and shares in a public company with a stated value of $4,000, and (f) in mid-2023, the supreme court of new south wales granted probate.   in mid-2023, the husband and his sister deposed to an affidavit of executors, (e) the gross value of the estate was $920,000 with no creditors. the estate comprises a residential property with a stated value of $750,000, cash funds of $40,000 and shares in a public company with a stated value of $4,000, and (f) in mid-2023, the supreme court of new south wales granted probate.   the gross value of the estate was $920,000 with no creditors. the estate comprises a residential property with a stated value of $750,000, cash funds of $40,000 and shares in a public company with a stated value of $4,000, and (f) in mid-2023, the supreme court of new south wales granted probate.   in mid-2023, the supreme court of new south wales granted probate.
mr o
family violence e husband] was often violent towards me in the marriage. he often picked on me. i tried to calm the situation by not responding and keeping out of his way when he was angry.
current circumstances
contentions  her contributions should be assessed as 30 per cent based on a ten-year relationship during which she worked in the husband’s business, “assumed responsibility for the mortgage” of the suburb c property, made greater homemaker contributions, cared for mr o per robb & robb (1995) flc 92- 555, and to account for family violence per kennon & kennon [1997] famca 27, (1997) flc 92-757 (“kennon”), and (b) there should be a further 12.5 per cent adjustment in her favour pursuant to s 75(2) of the act having regard to the parties’ respective ages in that the husband’s life expectancy is less than the wife’s, her medical condition, disparity of income and financial resources, and the husband’s non-disclosure.   there should be a further 12.5 per cent adjustment in her favour pursuant to s 75(2) of the act having regard to the parties’ respective ages in that the husband’s life expectancy is less than the wife’s, her medical condition, disparity of income and financial resources, and the husband’s non-disclosure.   his contributions should be assessed at 80 per cent having regard to his initial contributions but acknowledging that the wife made homemaker contributions and worked in the business. he contends that the wife’s care of mr o was neither frequent nor of long duration. he resists any adjustment based on the principles in kennon, and (b) there should be a further five per cent adjustment in his favour pursuant to s 75(2) of the act having regard to: (i) the parties’ respective ages in that the wife is younger than the husband, (ii) the husband is in a “poor state of health” whereas the wife is “generally in good health” although she had a medical condition. counsel for the husband ventures in his case outline document to assert that the “husband will likely require care at some stage in the not too distant future”, (iii) the husband will never work again and has no opportunity to accumulate further assets whereas the wife has time to accumulate assets and has qualifications in that regard, and (iv) the disparity of income and financial resources, and the husband’s non-disclosure.   there should be a further five per cent adjustment in his favour pursuant to s 75(2) of the act having regard to: (i) the parties’ respective ages in that the wife is younger than the husband, (ii) the husband is in a “poor state of health” whereas the wife is “generally in good health” although she had a medical condition. counsel for the husband ventures in his case outline document to assert that the “husband will likely require care at some stage in the not too distant future”, (iii) the husband will never work again and has no opportunity to accumulate further assets whereas the wife has time to accumulate assets and has qualifications in that regard, and (iv) the disparity of income and financial resources, and the husband’s non-disclosure.   the parties’ respective ages in that the wife is younger than the husband, (ii) the husband is in a “poor state of health” whereas the wife is “generally in good health” although she had a medical condition. counsel for the husband ventures in his case outline document to assert that the “husband will likely require care at some stage in the not too distant future”, (iii) the husband will never work again and has no opportunity to accumulate further assets whereas the wife has time to accumulate assets and has qualifications in that regard, and (iv) the disparity of income and financial resources, and the husband’s non-disclosure.  ) the husband is in a “poor state of health” whereas the wife is “generally in good health” although she had a medical condition. counsel for the husband ventures in his case outline document to assert that the “husband will likely require care at some stage in the not too distant future”, (iii) the husband will never work again and has no opportunity to accumulate further assets whereas the wife has time to accumulate assets and has qualifications in that regard, and (iv) the disparity of income and financial resources, and the husband’s non-disclosure.  i) the husband will never work again and has no opportunity to accumulate further assets whereas the wife has time to accumulate assets and has qualifications in that regard, and (iv) the disparity of income and financial resources, and the husband’s non-disclosure.  ) the disparity of income and financial resources, and the husband’s non-disclosure.
as a result of the above, there should be a 5% adjustment in favour of the husband, such that the net division, not of all assets, but of an adjusted asset pool, taking into account the change in the parties’ positions between the commencement of cohabitation and the conclusion of cohabitation. if in fact the asset pool has gone backwards over that time, then it is recognised that there would need to be an adjustment in favour of the wife to some extent, given the ten year relationship and the contributions which it is acknowledged that she did make. it is anticipated that this would equate to 10% of the combined asset pool. that is, combined assets of $5,333,642, less the [d bank] liability of approximately $500,000 leaving approximately $4,833,177, of which 15% equates to $724,976, with superannuation effectively cancelling itself out, given the relative equality of interests in superannuation.
legal framework   in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate:   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them - altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property,
[...]   the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.  .]   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account:   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage, or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property, whether or not that last‑mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage, or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property, whether or not that last‑mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and
the judge called upon to decide proceedings of that kind is not entitled to do what has been described as ‘palm tree justice’. no doubt he is given a wide discretion, but he must exercise it in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down. .] third, whether making a property settlement order is “just and equitable” is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them or has the right to an interest in marital property which is fixed by reference to the various matters (including financial and other contributions) set out in s 79(4). the power to make a property settlement order must be exercised “in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down”. to conclude that making an order is “just and equitable” only because of and by reference to various matters in s 79(4), without a separate consideration of s 79(2), would be to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the act.
in our opinion it is not so much a matter of erosion of contribution but a question of what weight is to be attached, in all the circumstances, to the initial contribution. it is necessary to weigh the initial contributions by a party with all other relevant contributions of both the husband and the wife. in considering the weight to be attached to the initial contribution, in this case of the husband, regard must be had to the use made by the parties of that contribution. in the present case that use was a substantial contribution to the purchase price of the matrimonial home: see also campo and campo (unreported, full court (ellis, lindenmayer and finn jj), sydney, delivered 19 may 1995 at pages 21 and 22 of the joint judgment) and zahra and zahra (unreported, full court sydney, delivered 3 october 1996, per ellis j. at page 10).
what are the assets, liabilities and financial resources of the parties or either of them?
item 1: suburb c property   the position of the property on a main road, (b) damage to the ceiling and tiles, and (c) comparable sales and rental evidence.   damage to the ceiling and tiles, and (c) comparable sales and rental evidence.   comparable sales and rental evidence.
item 12: addback of $300,000
item 13: addback of suburb q sale proceeds  the necessary propositions were not put to the husband in cross-examination, (b) the fact that the wife was not involved in the district court proceedings does not mean that the decisions made by the husband in relation to its conduct and compromise constituted waste, and (c) the compromise of litigation on a without admissions basis does not constitute waste where such compromise avoids further legal fees and the risk of litigation itself, including the risk of an assessment of liability greater than that which has been compromised and an order for costs.   the fact that the wife was not involved in the district court proceedings does not mean that the decisions made by the husband in relation to its conduct and compromise constituted waste, and (c) the compromise of litigation on a without admissions basis does not constitute waste where such compromise avoids further legal fees and the risk of litigation itself, including the risk of an assessment of liability greater than that which has been compromised and an order for costs.   the compromise of litigation on a without admissions basis does not constitute waste where such compromise avoids further legal fees and the risk of litigation itself, including the risk of an assessment of liability greater than that which has been compromised and an order for costs.
item 15: wife’s superannuation
item 17: inheritance
finding as to the balance sheet
section 79(4)(a): direct and indirect financial contributions
section 79(4)(b): non-financial contributions
section 79(4)(c): contributions to welfare of the family, including homemaking and parenting
conduct
that is, these principles, which should only apply to exceptional cases, may become common coinage in property cases and be used inappropriately as tactical weapons or for personal attacks and so return this court to fault and misconduct in property matters – a circumstance which proved so debilitating in the past. in addition there is the risk of substantial additional time and cost. ... it is essential to bear in mind the relatively narrow band of cases to which these considerations apply. to be relevant, it would be necessary to show that the conduct occurred during the course of the marriage and had discernible impact upon the contributions of the other party. it is not directed to conduct which does not have that effect... it has to be said, that their honours terms “exceptional” and “narrow” lose much of their force if cases involving significant violence are to be the subject of the application of the principles. such cases might have been regarded as exceptional at the time kennon was decided but they cannot today be so regarded. unfortunately the prevalence of family violence is wide and artificial barriers to its recognition, such as trying to limit its recognition in property cases to exceptional or narrow cases, has no basis in principle. as i shall endeavour to explain shortly, the focus of the majority’s reasoning was on the nature and quality of the contributions themselves which were not limited by such qualifying adjectives.
23. in kennon, the principle was identified as follows:
put shortly, our view is that where there is a course of violent conduct by one party towards the other during the marriage which is demonstrated to have had a significant adverse impact upon that party’s contributions to the marriage, or, put the other way, to have made his or her contributions significantly more arduous than they ought to have been, that is a fact which a trial judge is entitled to take into account in assessing the parties’ respective contributions within s 79. for the reasons given, the words “significantly” and “more arduous” are not to be read as coterminous with “exceptional”. rather, they arise from the basis of the principle itself which focuses on contributions. if the nature and extent of a person’s contributions are made more difficult or harder so that they should be accorded greater weight, such that they should be taken into account in the determining of the outcome, they have therefore been “significantly impacted” or made “more arduous”. the focus is not on the conduct per se, but on its effects on contributions. the threshold for recognition is therefore met by conduct which has a discernible effect on the contributions of the other party such that it should be recognised in determining the respective contributions of the parties. that, in my view, should be the focus and terms such as “exceptional” or “narrow”, or indeed, “onerous” add an unnecessary and unacceptable gloss suggesting that a rare and high level of impact is required and that the violence or its impact must be exceptional. that is not however, what their honours said. all that was required was a “significant adverse impact” upon a party’s contributions. the word “significant” was used, in my opinion, as describing that the effect must be sufficient to warrant recognition but not imparting some artificial threshold. the effect of the conduct must be such that a greater weight should be given to the contributions. more recent cases have softened some of the harshness of the original application of the principles identified in kennon. for example, it is now the position that the adverse effect of the violence on the contributions of a party can be inferred from the lay evidence of the parties and that there is no need to call evidence to “quantify” that effect (maine & maine [2016] famcafc 270, (2016) 56 fam lr 500 at [47]–[52] (“maine”), britt & britt [2017] famcafc 27, (2017) flc 93-764 at [74]–[75], keating & keating [2019] famcafc 46, (2019) flc 93-894 at [27]–[43], [52]–[67], benson & drury [2020] famcafc 303, (2020) flc 93-998 (“benson & drury”) at [47]–[50]). it seems to me that regarding kennon claims as “special” or “exceptional” is apt to mislead. in reality, all the majority said in that case was that a person’s contributions are to be assessed in the light of all of the circumstances and where those circumstances have the effect of making the contributions more difficult, onerous or arduous, that should be recognised in the assessment of contributions. that, of course, takes place in a holistic manner (dickons v dickons [2012] famcafc 154, (2012) 50 fam lr 244, jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78, (2019) flc 93-898). the primary judge did not use those words. rather, her honour said “the wife’s non-financial contributions were impacted and made more difficult and distressing” (at [46]) and “more arduous” (at [126]). they were found to be of such a nature so as to require consideration. i would not take that to be an incorrect application of the principles set out in kennon. the difficulty that arises in this matter is, however, that the primary judge did not explain how the acts of violence of the husband led to the non-financial contributions of the wife being made difficult, distressing and more arduous. the reasons are silent on the issue. in maine, the court held that the application of the principle in kennon “required of his honour findings in respect of evidence that addressed specifically... the impact that the violence had upon the wife’s contributions” (at [52]). the requisite finding could, as discussed, be inferred as explained in benson & drury at [50]. the husband submits that the absence of this discussion indicates that her honour did not understand and did not correctly apply the principles set out in kennon (ground 2(a)). alternatively, it is said that the failure itself is an error (ground 1(c), ground 2(b) and ground 3). i incline to the latter view, but either way, error has been demonstrated. whilst the events described by the wife were no doubt distressing, the evidence and the findings did not deal with the magnitude and extent of its effect. whilst matters can certainly be inferred, that inference must be properly based on the evidence before the court.
here, the primary judge found the appellant perpetrated family violence upon the respondent and drew an inference that such violence did have an effect upon the respondent’s contributions, making them “all the more arduous” (at [162]). an inference is an assent to the existence of a fact which is based on the proven existence of some other fact or facts, drawn as part of the fact finding process as an exercise of ordinary powers of deduction and reason in the light of human experience, unaffected by any rule of law (g v h [1994] hca 48, (1994) 181 clr 387 at [4]). obviously, the strength of the subject inference depends upon the quality of the underlying evidence. it must be reasonable to draw the inference from primary facts. mere conjecture will not suffice (seltsam pty ltd v mcguiness (2000) 49 nswlr 262 at 275–278 per spigelman cj, carr v baker [1936] nswstrp 20, (1936) 36 sr (nsw) 301 at 306–307 per jordan cj). importantly, the evaluation of the evidence from which the subject inference is sought to be drawn should be thorough and balanced. in the context of a kennon argument, any factual controversies over the alleged misconduct of one spouse and its alleged deleterious consequential effects upon the other spouse should be resolved by familiar forensic techniques. disputed but untested allegations, are not facts (keating at [55]–[66]).
is there an incidence of family violence?
should the conduct be recognised in determining contributions?
i was scared because i can’t sleep. i’m always crying, and i want to ask for help... i always hear the news the people that die, and there’s a gun in my place, and that’s what’s always in my head. i’m seeing it when i close my eyes.
section 79(4)(d): the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage
section 79(4)(e): the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) of the act so far as they are relevantsection 75(2)(a)
section 75(2)(b) and (o)
section 75(2)(o): robb & robb
section 79(4)(f): any order made under the family law act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, section 79(4)(g): any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 etc.
conclusion
associate: dated: 12 october 2023
dated: 12 october 2023