last updated: 15 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mcdowell & redfield [2023] fedcfamc2f 1307
orders
the court orders that:  notifies the father of any proposed decision relating to the long-term care and welfare of the child, including but not limited to: (i) proposed decision about which schools the child shall attend, (ii) proposed decision about elective surgery, treatment of chronic conditions, orthodontic treatment and other long-term medical issues affecting the child, (b) ensure that such notification is given to the father in writing and is given not less than twenty-eight (28) days before a final decision is made, except in the case of an emergency, and (c) take into consideration any views expressed by the father in respect of such proposed decisions.   proposed decision about which schools the child shall attend, (ii) proposed decision about elective surgery, treatment of chronic conditions, orthodontic treatment and other long-term medical issues affecting the child,  ) proposed decision about elective surgery, treatment of chronic conditions, orthodontic treatment and other long-term medical issues affecting the child,   ensure that such notification is given to the father in writing and is given not less than twenty-eight (28) days before a final decision is made, except in the case of an emergency, and (c) take into consideration any views expressed by the father in respect of such proposed decisions.   take into consideration any views expressed by the father in respect of such proposed decisions.   commencing on the first saturday after these orders and each alternate saturday thereafter, from 9am until 6pm, (b) each wednesday from after daycare, school, or from 3:30pm (if a non-school/daycare attendance day) until 6pm, and (c) at such other times as agreed to by the parents in writing.   each wednesday from after daycare, school, or from 3:30pm (if a non-school/daycare attendance day) until 6pm, and (c) at such other times as agreed to by the parents in writing.   at such other times as agreed to by the parents in writing.   a copy of all school reports and school photo order forms for the child, (b) notification for school activities, such activities being those that parents are ordinarily entitled to or invited by the school to attend, and (c) notification of parent/teacher nights.   notification for school activities, such activities being those that parents are ordinarily entitled to or invited by the school to attend, and (c) notification of parent/teacher nights.   notification of parent/teacher nights.   any serious medical problems, severe illnesses and/or hospital admissions suffered by the child whilst she is in their care as soon as possible, (b) any medication that has been prescribed to the child and the reason for such medication, and (c) any treatment that is required to be undertaken for the child.   any medication that has been prescribed to the child and the reason for such medication, and (c) any treatment that is required to be undertaken for the child.   any treatment that is required to be undertaken for the child.   exposing the child to violence including physical or verbal threats or intimidation, whether such threats or intimidation or violence be directed at the child, the mother, the father, or any other member of the parent’s respective households, (b) denigrating any of the other parent’s or member of the other parent’s families in the presence or hearing of the child and each parent shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person doing so, (c) discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceeding with the child or permitting any third party to do so, (d) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (e) consuming alcohol in excess of the legal driving limit when they have the child in their care and for the 12 hours prior to the child coming into their care, and (f) using illicit substances or prescription medication that they do not have a valid script for when the child is in their care and for the 72 hours prior to the child coming into their care.   denigrating any of the other parent’s or member of the other parent’s families in the presence or hearing of the child and each parent shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person doing so, (c) discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceeding with the child or permitting any third party to do so, (d) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (e) consuming alcohol in excess of the legal driving limit when they have the child in their care and for the 12 hours prior to the child coming into their care, and (f) using illicit substances or prescription medication that they do not have a valid script for when the child is in their care and for the 72 hours prior to the child coming into their care.   discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceeding with the child or permitting any third party to do so, (d) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (e) consuming alcohol in excess of the legal driving limit when they have the child in their care and for the 12 hours prior to the child coming into their care, and (f) using illicit substances or prescription medication that they do not have a valid script for when the child is in their care and for the 72 hours prior to the child coming into their care.   making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (e) consuming alcohol in excess of the legal driving limit when they have the child in their care and for the 12 hours prior to the child coming into their care, and (f) using illicit substances or prescription medication that they do not have a valid script for when the child is in their care and for the 72 hours prior to the child coming into their care.   consuming alcohol in excess of the legal driving limit when they have the child in their care and for the 12 hours prior to the child coming into their care, and (f) using illicit substances or prescription medication that they do not have a valid script for when the child is in their care and for the 72 hours prior to the child coming into their care.   using illicit substances or prescription medication that they do not have a valid script for when the child is in their care and for the 72 hours prior to the child coming into their care.
reasons for judgment
judge obradovic:
issues for determination  each alternate weekend from saturday at 10am until sunday at 4pm, (b) during the christmas and easter period, on father’s day and on x’s birthday, (c) that until x commences year 2, the above time shall occur in the home of the paternal grandmother, including x staying there overnight and in the presence of the paternal grandmother. that the paternal grandmother shall not leave the father alone with x in excess of one hour, (d) at other times as agreed by the parties in writing, and (e) when x commences attending school, in addition to the above time, one half of each nsw school holiday period.   during the christmas and easter period, on father’s day and on x’s birthday, (c) that until x commences year 2, the above time shall occur in the home of the paternal grandmother, including x staying there overnight and in the presence of the paternal grandmother. that the paternal grandmother shall not leave the father alone with x in excess of one hour, (d) at other times as agreed by the parties in writing, and (e) when x commences attending school, in addition to the above time, one half of each nsw school holiday period.   that until x commences year 2, the above time shall occur in the home of the paternal grandmother, including x staying there overnight and in the presence of the paternal grandmother. that the paternal grandmother shall not leave the father alone with x in excess of one hour, (d) at other times as agreed by the parties in writing, and (e) when x commences attending school, in addition to the above time, one half of each nsw school holiday period.   at other times as agreed by the parties in writing, and (e) when x commences attending school, in addition to the above time, one half of each nsw school holiday period.   when x commences attending school, in addition to the above time, one half of each nsw school holiday period.   whether x is at an unacceptable risk of harm with the mother or the father, (b) whether an equal time arrangement is appropriate or that x should live primarily with one parent, (c) if there is an unacceptable risk of harm to x while spending time with the father, whether such time, if any, can occur overnight and without supervision, (d) what order for parental responsibility is appropriate in the circumstances, and (e) whether it is in x’s best interests to make the various restraints and orders for drug testing sought by the parties.   whether an equal time arrangement is appropriate or that x should live primarily with one parent, (c) if there is an unacceptable risk of harm to x while spending time with the father, whether such time, if any, can occur overnight and without supervision, (d) what order for parental responsibility is appropriate in the circumstances, and (e) whether it is in x’s best interests to make the various restraints and orders for drug testing sought by the parties.   if there is an unacceptable risk of harm to x while spending time with the father, whether such time, if any, can occur overnight and without supervision, (d) what order for parental responsibility is appropriate in the circumstances, and (e) whether it is in x’s best interests to make the various restraints and orders for drug testing sought by the parties.   what order for parental responsibility is appropriate in the circumstances, and (e) whether it is in x’s best interests to make the various restraints and orders for drug testing sought by the parties.   whether it is in x’s best interests to make the various restraints and orders for drug testing sought by the parties.
procedural & care history  week 1: (i) sunday afternoon to thursday morning with the mother, and (ii) thursday morning until sunday afternoon with the father, (b) week 2: (i) sunday afternoon until tuesday morning with the mother, (ii) tuesday morning until friday morning with the father, and (iii) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the mother, (c) week 3: (i) sunday afternoon until thursday morning with the father, and (ii) thursday morning until sunday afternoon with the mother, (d) week 4: (i) sunday afternoon until tuesday morning with the father, (ii) tuesday morning until friday morning with the mother, and (iii) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the father.   sunday afternoon to thursday morning with the mother, and (ii) thursday morning until sunday afternoon with the father,  ) thursday morning until sunday afternoon with the father,   week 2: (i) sunday afternoon until tuesday morning with the mother, (ii) tuesday morning until friday morning with the father, and (iii) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the mother, (c) week 3: (i) sunday afternoon until thursday morning with the father, and (ii) thursday morning until sunday afternoon with the mother, (d) week 4: (i) sunday afternoon until tuesday morning with the father, (ii) tuesday morning until friday morning with the mother, and (iii) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the father.   sunday afternoon until tuesday morning with the mother, (ii) tuesday morning until friday morning with the father, and (iii) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the mother,  ) tuesday morning until friday morning with the father, and (iii) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the mother,  i) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the mother,   week 3: (i) sunday afternoon until thursday morning with the father, and (ii) thursday morning until sunday afternoon with the mother, (d) week 4: (i) sunday afternoon until tuesday morning with the father, (ii) tuesday morning until friday morning with the mother, and (iii) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the father.   sunday afternoon until thursday morning with the father, and (ii) thursday morning until sunday afternoon with the mother,  ) thursday morning until sunday afternoon with the mother,   week 4: (i) sunday afternoon until tuesday morning with the father, (ii) tuesday morning until friday morning with the mother, and (iii) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the father.   sunday afternoon until tuesday morning with the father, (ii) tuesday morning until friday morning with the mother, and (iii) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the father.  ) tuesday morning until friday morning with the mother, and (iii) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the father.  i) friday morning until sunday afternoon with the father.
relevant legal principles
the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion... the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion. that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations enumerated within s 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one.
discussion & findings
background
the father’s living arrangements
prior to the relationship
the relationship & cohabitation
we were arguing. [mr redfield] was drunk and [mr redfield] grabbed my neck with one hand, i dropped to the floor to try and make him stop and he grabbed me by the hair and dragged me down the hallway from the kitchen to the front door area. i got loose and went back down the hallway to the kitchen, when i got there [mr redfield]’s mother was there as she had come up from the [flat] and she pinned me onto a chair. she sat on top of me and held my wrists down. during the time i was screaming for help and for someone to call the police. my friend [ms r] was at the house at the time and called the police. the police attended 25 minutes later. the police allowed me to leave the home with [x] after discussions where they tried to have me leave [x] with [mr redfield] who was drunk and had just physically abused me. i called the police the following day and sought an advo and they told me that the officer in charge needed to come back out and take a statement and he was off for a few days. that officer never contacted me.
when i move out, you are not going to see [x] at all. you are incapable of looking after my baby. you won’t get shared custody! not when they realise you’re sharing a house with a grown man. i won’t have your mother rear my child.
“i will kick your head off your shoulders and down the street” “i will kill you” “you be careful what you say, i know where you live”
after separation
the late 2020 incident
after the late 2020 incident
“you better fucking take her back to my house” “you’ll be in jail by tomorrow” “you give my daughter back or you go to jail pretty fucking simple cunt” “bring [x] to my house now” “your [sic] a fucking drug dealer” “you are a drug manufacturer and convicted criminal with your own mental health problems your mum lives on the same property as you we have already lodged an emergency retrieval order through the courts....” “...the police already know there is an ongoing and suspected criminal and illegal activities happening at that premises”
“you won’t have any rights when you go back to jail your family needs to stop complying with your criminal orders because [ms p] will also loose [sic] her job she works at a [centre] and lives on a property drugs are manufactured be very careful [mr redfield]” “when can i get the rest of my stuff i’ll need it before you go back to jail” “you can say all the lies you want about you’re a thug and a criminal and there [sic] not far off sending you back to jail for the next ten years enjoy mate.....”
the u hotel incident
after the u hotel incident  the father requested the session due to court orders, (b) the father denied any current substance use including illicit drugs, (c) the father had used illicit drugs on average once a month in a social context and last used it in or about mid-2020, (d) from 2018, the father had used illicit drugs each weekend and last used drugs in or about late 2020, (e) the father used illicit substances to manage stress, (f) the father reported an incident in or about 2018, when he was feeling low, had thought about killing himself, drove to a location and called his family, who supported him, and that he has had no suicidal thoughts since, and (g) the counsellor considered that no further treatment was planned or necessary because the father’s ongoing abstinence and self-management was sufficient.   the father denied any current substance use including illicit drugs, (c) the father had used illicit drugs on average once a month in a social context and last used it in or about mid-2020, (d) from 2018, the father had used illicit drugs each weekend and last used drugs in or about late 2020, (e) the father used illicit substances to manage stress, (f) the father reported an incident in or about 2018, when he was feeling low, had thought about killing himself, drove to a location and called his family, who supported him, and that he has had no suicidal thoughts since, and (g) the counsellor considered that no further treatment was planned or necessary because the father’s ongoing abstinence and self-management was sufficient.   the father had used illicit drugs on average once a month in a social context and last used it in or about mid-2020, (d) from 2018, the father had used illicit drugs each weekend and last used drugs in or about late 2020, (e) the father used illicit substances to manage stress, (f) the father reported an incident in or about 2018, when he was feeling low, had thought about killing himself, drove to a location and called his family, who supported him, and that he has had no suicidal thoughts since, and (g) the counsellor considered that no further treatment was planned or necessary because the father’s ongoing abstinence and self-management was sufficient.   from 2018, the father had used illicit drugs each weekend and last used drugs in or about late 2020, (e) the father used illicit substances to manage stress, (f) the father reported an incident in or about 2018, when he was feeling low, had thought about killing himself, drove to a location and called his family, who supported him, and that he has had no suicidal thoughts since, and (g) the counsellor considered that no further treatment was planned or necessary because the father’s ongoing abstinence and self-management was sufficient.   the father used illicit substances to manage stress, (f) the father reported an incident in or about 2018, when he was feeling low, had thought about killing himself, drove to a location and called his family, who supported him, and that he has had no suicidal thoughts since, and (g) the counsellor considered that no further treatment was planned or necessary because the father’s ongoing abstinence and self-management was sufficient.   the father reported an incident in or about 2018, when he was feeling low, had thought about killing himself, drove to a location and called his family, who supported him, and that he has had no suicidal thoughts since, and (g) the counsellor considered that no further treatment was planned or necessary because the father’s ongoing abstinence and self-management was sufficient.   the counsellor considered that no further treatment was planned or necessary because the father’s ongoing abstinence and self-management was sufficient.   has complex ptsd, anxiety and depression, and (b) struggles with issues of frustration, stress, concentration, motivation, inability to control emotions, erratic moods, inability to trust others and substance use.   struggles with issues of frustration, stress, concentration, motivation, inability to control emotions, erratic moods, inability to trust others and substance use.
“... you mentally unstable excuse of a man” “...your mum is mosey incapable basic sad excuse if there even was one look at your family your [sic] in jail your nieces are on anti depresseants [sic] and you’re a kiddy fiddler your disgusting you will never spend time alone with my child”
“... yours and [ms p] aggressive domestic violent behaviour..... your mental health is deteriorating are a result of drugs”   the father told hospital staff that he had consumed alcohol and attempted to take his own life by overdosing on sleeping pills, (b) the father had sent text messages to friends indicating that he was planning to take his own life and that paramedics were called, and (c) when the paramedics arrived at the father’s car, which was parked next to a park, he was found unresponsive and surrounded by vomit.   the father had sent text messages to friends indicating that he was planning to take his own life and that paramedics were called, and (c) when the paramedics arrived at the father’s car, which was parked next to a park, he was found unresponsive and surrounded by vomit.   when the paramedics arrived at the father’s car, which was parked next to a park, he was found unresponsive and surrounded by vomit.   the father had sent text messages to a friend saying he wanted to harm himself, (b) the father had taken an unknown amount of sleeping pills and alcohol, and (c) the father was willing to talk to the mental health team.   the father had taken an unknown amount of sleeping pills and alcohol, and (c) the father was willing to talk to the mental health team.   the father was willing to talk to the mental health team.   he had recently broken up with his girlfriend, (b) the mother had recently taken x from his care, (c) the incident happened in the context of multiple psychosocial stressors, (d) he felt helpless, (e) he just wanted x back, (f) he did not suffer from past mental health issues and denied any psychotic symptoms, and (g) he is not taking any medication for mood or anxiety but does use ¼ of a sleeping tablet as required to sleep.   the mother had recently taken x from his care, (c) the incident happened in the context of multiple psychosocial stressors, (d) he felt helpless, (e) he just wanted x back, (f) he did not suffer from past mental health issues and denied any psychotic symptoms, and (g) he is not taking any medication for mood or anxiety but does use ¼ of a sleeping tablet as required to sleep.   the incident happened in the context of multiple psychosocial stressors, (d) he felt helpless, (e) he just wanted x back, (f) he did not suffer from past mental health issues and denied any psychotic symptoms, and (g) he is not taking any medication for mood or anxiety but does use ¼ of a sleeping tablet as required to sleep.   he felt helpless, (e) he just wanted x back, (f) he did not suffer from past mental health issues and denied any psychotic symptoms, and (g) he is not taking any medication for mood or anxiety but does use ¼ of a sleeping tablet as required to sleep.   he just wanted x back, (f) he did not suffer from past mental health issues and denied any psychotic symptoms, and (g) he is not taking any medication for mood or anxiety but does use ¼ of a sleeping tablet as required to sleep.   he did not suffer from past mental health issues and denied any psychotic symptoms, and (g) he is not taking any medication for mood or anxiety but does use ¼ of a sleeping tablet as required to sleep.   he is not taking any medication for mood or anxiety but does use ¼ of a sleeping tablet as required to sleep.
the shooting  the department had concerns that x was still at risk in the house and that she could be caught in the crossfire in any future shootings, (b) the father said that the shooter had said his name and he thought it may be targeted, (c) x had her own room at ms p and mr o’s house, (d) the department agreed that x was safe if staying at ms p and mr o’s house, (e) the father appeared concerned and worried for x, and (f) security arrangement were in place at the house.   the father said that the shooter had said his name and he thought it may be targeted, (c) x had her own room at ms p and mr o’s house, (d) the department agreed that x was safe if staying at ms p and mr o’s house, (e) the father appeared concerned and worried for x, and (f) security arrangement were in place at the house.   x had her own room at ms p and mr o’s house, (d) the department agreed that x was safe if staying at ms p and mr o’s house, (e) the father appeared concerned and worried for x, and (f) security arrangement were in place at the house.   the department agreed that x was safe if staying at ms p and mr o’s house, (e) the father appeared concerned and worried for x, and (f) security arrangement were in place at the house.   the father appeared concerned and worried for x, and (f) security arrangement were in place at the house.   security arrangement were in place at the house.
after the shooting
current circumstances
relationship between relevant persons
care arrangements of x when with the father
general allegations against the father & the father’s family  has physically abused and assaulted her, both when x was present and when she was not, (b) cannot control his anger, (c) has a substantial criminal history, (d) often has drug users come in and out of the house, (e) sells illicit drugs, (f) is a drug user, (g) had q living with him when he was arrested for offences, (h) lived with mr m for 14 years, including whilst x was living at the house and that he is not a safe person. mr m is currently imprisoned. the mother believes mr m and the father cooked drugs together when they lived at the house, (i) has associations with a bikie gang, (j) may have firearms at the property, (k) makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   cannot control his anger, (c) has a substantial criminal history, (d) often has drug users come in and out of the house, (e) sells illicit drugs, (f) is a drug user, (g) had q living with him when he was arrested for offences, (h) lived with mr m for 14 years, including whilst x was living at the house and that he is not a safe person. mr m is currently imprisoned. the mother believes mr m and the father cooked drugs together when they lived at the house, (i) has associations with a bikie gang, (j) may have firearms at the property, (k) makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   has a substantial criminal history, (d) often has drug users come in and out of the house, (e) sells illicit drugs, (f) is a drug user, (g) had q living with him when he was arrested for offences, (h) lived with mr m for 14 years, including whilst x was living at the house and that he is not a safe person. mr m is currently imprisoned. the mother believes mr m and the father cooked drugs together when they lived at the house, (i) has associations with a bikie gang, (j) may have firearms at the property, (k) makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   often has drug users come in and out of the house, (e) sells illicit drugs, (f) is a drug user, (g) had q living with him when he was arrested for offences, (h) lived with mr m for 14 years, including whilst x was living at the house and that he is not a safe person. mr m is currently imprisoned. the mother believes mr m and the father cooked drugs together when they lived at the house, (i) has associations with a bikie gang, (j) may have firearms at the property, (k) makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   sells illicit drugs, (f) is a drug user, (g) had q living with him when he was arrested for offences, (h) lived with mr m for 14 years, including whilst x was living at the house and that he is not a safe person. mr m is currently imprisoned. the mother believes mr m and the father cooked drugs together when they lived at the house, (i) has associations with a bikie gang, (j) may have firearms at the property, (k) makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   is a drug user, (g) had q living with him when he was arrested for offences, (h) lived with mr m for 14 years, including whilst x was living at the house and that he is not a safe person. mr m is currently imprisoned. the mother believes mr m and the father cooked drugs together when they lived at the house, (i) has associations with a bikie gang, (j) may have firearms at the property, (k) makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   had q living with him when he was arrested for offences, (h) lived with mr m for 14 years, including whilst x was living at the house and that he is not a safe person. mr m is currently imprisoned. the mother believes mr m and the father cooked drugs together when they lived at the house, (i) has associations with a bikie gang, (j) may have firearms at the property, (k) makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   lived with mr m for 14 years, including whilst x was living at the house and that he is not a safe person. mr m is currently imprisoned. the mother believes mr m and the father cooked drugs together when they lived at the house, (i) has associations with a bikie gang, (j) may have firearms at the property, (k) makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   has associations with a bikie gang, (j) may have firearms at the property, (k) makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   may have firearms at the property, (k) makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   makes false allegations against the mother, (l) may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   may have a copy of the mother’s house keys and may enter her house without her permission, (m) may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   may have sent people on motorbikes after her, and (n) may have stalked her house in his car.   may have stalked her house in his car.   controlled everything they did, (b) isolated her from her family and friends, (c) made sure the mother could only work jobs that were suitable to the father, (d) continually changed the days the mother had with x to limit her opportunities to work, and (e) has threatened and blackmailed the mother to influence her to accept his proposal for final orders, including by threatening to reduce her time with x if she does not agree, and by threatening to make her pay child support.   isolated her from her family and friends, (c) made sure the mother could only work jobs that were suitable to the father, (d) continually changed the days the mother had with x to limit her opportunities to work, and (e) has threatened and blackmailed the mother to influence her to accept his proposal for final orders, including by threatening to reduce her time with x if she does not agree, and by threatening to make her pay child support.   made sure the mother could only work jobs that were suitable to the father, (d) continually changed the days the mother had with x to limit her opportunities to work, and (e) has threatened and blackmailed the mother to influence her to accept his proposal for final orders, including by threatening to reduce her time with x if she does not agree, and by threatening to make her pay child support.   continually changed the days the mother had with x to limit her opportunities to work, and (e) has threatened and blackmailed the mother to influence her to accept his proposal for final orders, including by threatening to reduce her time with x if she does not agree, and by threatening to make her pay child support.   has threatened and blackmailed the mother to influence her to accept his proposal for final orders, including by threatening to reduce her time with x if she does not agree, and by threatening to make her pay child support.
x’s childcare attendance
undertakings
prior undertaking of the paternal grandmother
potential future undertakings   she could supervise if required however she did not consider it necessary, (b) it would be a big burden, but if it means that the father and paternal family could see x she would do it, (c) her work commitments meant that weekday supervision would have to occur sometime after 3:30pm, (d) she would make time to supervise on weekends if required, (e) she could not foresee a time when she wouldn’t be available to supervise in the future, (f) if the father tried to interfere with her supervision she would notify the required people, (g) if the father got involved with bad people or started using drugs again she would confront him and notify the required people, (h) any communication with the mother would be via text message preferably, and (i) she would be willing to give an undertaking to that effect if it meant that the father and the paternal family could have time with x.   it would be a big burden, but if it means that the father and paternal family could see x she would do it, (c) her work commitments meant that weekday supervision would have to occur sometime after 3:30pm, (d) she would make time to supervise on weekends if required, (e) she could not foresee a time when she wouldn’t be available to supervise in the future, (f) if the father tried to interfere with her supervision she would notify the required people, (g) if the father got involved with bad people or started using drugs again she would confront him and notify the required people, (h) any communication with the mother would be via text message preferably, and (i) she would be willing to give an undertaking to that effect if it meant that the father and the paternal family could have time with x.   her work commitments meant that weekday supervision would have to occur sometime after 3:30pm, (d) she would make time to supervise on weekends if required, (e) she could not foresee a time when she wouldn’t be available to supervise in the future, (f) if the father tried to interfere with her supervision she would notify the required people, (g) if the father got involved with bad people or started using drugs again she would confront him and notify the required people, (h) any communication with the mother would be via text message preferably, and (i) she would be willing to give an undertaking to that effect if it meant that the father and the paternal family could have time with x.   she would make time to supervise on weekends if required, (e) she could not foresee a time when she wouldn’t be available to supervise in the future, (f) if the father tried to interfere with her supervision she would notify the required people, (g) if the father got involved with bad people or started using drugs again she would confront him and notify the required people, (h) any communication with the mother would be via text message preferably, and (i) she would be willing to give an undertaking to that effect if it meant that the father and the paternal family could have time with x.   she could not foresee a time when she wouldn’t be available to supervise in the future, (f) if the father tried to interfere with her supervision she would notify the required people, (g) if the father got involved with bad people or started using drugs again she would confront him and notify the required people, (h) any communication with the mother would be via text message preferably, and (i) she would be willing to give an undertaking to that effect if it meant that the father and the paternal family could have time with x.   if the father tried to interfere with her supervision she would notify the required people, (g) if the father got involved with bad people or started using drugs again she would confront him and notify the required people, (h) any communication with the mother would be via text message preferably, and (i) she would be willing to give an undertaking to that effect if it meant that the father and the paternal family could have time with x.   if the father got involved with bad people or started using drugs again she would confront him and notify the required people, (h) any communication with the mother would be via text message preferably, and (i) she would be willing to give an undertaking to that effect if it meant that the father and the paternal family could have time with x.   any communication with the mother would be via text message preferably, and (i) she would be willing to give an undertaking to that effect if it meant that the father and the paternal family could have time with x.   she would be willing to give an undertaking to that effect if it meant that the father and the paternal family could have time with x.
expert evidence  wherever possible, the father undertake the primary caregiving duties when x is in his care, (b) if the court finds that the father does manufacture drugs but there is not an unacceptable risk of harm for x to have time with him, such time should occur away from the property, (c) both parents engage in psychological services, (d) unless the court makes a finding that the father committed coercive and controlling behaviour, that the parents have shared parental responsibility, (e) if the court is satisfied that it is in x’s best interest that she live primarily with one parent, she should live with the mother unless the court finds she is an unacceptable risk to x, and (f) if x lives primarily with the mother, she should spend time with the father each weekend from friday to sunday unless the court finds he is an unacceptable risk to x.   if the court finds that the father does manufacture drugs but there is not an unacceptable risk of harm for x to have time with him, such time should occur away from the property, (c) both parents engage in psychological services, (d) unless the court makes a finding that the father committed coercive and controlling behaviour, that the parents have shared parental responsibility, (e) if the court is satisfied that it is in x’s best interest that she live primarily with one parent, she should live with the mother unless the court finds she is an unacceptable risk to x, and (f) if x lives primarily with the mother, she should spend time with the father each weekend from friday to sunday unless the court finds he is an unacceptable risk to x.   both parents engage in psychological services, (d) unless the court makes a finding that the father committed coercive and controlling behaviour, that the parents have shared parental responsibility, (e) if the court is satisfied that it is in x’s best interest that she live primarily with one parent, she should live with the mother unless the court finds she is an unacceptable risk to x, and (f) if x lives primarily with the mother, she should spend time with the father each weekend from friday to sunday unless the court finds he is an unacceptable risk to x.   unless the court makes a finding that the father committed coercive and controlling behaviour, that the parents have shared parental responsibility, (e) if the court is satisfied that it is in x’s best interest that she live primarily with one parent, she should live with the mother unless the court finds she is an unacceptable risk to x, and (f) if x lives primarily with the mother, she should spend time with the father each weekend from friday to sunday unless the court finds he is an unacceptable risk to x.   if the court is satisfied that it is in x’s best interest that she live primarily with one parent, she should live with the mother unless the court finds she is an unacceptable risk to x, and (f) if x lives primarily with the mother, she should spend time with the father each weekend from friday to sunday unless the court finds he is an unacceptable risk to x.   if x lives primarily with the mother, she should spend time with the father each weekend from friday to sunday unless the court finds he is an unacceptable risk to x.   her views since making the report had not changed, (b) she continued to have concerns about both parties in relation to substance misuse, psychological wellbeing, family violence, the shooting and the father’s capacity to parent without the paternal family’s assistance, (c) she considers that the father lacks insight apropos of his drug addiction and has not satisfactorily addressed it, (d) the father should undergo professional counselling, (e) whilst the mother has said she has addressed her drug and mental health issues, that she still has concerns about this, (f) the less risky parent is the one who has engaged in professional services and intervention, (g) it is not in x’s best interests for the paternal family, rather than the father, to be primarily caring for x when she is in the father’s care, (h) unless there is an unacceptable risk of harm, it would be in x’s best interest to still have overnight time with her father, and (i) the parties should agree on a single childcare centre for x to attend.   she continued to have concerns about both parties in relation to substance misuse, psychological wellbeing, family violence, the shooting and the father’s capacity to parent without the paternal family’s assistance, (c) she considers that the father lacks insight apropos of his drug addiction and has not satisfactorily addressed it, (d) the father should undergo professional counselling, (e) whilst the mother has said she has addressed her drug and mental health issues, that she still has concerns about this, (f) the less risky parent is the one who has engaged in professional services and intervention, (g) it is not in x’s best interests for the paternal family, rather than the father, to be primarily caring for x when she is in the father’s care, (h) unless there is an unacceptable risk of harm, it would be in x’s best interest to still have overnight time with her father, and (i) the parties should agree on a single childcare centre for x to attend.   she considers that the father lacks insight apropos of his drug addiction and has not satisfactorily addressed it, (d) the father should undergo professional counselling, (e) whilst the mother has said she has addressed her drug and mental health issues, that she still has concerns about this, (f) the less risky parent is the one who has engaged in professional services and intervention, (g) it is not in x’s best interests for the paternal family, rather than the father, to be primarily caring for x when she is in the father’s care, (h) unless there is an unacceptable risk of harm, it would be in x’s best interest to still have overnight time with her father, and (i) the parties should agree on a single childcare centre for x to attend.   the father should undergo professional counselling, (e) whilst the mother has said she has addressed her drug and mental health issues, that she still has concerns about this, (f) the less risky parent is the one who has engaged in professional services and intervention, (g) it is not in x’s best interests for the paternal family, rather than the father, to be primarily caring for x when she is in the father’s care, (h) unless there is an unacceptable risk of harm, it would be in x’s best interest to still have overnight time with her father, and (i) the parties should agree on a single childcare centre for x to attend.   whilst the mother has said she has addressed her drug and mental health issues, that she still has concerns about this, (f) the less risky parent is the one who has engaged in professional services and intervention, (g) it is not in x’s best interests for the paternal family, rather than the father, to be primarily caring for x when she is in the father’s care, (h) unless there is an unacceptable risk of harm, it would be in x’s best interest to still have overnight time with her father, and (i) the parties should agree on a single childcare centre for x to attend.   the less risky parent is the one who has engaged in professional services and intervention, (g) it is not in x’s best interests for the paternal family, rather than the father, to be primarily caring for x when she is in the father’s care, (h) unless there is an unacceptable risk of harm, it would be in x’s best interest to still have overnight time with her father, and (i) the parties should agree on a single childcare centre for x to attend.   it is not in x’s best interests for the paternal family, rather than the father, to be primarily caring for x when she is in the father’s care, (h) unless there is an unacceptable risk of harm, it would be in x’s best interest to still have overnight time with her father, and (i) the parties should agree on a single childcare centre for x to attend.   unless there is an unacceptable risk of harm, it would be in x’s best interest to still have overnight time with her father, and (i) the parties should agree on a single childcare centre for x to attend.   the parties should agree on a single childcare centre for x to attend.
court’s determination
relevant considerations
parental responsibility
conclusion
associate: dated: 13 october 2023
dated: 13 october 2023
[1] see slater & light [2011] famcafc 1, [45].[2] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520, [26] cited with approval by the full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, [121] (“mccall”).[3] mccall at [122].[4] mrr v gr [2010] hca 4, [13].[5] banks & banks [2015] famcafc 36.[6] isles v nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97, [58] (“isles v nelissen”).[7] isles v nelissen [59].[8] isles v nelissen [85].[9] see for example the discussion in johnson & page [2007] famca 1235, [62]-[74].[10] m & m (1989) 166 clr 69, [25].[11] presumably illicit substances. [12] [1959] hca 8.[13] which the court understands is tetrahydrocannabinol, commonly referred to as medicinal cannabis.[14] this is a matter upon which the court takes judicial notice.[15] isles & nelissen at [53].[16] isles citing fitzwater & fitzwater [2019] famcafc 251 at [138] – [140] with approval at [50]- [51].