last updated: 5 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kade & bertram [2023] fedcfamc2f 1236
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  the mother must, at first instance, inform and provide notice to the father in writing via text message of the decision proposed to be made, (b) the mother must, at first instance, and in the notice pursuant to order 1(a) above, invite written comments from the father, (c) the mother must consider such comments before making her decision, and (d) the mother must inform the father in writing via text message of the decision once it is made.   the mother must, at first instance, and in the notice pursuant to order 1(a) above, invite written comments from the father, (c) the mother must consider such comments before making her decision, and (d) the mother must inform the father in writing via text message of the decision once it is made.   the mother must consider such comments before making her decision, and (d) the mother must inform the father in writing via text message of the decision once it is made.   the mother must inform the father in writing via text message of the decision once it is made.
live with
spend time  from the date of these orders until a period of six months after the child commences school in 2024, each alternate friday from 4.00 pm until 5.00 pm on sunday. (b) after a period of six months from the date that the child commences school, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday.   after a period of six months from the date that the child commences school, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday.
school holidays
easter  the child shall spend time with the mother: (i) in even years from 4.00 pm maundy thursday until 5.00 pm easter saturday, (ii) in odd years from 5.00 pm easter saturday until 4.00 pm easter monday. (b) the child shall spend time with the father: (i) in odd years from 4.00 pm maundy thursday until 5.00 pm easter saturday, (ii) in even years from 5.00 pm easter saturday until 4pm easter monday.   in even years from 4.00 pm maundy thursday until 5.00 pm easter saturday, (ii) in odd years from 5.00 pm easter saturday until 4.00 pm easter monday. (b) the child shall spend time with the father: (i) in odd years from 4.00 pm maundy thursday until 5.00 pm easter saturday, (ii) in even years from 5.00 pm easter saturday until 4pm easter monday.  ) in odd years from 5.00 pm easter saturday until 4.00 pm easter monday. (b) the child shall spend time with the father: (i) in odd years from 4.00 pm maundy thursday until 5.00 pm easter saturday, (ii) in even years from 5.00 pm easter saturday until 4pm easter monday.   the child shall spend time with the father: (i) in odd years from 4.00 pm maundy thursday until 5.00 pm easter saturday, (ii) in even years from 5.00 pm easter saturday until 4pm easter monday.   in odd years from 4.00 pm maundy thursday until 5.00 pm easter saturday, (ii) in even years from 5.00 pm easter saturday until 4pm easter monday.  ) in even years from 5.00 pm easter saturday until 4pm easter monday.
christmas day  from 12 noon on christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day with the father, and (b) from 12 noon on christmas day until 12 noon on boxing day with the mother.   from 12 noon on christmas day until 12 noon on boxing day with the mother.   from 12 noon on christmas eve until 12 noon on christmas day with the mother, and (b) from 12 noon on christmas day until 12 noon on boxing day with the father.   from 12 noon on christmas day until 12 noon on boxing day with the father.
child’s birthday  in odd years from 1.00 pm or after school on the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the next day, (b) in even years from 1.00 pm or after school on the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the next day.   in even years from 1.00 pm or after school on the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the next day.   in even years from 1.00 pm or after school on the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the next day, (b) in odd years from 1.00 pm or after school on the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the next day.   in odd years from 1.00 pm or after school on the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the next day.
mother’s day and father’s day
school events, child’s activities, and communication  sporting fixtures, (b) extra-curricular activities that allow for parental attendance, (c) school functions and events that allow for parental attendance including but not limited to concerts, school assemblies, sports days, carnivals, parent and teacher interviews, canteen duties and social functions, and the parent who has the child in their care on the day of such events will be responsible for their day-to-day care at such event and the child’s transportation to and from that event.   extra-curricular activities that allow for parental attendance, (c) school functions and events that allow for parental attendance including but not limited to concerts, school assemblies, sports days, carnivals, parent and teacher interviews, canteen duties and social functions, and the parent who has the child in their care on the day of such events will be responsible for their day-to-day care at such event and the child’s transportation to and from that event.   school functions and events that allow for parental attendance including but not limited to concerts, school assemblies, sports days, carnivals, parent and teacher interviews, canteen duties and social functions, and the parent who has the child in their care on the day of such events will be responsible for their day-to-day care at such event and the child’s transportation to and from that event.
and the parent who has the child in their care on the day of such events will be responsible for their day-to-day care at such event and the child’s transportation to and from that event.   any medical problems or illnesses suffered by the child while in their care, (b) any medication that has been prescribed for the child, (c) any social, school or religious function which the child are to attend, and (d) any other matter relevant to the child’s welfare.   any medication that has been prescribed for the child, (c) any social, school or religious function which the child are to attend, and (d) any other matter relevant to the child’s welfare.   any social, school or religious function which the child are to attend, and (d) any other matter relevant to the child’s welfare.   any other matter relevant to the child’s welfare.   communicate by telephone matters of an urgent nature, and (b) communicate in relation to all other matters regarding the welfare of the child, with the utilisation of a parenting app, mymob, and for this purpose, the parties shall within 7 days from the date of these orders, download such parenting application onto their phones.   communicate in relation to all other matters regarding the welfare of the child, with the utilisation of a parenting app, mymob, and for this purpose, the parties shall within 7 days from the date of these orders, download such parenting application onto their phones.
restraints  discussing these family law proceedings with the child, (b) making critical or derogatory remarks in relation to the other party in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting any third party to do so, and (c) physically disciplining the child.   making critical or derogatory remarks in relation to the other party in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting any third party to do so, and (c) physically disciplining the child.   physically disciplining the child.
courses
authorities
reasons for judgment
introduction
proposals
parental responsibility that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child, [x], born [in] 2017 (“the child”) but when making a decision about major long term issues, the following shall apply:
1.1. the mother must, at first instance, inform and provide notice to the father in writing via text message of the decision made, 1.2. the mother must, at first instance, and in the notice pursuant to order 1.1 above, invite written comments from the father, 1.3. the mother must make a genuine effort to consider such comments made into account when making the decision, and 1.4. the mother must inform the father in writing via text message of the decision once it is made.
live with 2. that the child live with the mother. spend time that unless otherwise agreed in writing, the child shall spend time with the father as follows: a) from the date of these orders until a period of 6 months after the child commences school in 2024, each alternate friday from 4:00pm until 5:00pm on sunday. b) after a period of 6 months from the date that the child commences school, each alternate friday from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday. school holidays the father shall spend time with the child during the term 1 and 2, 2024, school holiday periods for 2 nights of the school holiday period. for the purposes of order 4, the 2 nights are to commence in the first week of such holidays on sunday from 4:00pm until 5:00pm on tuesday. the father’s time shall increase by a night during the term 3, 2024, school holiday period from sunday 4:00pm until 4:00pm on tuesday, and shall increase by a night each consecutive school holiday period until the child spends 7 nights with the father. upon the father’s time increasing to 7 nights with the child, the father shall spend time with the child during the term 1, 2, and 3 school holidays in the first half in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. upon the father’s time increasing to 7 nights with the child, the father shall spend time with the child during the term 4 school holiday period for the first week and each alternate week thereafter in odd numbered years and in the second week and each alternate week thereafter in even numbered years. where time does not commence or conclude at school, at the commencement of the father’s time the father is to pick up the child from the mother’s residence and, at the conclusion of the father’s time, the mother or her representative is to pick up the child from the father’s residence. notwithstanding any other order, the child shall spend time with the mother and father on the following special occasions: easter a. the child shall spend time with the mother:
a) from the date of these orders until a period of 6 months after the child commences school in 2024, each alternate friday from 4:00pm until 5:00pm on sunday. b) after a period of 6 months from the date that the child commences school, each alternate friday from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday.
b) after a period of 6 months from the date that the child commences school, each alternate friday from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday.
i) in even years from 4pm thursday until 5pm easter saturday, in odd years the child shall spend time with the mother from 5 pm easter saturday until 4pm easter monday.
b. the child shall spend time with the father:
i) in odd years from 4 pm thursday until 5pm easter saturday, in even years the child shall spend time with the father from 5pm easter saturday until 4pm om easter monday.
christmas day a. in each year that ends in an even number the child is to spend: from 12 noon on christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day with the father, and from 12 noon on christmas day until 12 noon on boxing day with the mother. b. in each year that ends in an odd number the child is to spend: from 12 noon on christmas eve until 12 noon on christmas day with the mother, and from 12 noon on christmas day until 12 noon on boxing day with the father. childs birthday the father shall spend time with the child from 4pm [on the child’s birthday] until 1pm [the next day]. commencing in 2024, the mother shall spend time with the child: in odd years from 1pm or after school [on the child’s birthday] until 9am or before school [the next day]. in even years from 1pm or after school [on the child’s birthday] until 9am or before school [the next day]. 13. commencing in 2024, the father shall spend time with the child: in even years from 1pm or after school on [on the child’s birthday] until 9am or the commencement of school [the next day]. in odd years from 1pm or after school [on the child’s birthday] until 9am or before school [the next day]. mother’s day and father’s day if mother’s day falls on a weekend when the mother does not otherwise have care of the child, the mother will have care of the child from 4pm the friday prior to mother’s day until 9am or the commencement of school monday, notwithstanding any other order. if father’s day falls on a weekend when the father does not otherwise have care of the child, the father will have care of the child from 4pm the friday prior to father’s day until 9am or the commencement of school monday notwithstanding any other order. school events, child’s activities, and communication the parents will both be entitled to attend all events involving the child including:
i) sporting fixtures, ii) extra-curricular activities that allow for parental attendance, school functions and events that allow for parental attendance including but not limited to concerts, school assemblies, sports days, parent and teacher interviews, canteen duties and social functions, and the parent who has the child in their care on the day of such events will be responsible for their day-to-day care at such event and the child’s transportation to and from that event.
17. any other times will be as agreed between the parents in writing. the father is to have facetime contact with the child each tuesday and thursday at 6.00pm and each parent shall ensure that their phones are charged and have requisite credit to facilitate such communication. the mother and father shall immediately notify the other parent of any illness, medical emergency, serious medical problem, hospitalisation or accident in relation to the child when the child is in their care and together with any such notice, the parent is to provide the name of the hospital, treating medical practitioner and/or medical facility that provided medical treatment. 20. the parties shall ensure that the other party is kept informed of: any medical problems or illnesses suffered by the child while in their care,
ii) any medication that has been prescribed for the child, any social, school or religious function which the child are to attend, and iv) any other matter relevant to the child’s welfare. that for the purposes of communicating information between the parties the mother and father shall: communicate by telephone matters of an urgent nature, and otherwise, and communicate in relation to all other matters regarding the welfare of the child, with the utilisation ofa parenting app, mymob, and for this purpose, the parties shall within 7 days from the date of these orders, download such parenting application onto their phones. each party shall advise the other party of their current address, contact telephone numbers (including both landline and mobile phone numbers if applicable) and email address, and advise the other party of any changes to these details within seven days of such change occurring.
restraints the parties are restrained from:
i) discussing these family law proceedings with the child, making critical or derogatory remarks in relation to the other party in the presence or hearing of the child and that each party do all things necessary to ensure that no third party makes critical comments about the other party in the presence or hearing of the child, and iii) physically disciplining the child. without admissions, the father shall continue to ensure that he does not communicate with any of the child’s therapists or professionals with disrespect or aggression, or in a harassing manner, otherwise such authorities allowing such communication shall be suspended.
courses that the father forthwith engage with [c organisation] and undertake such courses which will enable him to gain an understanding of the child’s condition in ways that he can assist the child when the child is spending time with him. authorities that these orders are authority for any medical practitioner, dentist, counsellor or other health professional who treats the child to provide information to the other parent upon request by the other parent, to the extent permitted by law. that each parent is permitted to liaise directly with the child’s school, sporting bodies and/or extra-curricular organisation to obtain any necessary information about the child’s progress, and these orders are authority for the school, sporting bodies and/or other organisations to release such information as requested by the other parent to the extent permitted by law and that the parent that caused the child to be enrolled in such activities or schooling must provide the other parent the particulars of the enrolment within 24 hours or enrolment. that these orders are authority for the child’s school to provide both parents with copies of the child’s school reports, newsletters, photograph order forms and invitations to attend any activities which parents are invited to attend and for both parents to be named on all school and extracurricular records as emergency contacts. that each parent is permitted to attend parent-teacher interviews, concerts, carnivals and other events involving the child’s school, or in the context of extra-curricular activities to which parents are ordinarily invited, even if that event occurs at a time when the child is in the care of the other parent pursuant to these orders. notations in the event that the father is unable to exercise his time with the child during school holidays as per the provisions herein, then the child’s time in accordance with order 3(b) shall continue during school holidays. (as per the original)
material relied upon  outline of case filed 28 august 2023, (b) amended initiating application filed 8 march 2023, (c) his affidavit filed 9 march 2023, (d) affidavit of ms g, paternal grandmother, filed 8 march 2023, (e) affidavit of mr h filed 8 march 2023, (f) notice of risk filed 19 september 2019.   amended initiating application filed 8 march 2023, (c) his affidavit filed 9 march 2023, (d) affidavit of ms g, paternal grandmother, filed 8 march 2023, (e) affidavit of mr h filed 8 march 2023, (f) notice of risk filed 19 september 2019.   his affidavit filed 9 march 2023, (d) affidavit of ms g, paternal grandmother, filed 8 march 2023, (e) affidavit of mr h filed 8 march 2023, (f) notice of risk filed 19 september 2019.   affidavit of ms g, paternal grandmother, filed 8 march 2023, (e) affidavit of mr h filed 8 march 2023, (f) notice of risk filed 19 september 2019.   affidavit of mr h filed 8 march 2023, (f) notice of risk filed 19 september 2019.   notice of risk filed 19 september 2019.   outline of case filed 28 august 2023, (b) her affidavit filed 27 february 2023, (c) amended response filed 27 february 2023, (d) notice of risk filed 13 november 2019, (e) family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022.   her affidavit filed 27 february 2023, (c) amended response filed 27 february 2023, (d) notice of risk filed 13 november 2019, (e) family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022.   amended response filed 27 february 2023, (d) notice of risk filed 13 november 2019, (e) family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022.   notice of risk filed 13 november 2019, (e) family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022.   family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022.   outline of case filed 1 september 2019.
exhibits  exhibit a: psychological report of dr k received by the parties and icl on 30 august 2023, (b) exhibit b: pages 1–5 of father’s tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: pages 8–12 of icl tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: page 6 of father’s tender bundle, (e) exhibit e: pages 7–13 of father’s tender bundle, (f) exhibit f: email from ms l to ms m and ms n dated 4 november 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders 14 november 2022, (h) exhibit h: pages 88–90 of father’s tender bundle, page 94 of father’s tender bundle, email from father’s solicitor to mother’s solicitor 28 november 2022, email from mother’s solicitor to father’s solicitor 13 march 2023, (i) exhibit i: pages 14–16 of father’s tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 23 (being letter 2 february 2020 from o company to suburb p police), 28-29 of father’s tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit b: pages 1–5 of father’s tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: pages 8–12 of icl tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: page 6 of father’s tender bundle, (e) exhibit e: pages 7–13 of father’s tender bundle, (f) exhibit f: email from ms l to ms m and ms n dated 4 november 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders 14 november 2022, (h) exhibit h: pages 88–90 of father’s tender bundle, page 94 of father’s tender bundle, email from father’s solicitor to mother’s solicitor 28 november 2022, email from mother’s solicitor to father’s solicitor 13 march 2023, (i) exhibit i: pages 14–16 of father’s tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 23 (being letter 2 february 2020 from o company to suburb p police), 28-29 of father’s tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit c: pages 8–12 of icl tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: page 6 of father’s tender bundle, (e) exhibit e: pages 7–13 of father’s tender bundle, (f) exhibit f: email from ms l to ms m and ms n dated 4 november 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders 14 november 2022, (h) exhibit h: pages 88–90 of father’s tender bundle, page 94 of father’s tender bundle, email from father’s solicitor to mother’s solicitor 28 november 2022, email from mother’s solicitor to father’s solicitor 13 march 2023, (i) exhibit i: pages 14–16 of father’s tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 23 (being letter 2 february 2020 from o company to suburb p police), 28-29 of father’s tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit d: page 6 of father’s tender bundle, (e) exhibit e: pages 7–13 of father’s tender bundle, (f) exhibit f: email from ms l to ms m and ms n dated 4 november 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders 14 november 2022, (h) exhibit h: pages 88–90 of father’s tender bundle, page 94 of father’s tender bundle, email from father’s solicitor to mother’s solicitor 28 november 2022, email from mother’s solicitor to father’s solicitor 13 march 2023, (i) exhibit i: pages 14–16 of father’s tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 23 (being letter 2 february 2020 from o company to suburb p police), 28-29 of father’s tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit e: pages 7–13 of father’s tender bundle, (f) exhibit f: email from ms l to ms m and ms n dated 4 november 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders 14 november 2022, (h) exhibit h: pages 88–90 of father’s tender bundle, page 94 of father’s tender bundle, email from father’s solicitor to mother’s solicitor 28 november 2022, email from mother’s solicitor to father’s solicitor 13 march 2023, (i) exhibit i: pages 14–16 of father’s tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 23 (being letter 2 february 2020 from o company to suburb p police), 28-29 of father’s tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit f: email from ms l to ms m and ms n dated 4 november 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders 14 november 2022, (h) exhibit h: pages 88–90 of father’s tender bundle, page 94 of father’s tender bundle, email from father’s solicitor to mother’s solicitor 28 november 2022, email from mother’s solicitor to father’s solicitor 13 march 2023, (i) exhibit i: pages 14–16 of father’s tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 23 (being letter 2 february 2020 from o company to suburb p police), 28-29 of father’s tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit g: orders 14 november 2022, (h) exhibit h: pages 88–90 of father’s tender bundle, page 94 of father’s tender bundle, email from father’s solicitor to mother’s solicitor 28 november 2022, email from mother’s solicitor to father’s solicitor 13 march 2023, (i) exhibit i: pages 14–16 of father’s tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 23 (being letter 2 february 2020 from o company to suburb p police), 28-29 of father’s tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit h: pages 88–90 of father’s tender bundle, page 94 of father’s tender bundle, email from father’s solicitor to mother’s solicitor 28 november 2022, email from mother’s solicitor to father’s solicitor 13 march 2023, (i) exhibit i: pages 14–16 of father’s tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 23 (being letter 2 february 2020 from o company to suburb p police), 28-29 of father’s tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit i: pages 14–16 of father’s tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 23 (being letter 2 february 2020 from o company to suburb p police), 28-29 of father’s tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit j: pages 23 (being letter 2 february 2020 from o company to suburb p police), 28-29 of father’s tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit k: one page document headed d photography, (l) exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit l: cops event, (m) exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit m: paragraph 49 and annexure d to mother’s affidavit filed 1 september 2020, (n) exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit n: orders 13 march 2023, (o) exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit o: letter from q company dated 11 august 2022, (p) exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit p: family report of ms j dated 21 april 2022, (q) exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit q: pages 20-21 of icl tender bundle.
evidence
evidence of the paternal grandmother
the family report
... in regards to [x] spending time with him, [mr bertram] explained that he is making this proposal due to the current situation at [ms kade]’s house (discussed in child safety and well- being section). when asked why he was proposing equal time if he thought [x] was at risk in [ms kade]’s care, [mr bertram] said that he did not have a choice. he said that he did not believe that an order would be made for [x] to live with him. [mr bertram] stated that “i have every right to him ([x]), i am his father.” [mr bertram] stated that he did not want to be a part-time father. however, he said that whilst he did not want [x] to come from a broken home, there was no benefit to staying in a toxic relationship. ...
... ... [ms v] explained that she and [mr bertram] have a generally amicable and respectful relationship which helps when [x] spends time with him. she alleged that, however, there was one occasion (approximately six months prior to the interview) when she was five minutes late and “he lost it.” [ms v] explained that [mr bertram] came to the car and “just kept going and going and going.” [ms v] elaborated saying that [mr bertram] was telling her that [ms kade] was taking [x] away from him and that she ([ms v]) had “obviously not read the court orders”. [ms v] said that she was disturbed and nervous and she was unable to comprehend what he was saying. [ms v] said that she will now not allow [mr bertram] to treat her that way. [ms v] said that she facilitates the changeovers because she is concerned about [x] and because she lives with [ms kade] and [x] she “put up with this” to maintain the communication with [mr bertram]. [ms v] said that she still “wait(s) for something,” regarding [mr bertram]’s abusive behaviour towards her. [ms v] said that she does not want to be put “in a difficult position,” as she was previously. [ms v] alleged that [mr bertram] is verbally abusive to [ms kade] in text messages and that [mr bertram] will only correspond with her ([ms v]).
... [ms kade]’s primary concern about [x]’s safety and well-being with [mr bertram] was that [mr bertram] was unable to accept [x]’s diagnosis of autism. ... [ms kade] further expressed concern that because [mr bertram] does not support [x]’s diagnosis that he does not follow the recommendations about behaviour management when [x] has a meltdown. [ms kade] explained that, during a changeover, [x] had a “meltdown” and [x] was hitting and biting [mr bertram]. [ms kade] alleged that in response [mr bertram] told [x] that “if you bite me i am going to bite you back” and then [mr bertram] smacked [x]. ... [ms kade] said that the behaviour therapist does not want to engage with [mr bertram] due to his behaviour towards her (the therapist). [ms kade] said that she had tried to involve [mr bertram] but his behaviour had negatively affected [x]’s ability to access treatment and therefore negatively affect [x]’s well-being. she explained that the occupational therapist is well versed in [x]’s needs and further, that [x] is comfortable with the occupational therapist. [ms kade] said that she seeks out assistance for [x] because she wants to see [x] live an independent life. [ms kade] said that [mr bertram]’s behaviour towards [x]’s therapists has resulted in her doing “the bad thing” and keeping [mr bertram] from being involved in [x]’s therapy. [ms kade] alleged that [mr bertram] tried to have [x]’s access to ndis funding cancelled and her submitting a new application caused “a lot” of conflict between them. she said that [mr bertram] continues to assert that she has manipulated the therapists. [ms kade] stated that [mr bertram]’s behaviour is impacting [x]’s ability to access therapy. ...
... [mr bertram] and [ms kade] each reported that there was family violence in the relationship between them. due to the ongoing difficult relationship between [mr bertram] and [ms kade] this continues to impact the co‑parenting relationship between them. it appears that the reported physical abuse between each of them, regardless of the primary perpetrator, was of low intensity and lethality with each reporting that it consisted mainly of verbal abuse and throwing household objects. this continued negative relationship and verbal abuse in relation to [ms kade]’s parenting is likely to affect her ability to meet [x]’s needs and additionally, negatively affect the [x]’s emotional and physical well-being. in this instance, [x] living with each parent equally would not be recommended. further to the reported family violence, it appears that [mr bertram]’s and [ms kade]’s parenting relationship is characterised by inconsistent communication (with the majority of the communication regarding [x] to be between [mr bertram] and [ms v]), limited trust in the other as a parent, and dispute regarding [x]’s diagnosis and treatment. it appears that the poor parenting relationship between the parties is likely to have had a detrimental impact on [x], including him being exposed to the parental dispute regarding parenting arrangements and his treatment. this raises concerns that if this behaviour continues then [x] will continued to be exposed to parental conflict which is likely to have a detrimental impact on his psychological well-being. the apparent nature of the parenting relationship between the parties, combined with [mr bertram]’s apparent negative views regarding [ms kade], and [mr bertram] dismissing the need for [x] to receive intervention for autism combined with the potentially detrimental impact of this on [x], contraindicates an equal time arrangement as being in the [x]’s best interests. therefore, such an arrangement would not be recommended and it would be recommended that [x] live primarily with [ms kade]. given the assessed nature of the [x]’s relationship with each parent, [x] is likely to benefit if the current arrangement stays stable and any changes made are done over a period of time because [x] is likely to find changes in his routine challenging, which may result in [x] experiencing emotional and/or behaviour difficulties. there are benefits to [x] having arrangements that conform to a set pattern, thus providing stability, consistency, and predictability for him. additionally, this arrangement is likely to provide some protection for [x] from the parental dispute. it would therefore be recommended that the current arrangements for [x] to spend time with [mr bertram] remain in place until [x] commences school. once [x] commences school it would be recommended that [x] spend time with [mr bertram], each alternate weekend, from friday afternoon until monday morning (with changeover occurring at school or a neutral venue if the school is closed), with provision for school holidays and days of celebration. [mr bertram] and [ms kade] do not have a co-operative co-parenting arrangement. this combined with a dispute over [x]’s diagnosis raises concern that such an arrangement would not be able to be sustained by [mr bertram] and [ms kade] in the future. in the circumstances where the court finds that there is no veracity to [ms kade]’s allegations about [mr bertram]’s behaviour towards [x]’s treatment team, then consideration could be given to [mr bertram] and [ms kade] sharing parental responsibility for [x]. in the circumstance that it is determined that [mr bertram] and [ms kade] share parental responsibility for [x], it would be recommended that they each participate in a multi-session parenting after separation course, such as [w program]. however, if the court finds veracity that [mr bertram] disagrees with [x]’s diagnosis despite evidence to the contrary and has abused members of [x]’s treatment team subsequently impacted [x]’s ability to access suitable treatment, it would be recommended that [ms kade] have sole parental responsibility for [x].   the father engage with autism services to assist him in understanding the child’s diagnosis and treatment recommendations, (b) the child live with the mother, (c) the child continue to spend time with the father as he does currently, until the child commences school, (d) when the child commences school, that the child spend time with the father from friday afternoon until monday morning (the court interpolates here that it is clear from the whole of the family report writer’s evidence, including her oral evidence, that she was proposing such time on a fortnightly basis), (e) the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child, to reduce the child’s exposure to conflict over parenting arrangements and his treatment. it is recommended that this does not preclude the father from being informed of major decisions regarding the child and/or from the father obtaining information from the child’s school about the child’s progress.   the child live with the mother, (c) the child continue to spend time with the father as he does currently, until the child commences school, (d) when the child commences school, that the child spend time with the father from friday afternoon until monday morning (the court interpolates here that it is clear from the whole of the family report writer’s evidence, including her oral evidence, that she was proposing such time on a fortnightly basis), (e) the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child, to reduce the child’s exposure to conflict over parenting arrangements and his treatment. it is recommended that this does not preclude the father from being informed of major decisions regarding the child and/or from the father obtaining information from the child’s school about the child’s progress.   the child continue to spend time with the father as he does currently, until the child commences school, (d) when the child commences school, that the child spend time with the father from friday afternoon until monday morning (the court interpolates here that it is clear from the whole of the family report writer’s evidence, including her oral evidence, that she was proposing such time on a fortnightly basis), (e) the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child, to reduce the child’s exposure to conflict over parenting arrangements and his treatment. it is recommended that this does not preclude the father from being informed of major decisions regarding the child and/or from the father obtaining information from the child’s school about the child’s progress.   when the child commences school, that the child spend time with the father from friday afternoon until monday morning (the court interpolates here that it is clear from the whole of the family report writer’s evidence, including her oral evidence, that she was proposing such time on a fortnightly basis), (e) the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child, to reduce the child’s exposure to conflict over parenting arrangements and his treatment. it is recommended that this does not preclude the father from being informed of major decisions regarding the child and/or from the father obtaining information from the child’s school about the child’s progress.   the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child, to reduce the child’s exposure to conflict over parenting arrangements and his treatment. it is recommended that this does not preclude the father from being informed of major decisions regarding the child and/or from the father obtaining information from the child’s school about the child’s progress.  tness] it’s – it might – it’s likely to make the mother feel very unsure of her ability to communicate with [mr bertram]. it – it would make communicating difficult if you were going to get derogatory terms or abuse back when you tried to communicate about the child. a child who’s placed in – or exposed to parental conflict, or a parent that – well, a parental conflict is detrimental to a child’s wellbeing. they can experience more depression, more anxiety, they can have difficulties with peer relationships, they can have trouble with sleep, and physiology. so they can get things like stomach aches, or headaches, or – or experience physical symptoms when they – when they’re feeling anxious. they would also pick up on if the – their primary carer is anxious as well, and that can impact the level of care that’s provided for that child, because they might be more irritable, they might lash out more themselves. so there – there’s a number of things that could happen if conflict and abuse is ongoing in a co-parenting relationship.  tness] not accepting a – a diagnosis, or continually dismissing information about the child, is going to make the co-parenting relationship contentious...raising a neurodivergent child has additional challenges to a neurotypical child, and that puts an additional burden on the – on the parenting relationship for the primary parent to – if that’s not supported even in a separated relationship, it can make parenting additionally difficult.  unsel] can you tell the court why? [witness] i think that a child – a young child that is neurotypical already finds a week about arrangement quite difficult, and you have to have a high level of cooperation and communication between parents to make that arrangement work for the child. when you add autism diagnosis on top of that, then that makes that lack of communication between parents very difficult for [x], and you’re also looking at travel burden on a child, having two sets of rules, and also the fact that if you’re not supporting the child’s diagnosis, the child’s treatment regime, getting them to appointments, things along those lines, the inconsistency is going to be very detrimental to a child’s wellbeing.  tness] children generally can cope with some differences in each household. a young child and an autistic – would find that a lot more challenging. so the more consistent that each household can be is the – the – less cognitive demands on the child, and, therefore, less anxiety about change. so it – it would be better for the child if the routines were very similar. [counsel] and the routine and consistency of a child across two households, would you agree, would be better served if there was – if there were able to be a good co-parenting relationship between both parents? [witness] yes, because you would need to be sharing a lot of information about a child, what they’ve done at school, what therapies are working, what needs modifying, what a sleep routine is like, if – if they’re upset, if they’re unwell. there – there’s a lot of information that needs to be shared.  tness] because you’re – you know, the child would be getting information from school, it – it would be things like homework or parties. so, like, the social – social calendar, sort of, events for school. they would need to be communicated if they’re in the other parent’s week. the child might leave something at the other parent’s house, and that – that needs to be collected. a shoe or a uniform, for example, might be left at the other parent’s house, and – and be needed. if the child’s having regular therapy, homework tasks from that might need to be communicated as they change. feeding routines, sleeping routines would need to be communicated as they change. there – there’s generally a lot of cooperation between households where an equal-time arrangement occurs especially with a young child that can’t manage those tasks by themselves and needs support. [the court] and, [ms j], with an equal-time arrangement, if you assume that these parties haven’t talked over the phone with each other or had a face-to-face conversation since separation in about easter 2018, does that tell for or against an equal-time arrangement? [witness] it would be against because you would hope that there would because (sic be) communication occurring already. if it – if it’s four, nearly five years on with no communication, or very limited communication, it doesn’t bode well for that occurring in the future. [the court] well, i should have said assume that there has been some level of text message communication since separation to date but assume that the father usually communicates with the maternal grandmother in relation to issues pertaining to the child. does that change your view? [witness] no.  tness] those types of things can be useful. i still – even with an application, i still believe that there – there has to be a level of respect and cooperation between parents for co-parenting, and shared parental responsibility to be non-detrimental for the child.  unsel] and in terms of that, if those difficulties could be overcome by a better attitude towards each other through the attendance of courses, i think that you recommended, and also in the interim period, continuing to – well, not continuing, but to use an application such as the ones that you’ve described before, that would alleviate your concerns, wouldn’t it, about the last remaining reason relating to parental – yes – sole parental responsibility, is that right? [witness] yes. if they were able – if they were able to successfully complete the course and implement a different relationship with each other, then, yes, that would alleviate that concern.  unsel] do you – are you concerned that there would be an ongoing verbal problems between the two parents? [witness] there could – there – there is possibility of that. i mean, you know, it – it – it has occurred in the past, and – and it – it hasn’t occurred more recently, as you’ve said, but they also aren’t speaking. so i – i do have concerns that the verbal abuse was quite of a high nature in terms of the language used, and even if [x] is not witness to it, he is impacted by the impact on the parent having that behaviour occur against them.  tness] i think if that was the current position and they were able to change the relationship that they have, or – or even maintain what they currently have, and that’s not occurring, then that would alleviate concerns of it occurring in the future. but it doesn’t change a concern, or the impact of that verbal abuse would have had on a person when it occurs to them, because it can be intimidating, it can be experienced as fearful, it can have a negative impact on – on the person that it’s occurring to. so one element of those things, if it – if it’s the only element, does not mean that it’s not a negative impact on the person that it occurs to.  unsel] in terms of that, i want you to assume that the child is capable of sleeping in his own bed when he spends nights at his father’s house? [witness] yes. okay. [counsel] does that in any way change your view about whether or not the child is capable of sleeping in his own bed? [witness] it – it wouldn’t be unusual for him to need different levels of comfort from different parents. children do behave differently with different people. [counsel] that’s, i suppose, part of the ---? [witness] he---- [counsel] ---environmental factors that we talk about? [witness] ---well, he – he may feel more – more able to express all his emotions in one house versus another....i wouldn’t be able to say the reasoning for it, but you – in – on a general basis, you do see children who will have more emotional outbursts with one parent because they know that parent will accept the emotional outburst and give them the comfort that they need in that scenario, for example, or a parent could trigger an emotional outburst more in a different environment. it’s very hard to say. it would depend on the specific child, but they do behave differently in different houses, for different reasons.  tness] it’s more reducing the cognitive demands on a child to anything – any change requires new processing of information, new time spent feeling comfortable in that environment. so we’re trying – you try to reduce the demands that can be controlled, so that child can use their abilities to deal with things that do change that you – you have no control over.  tness] it’s an – an overload of – of sensory input, so the ability to hold in emotions can – or manage your behaviour in a situation can be, like, suppressed. so, yes, they – they cry or kick, or get aggressive as – because they don’t necessarily have the language or the ability to explain why they’re experiencing a difficulty in a change of the situation.  tness] yes. parenting does not cause autism. autism is a – a – we call it a neurodivergency because the brain of an autistic child works differently to a neurotypical brain. the – the two parts of the brain, to put it relatively simply, your frontal lobe and your memory centres of your brain don’t communicate, so you – you have – don’t communicate well, i should say. so they – it is not something that is caused by parenting. it is not something that’s caused by food that the children eat, or – or things like that. it is something that is developmentally – a child is born with it. it doesn’t present until – generally, until children start to speak, or – or they miss milestones. so, generally, you know, you can – a diagnosis or a suspected diagnosis could occur around 18 months, but, generally, it’s three to five that you will get a – a formal diagnosis for a child. [counsel] and i’m right to say, am i not, that early intervention is important in relation to that diagnosis? [witness] very much so. yes. [counsel] and why is that? [witness] because of the astounding amount of change that the brain goes through in the early years of a person’s life. like, your – your neural pathways are much more malleable the earlier that you are in your lifespan. it is much harder to change the older you get.  unsel] so is this the situation, that if his honour is satisfied that there are still problems of communication between the mother and the father, if there is no established method for decision making, if there is a hostility between the parents, that you would persist with a recommendation that there be sole parental responsibility? [witness] yes. ... [counsel] i want to suggest to you that it is in [x]’s best interests, as it is in the best interests of any child, to know that both of his parents have been involved in decision making? [witness] yes. [counsel] and that, in this case, that might be – that benefit to [x] might be best achieved by an arrangement where the father was given information in relation to future decisions, and an opportunity to make contributions to that decision? [witness] yes. [counsel] but that given the co-parenting relationship – or the lack of co-parenting relationship between the father and the mother, and the hostility that has existed between the families in relation to this matter, that the interests of [x] are not best served by an order for shared parental responsibility, do you agree with that? [witness] yes. yes. i do.  unsel] i think you’re aware that there has not been any face-to-face communication between the parents since separation, and there has been no oral communication, that is they appear not to have communicated over the telephone, you understand that? [witness] yes. [counsel] and to the – i want to suggest to you, at least to the extent to which communication depends upon trust, that trust is undermined, and continues to be undermined, by the father in, for example, his reference to the mother in 2020 as “retarded”, his reference to his – to the reasons why he was not prepared to pay arrears of child support, and in his comments in the recent report of [dr k] that the mother was the cause of delay in [x], do you accept that all of those things are likely to undermine trust? [witness] yes. [counsel] if – it would be very optimistic, would it not, to imagine that attendances on court – attendances on courses by these parents would have the impact of creating a cooperative relationship given the lack of evidence of that at any time in the past? [witness] yes. i think i – sorry. yes. i think that there has been no – if there has been no communication between them to date, and they haven’t been able to get to an – a level of some cooperation, then there is reservations that one intervention would make a difference – a significant difference.  unsel] the mother’s response in relation to her own child, in relation to discipline, was to say that [x] does not need discipline. he needs positive reinforcement for good behaviours. do you have any comment to make about that? [witness] it – it is important to provide encouragement and redirection rather than a physical punishment for children. so, yes, that reinforcement for positive behaviour is a useful strategy to have.  unsel] and in terms of consistent routine, the – my understanding is that if – leaving to one side the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, your view is that the co-parenting relationship between [mr bertram] and [ms kade], in this case, is not one that provides you a basis for support for an equal-shared parental responsibility order? [witness] that’s correct. yes. [counsel] and is that also true of any order that would lead to more time for the father than what i will call the extended weekend time that is proposed halfway through next year, that is the arrangement of friday to monday? [witness] yes. [counsel] and do i take it that, in relation to [x], that is made more compelling because of the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder? [witness] that’s correct. [counsel] and why is that? [witness] because of the abilities of – the impact of the – if the relationship is what it has been described in that there’s no cooperation, there’s no communication, then you’re asking a child with a level of challenges, and [x]’s diagnosis of autism is the – the moderate range if we talk on the spectrum. so he has got a – a range of challenges that have already been assessed that they are going to be made more difficult by parents that do not trust or communicate and can navigate changes that will occur throughout going to school, interacting with peers, changes to therapies, changes to homework, things along those lines. [counsel] and am i right to think that given that the – he has been in the care of his mother all his life, that he describes his safe place as being in his mother’s household, that the need – that his own personal security is tied up with his life with his mother in that household? [witness] from – from what i have heard, it would – it has been described as – as his mother’s bed. so if that’s what [x] is saying, then that makes sense. yes.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the child
section 60cc considerations
subsection (2a) – the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.
subsection (2b) – the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence: a primary consideration
section 60cc(3) additional considerations  any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child  the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living  the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents  relating to the above discussed incident at her home in mid-2019 (discussed above under the need to protect primary consideration) when the father had attempted to take the child from her and the police had intervened, (b) relating to her concerns arising out of the father verbally abusing her family gp’s receptionist, including that the father would continue this behaviour, (c) relating to her concerns arising out of the father’s communications with the child’s occupational therapist, ms z, (d) relating to her concerns in respect to the father’s view that there was nothing wrong with the child, that the mother was a pathological liar, and that it was the mother causing issues in the child (see, for example, the father’s statements to the mother in the text messages set out in annexure g to the mother’s affidavit), and, (e) relating to her concerns that the father was not supportive of obtaining any diagnosis or ndis funding for the child.   relating to her concerns arising out of the father verbally abusing her family gp’s receptionist, including that the father would continue this behaviour, (c) relating to her concerns arising out of the father’s communications with the child’s occupational therapist, ms z, (d) relating to her concerns in respect to the father’s view that there was nothing wrong with the child, that the mother was a pathological liar, and that it was the mother causing issues in the child (see, for example, the father’s statements to the mother in the text messages set out in annexure g to the mother’s affidavit), and, (e) relating to her concerns that the father was not supportive of obtaining any diagnosis or ndis funding for the child.   relating to her concerns arising out of the father’s communications with the child’s occupational therapist, ms z, (d) relating to her concerns in respect to the father’s view that there was nothing wrong with the child, that the mother was a pathological liar, and that it was the mother causing issues in the child (see, for example, the father’s statements to the mother in the text messages set out in annexure g to the mother’s affidavit), and, (e) relating to her concerns that the father was not supportive of obtaining any diagnosis or ndis funding for the child.   relating to her concerns in respect to the father’s view that there was nothing wrong with the child, that the mother was a pathological liar, and that it was the mother causing issues in the child (see, for example, the father’s statements to the mother in the text messages set out in annexure g to the mother’s affidavit), and, (e) relating to her concerns that the father was not supportive of obtaining any diagnosis or ndis funding for the child.   relating to her concerns that the father was not supportive of obtaining any diagnosis or ndis funding for the child.  any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter  whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility
equal time
summary  in odd years from 1.00 pm or after school on the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the following day, (b) in even years from 1.00 pm or after school on the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the following day.   in even years from 1.00 pm or after school on the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the following day.   in even years from 1.00 pm or after school on the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the following day, (b) in odd years from 1.00 pm or after school the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the following day.   in odd years from 1.00 pm or after school the child’s birthday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school the following day.
associate: dated: 18 october 2023
dated: 18 october 2023