last updated: 5 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rong & huan (no 4) [2023] fedcfamc2f 1342
orders
until further order, the court orders that:
parenting
parental responsibility
lives with
the return of y to australia   he wants y to be returned to australia, (b) the court has decided that a return to australia is in y’s best interests, an (c) he expects y to return to australia.   the court has decided that a return to australia is in y’s best interests, an (c) he expects y to return to australia.   he expects y to return to australia.   he understands his obligations under these orders, (b) he understands that it has been determined that y’s best interests are that he be returned to australia, (c) he understands he is to take active steps to have y return to australia, and (d) he understands that if he fails to do so he may be subjected to further imprisonment and financial penalty.   he understands that it has been determined that y’s best interests are that he be returned to australia, (c) he understands he is to take active steps to have y return to australia, and (d) he understands that if he fails to do so he may be subjected to further imprisonment and financial penalty.   he understands he is to take active steps to have y return to australia, and (d) he understands that if he fails to do so he may be subjected to further imprisonment and financial penalty.   he understands that if he fails to do so he may be subjected to further imprisonment and financial penalty.
airport watchlist orders
time with the father during school term   for a period of 12 months of the date of these orders on each sunday from 9:00am to 6:00pm, and (b) thereafter and upon the father providing a certificate of his completion of a men’s behaviour change course and a parenting course to the mother, from 6:00pm saturday to 6:00pm sunday in each week.   thereafter and upon the father providing a certificate of his completion of a men’s behaviour change course and a parenting course to the mother, from 6:00pm saturday to 6:00pm sunday in each week.
it is noted that only x will spend time with the father in accordance with order 13(a) initially. the father’s time with y will commence after a period of 6 months after his return to australia. after a period of 12 months from the date of these orders, the father’s time with both children will progress in line with order 13(b).
time with the father during city j school holiday periods   for the first 4 term holidays from the issue of these orders from 9:00am monday to 5:00pm wednesday in the first week of each holiday period, (b) thereafter for the next 4 term holidays from 9:00am monday to 5:00pm thursday in the first week of each holiday period, (c) thereafter for the next 4 term holidays from 9:00am monday to 5:00pm friday in the first week of each holiday period, (d) thereafter as follows: - (i) for half of all term 1, term 2, and term 3 school holiday periods being the first half in all years ending in an even number and the second half in all years ending in an odd number, and (ii) on a week-about basis for the term 4 school holidays with the father to have the first week in all years ending in an even number and the second week in all years ending in an odd number.   thereafter for the next 4 term holidays from 9:00am monday to 5:00pm thursday in the first week of each holiday period, (c) thereafter for the next 4 term holidays from 9:00am monday to 5:00pm friday in the first week of each holiday period, (d) thereafter as follows: - (i) for half of all term 1, term 2, and term 3 school holiday periods being the first half in all years ending in an even number and the second half in all years ending in an odd number, and (ii) on a week-about basis for the term 4 school holidays with the father to have the first week in all years ending in an even number and the second week in all years ending in an odd number.   thereafter for the next 4 term holidays from 9:00am monday to 5:00pm friday in the first week of each holiday period, (d) thereafter as follows: - (i) for half of all term 1, term 2, and term 3 school holiday periods being the first half in all years ending in an even number and the second half in all years ending in an odd number, and (ii) on a week-about basis for the term 4 school holidays with the father to have the first week in all years ending in an even number and the second week in all years ending in an odd number.   thereafter as follows: - (i) for half of all term 1, term 2, and term 3 school holiday periods being the first half in all years ending in an even number and the second half in all years ending in an odd number, and (ii) on a week-about basis for the term 4 school holidays with the father to have the first week in all years ending in an even number and the second week in all years ending in an odd number.   for half of all term 1, term 2, and term 3 school holiday periods being the first half in all years ending in an even number and the second half in all years ending in an odd number, and (ii) on a week-about basis for the term 4 school holidays with the father to have the first week in all years ending in an even number and the second week in all years ending in an odd number.  ) on a week-about basis for the term 4 school holidays with the father to have the first week in all years ending in an even number and the second week in all years ending in an odd number.
time on special occasions   on each child’s birthday, with the parent with whom they would not otherwise be living or spending time from 4:00pm to 7:00pm on the day of the birthday, (b) with the mother from 9:00am to 6:00pm on the sunday which is mother’s day, (c) with the father from 9:00am to 6:00pm on the sunday which is father’s day, (d) with the mother from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an even number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an odd number, and (e) with the father from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an even number.   with the mother from 9:00am to 6:00pm on the sunday which is mother’s day, (c) with the father from 9:00am to 6:00pm on the sunday which is father’s day, (d) with the mother from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an even number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an odd number, and (e) with the father from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an even number.   with the father from 9:00am to 6:00pm on the sunday which is father’s day, (d) with the mother from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an even number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an odd number, and (e) with the father from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an even number.   with the mother from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an even number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an odd number, and (e) with the father from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an even number.   with the father from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an even number.
changeover
communication and authorities   the parent with whom the children are not spending time is to initiate the call, and (b) the parent with whom the children are spending time is to facilitate the call.   the parent with whom the children are spending time is to facilitate the call.
other matters
and it is noted that:
property   each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property including choses-in-action as well as superannuation, pensions, entitlements, long service leave, employment benefits and insurance policies in the possession of or to the entitlement or benefit of such party at the date of these orders, (b) for the purposes of these orders, superannuation entitlements, pensions, insurance policies and entitlements of a like nature relating to or belonging to each party shall remain the property and/or entitlement of that party without splitting and/or flagging, and (c) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify each other against any liability in the sole name of such party, and (d) any joint tenancy other parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   for the purposes of these orders, superannuation entitlements, pensions, insurance policies and entitlements of a like nature relating to or belonging to each party shall remain the property and/or entitlement of that party without splitting and/or flagging, and (c) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify each other against any liability in the sole name of such party, and (d) any joint tenancy other parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify each other against any liability in the sole name of such party, and (d) any joint tenancy other parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy other parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
father’s order sought
parenting [x] subject to order 7, [x] born [in] 2017 live with the mother. [y] that the parties do all things necessary to ensure that the child, [y], born [in] 2014 live with the paternal grandparents [ms o] and [mr s] in the city of [city t], in the country of [country n], until [y] completes his primary school education in [country n] or for such other period of time as agreed between the parties in writing. notation: it is anticipated that [y] will complete his primary school education in 2026. the parties do all things necessary and sign all documents including visa applications and passport applications to permit [y] to stay in [country n] with the paternal grandparents in accordance with order 2. that within 30 days of [y] completing his primary school education or such other time as agreed between the parties, the parties do all things necessary and sign all documents and pay all monies equally to secure the return of [y] to australia. that upon [y] return to australia, he live with each parent week-and-week about and spend time with each parent during school holiday periods and on specified days as applies to [x] in accordance with these orders. parental responsibility that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children. time spent [x] that the father spend time with [x] from the commencement of this order as follows: (a) for a period of 4 weeks from 9:00am till 4:00pm each sunday. (b) for a further period of 3 months: (i) in week one, from 10:00am saturday until 5:00pm sunday. (ii) in week two, from after school on the wednesday until the commencement of school on the following thursday. (c) for a further period of 3 months: (i) in week one, from after school friday until the commencement of school on monday. (ii) in week two, from after school wednesday until the commencement of school on friday. (d) thereafter, week-and-week about with each parent with handover occurring after school on the friday of each week. unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties and commencing at the end of the third school term in 2023: (a) for the term school holiday periods occurring at the end of the first, second and third school terms, for the first week of school holidays in even numbered years and the second week in odd numbered years. (b) for the term school holiday period occurring at the conclusion of the fourth school term (christmas holiday period), with each parent on a week-and-week about basis. for the purpose of the preceding order, the school holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of the last day of school and conclude on the sunday immediately prior to the resumption of the following school term. unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing and notwithstanding any other order: (a) [x] will spend time with the father from the commencement of this order: (i) on [x]’s birthday, if a school day, between 4:00pm and 7:00pm and on a non-school day for a minimum of 4 hours or as agreed between the parties and in the absence of an agreement from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (ii) on mother’s day with the mother from 9:00am to 6:00pm if the children are not otherwise living with the mother, (iii) on father’s day with the father from 9:00am to 6:00pm if the children are not otherwise living with the father, (iv) with the mother from 4:00pm on 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) in odd numbered years and from 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in even numbered years. (v) with the father from 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in odd numbered years and from 4:00pm 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) in even numbered years. both parents are at liberty to attend school events, extra-circular activities, parent teacher interviews, concerts or any other event that parents are invited and permitted to attend. changeovers for any changeover that does not occur at school on a school day, or as agreed between the parents or failing agreement at [q store, suburb c]. communication & information for the purposes of discussing matters relevant to the children, the parties shall communicate using the our family wizard or other parenting application as agreed. that the parties can communicate by text message or telephone in the event of an emergency or other urgent matter. that each parent shall advise the other as soon as practicable by telephone of any significant injury or illness a child/children may suffer whilst in their care. that each parent shall provide such authorities as are necessary to a school or schools the children may attend to ensure that the other parent receives all school reports, school notices, all photographs and notification of school events that a parent may attend. that each parent shall provide such authorities as are necessary to ensure that the other parent may communicate with any treating medical practitioners of a child or the children. each parent shall advise the other of any change in the telephone numbers and email addresses on which they may be contacted or a child’s place of residence within 48 hours of such change occurring. that the parties not denigrate or say unkind things about the other parent or the other parent’s family within the presence or hearing of a child or children or cause any other person to do so. while [y] continues to reside in [country n] – [y] travel to australia unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, the father will cause [y] to spend a period of no less than 4 weeks in each calendar year in australia at such time as agreed between the parties. [y] shall spend his time in australia with the mother for the first week and with the father the second week and alternating weekly thereafter. the father shall book and pay for a return airfare for [y] to travel between australia and [country n] for at least one occasion each year. that the father shall do all things necessary to facilitate the mother and [x] visiting [y] in [country n] for at least 2 weeks in each calendar year at such time as agreed between the mother and the father, with the father to pay for the mother’s and [x]’s return airfares between australia and [country n]. property retained property that unless otherwise specified by these or any other orders the father is, as against the other party, solely entitled to all other property that may be in his or her respective name, possession or control including, though not limited to the following: a) real property at [u street, suburb d] in [city j], b) real property at [p street, suburb w], in the [city j], c) any monies standing in his credit in any financial institution or moneys held on her behalf by any person, d) motor vehicles, e) company shares, f) household contents and personal chattels, g) all furniture and personal effects presently in his possession, h) his superannuation entitlements. that unless otherwise specified by these or any other orders the mother is, as against the other party solely entitled to all other property that may be in their respective names, possession or control including, though not limited to: that expect otherwise provided for, the mother shall retain: a) any real estate, b) any monies standing in her credit and in any financial institution, c) motor vehicles d) company shares e) her business and all moneys generated by this business. f) household contends and personal chattels: g) all furniture and personal effects presently in her possession, h) her superannuation entitlements. any other assets, property and financial resources held in her individual name, possession and control. liabilities that unless specified in any other orders, each party is solely responsible for the repayment of any debt or liabilities that may be their respective sole name, in joint names with a third party or that might otherwise encumber any property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. other that unless specified in any other orders, the father and mother agree to irrevocably indemnify each other in relation to any debts, liabilities, taxes or otherwise that may have been in existence at the time of separation in their own names whether known or unknown and in the future. each party shall do all acts and things reasonably required by the other including the signing or execution of all necessary documents to give effect to the provisions of these orders within 7 days of being requested to do so. that in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument, the registrar of the court be appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975, to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all acts and things to give validity to the operation to the deed or instrument.   for a period of 4 weeks from 9:00am till 4:00pm each sunday. (b) for a further period of 3 months: (i) in week one, from 10:00am saturday until 5:00pm sunday. (ii) in week two, from after school on the wednesday until the commencement of school on the following thursday. (c) for a further period of 3 months: (i) in week one, from after school friday until the commencement of school on monday. (ii) in week two, from after school wednesday until the commencement of school on friday. (d) thereafter, week-and-week about with each parent with handover occurring after school on the friday of each week.   for a further period of 3 months: (i) in week one, from 10:00am saturday until 5:00pm sunday. (ii) in week two, from after school on the wednesday until the commencement of school on the following thursday. (c) for a further period of 3 months: (i) in week one, from after school friday until the commencement of school on monday. (ii) in week two, from after school wednesday until the commencement of school on friday. (d) thereafter, week-and-week about with each parent with handover occurring after school on the friday of each week.   in week one, from 10:00am saturday until 5:00pm sunday. (ii) in week two, from after school on the wednesday until the commencement of school on the following thursday.  ) in week two, from after school on the wednesday until the commencement of school on the following thursday.   for a further period of 3 months: (i) in week one, from after school friday until the commencement of school on monday. (ii) in week two, from after school wednesday until the commencement of school on friday. (d) thereafter, week-and-week about with each parent with handover occurring after school on the friday of each week.   in week one, from after school friday until the commencement of school on monday. (ii) in week two, from after school wednesday until the commencement of school on friday.  ) in week two, from after school wednesday until the commencement of school on friday.   thereafter, week-and-week about with each parent with handover occurring after school on the friday of each week.   for the term school holiday periods occurring at the end of the first, second and third school terms, for the first week of school holidays in even numbered years and the second week in odd numbered years. (b) for the term school holiday period occurring at the conclusion of the fourth school term (christmas holiday period), with each parent on a week-and-week about basis.   for the term school holiday period occurring at the conclusion of the fourth school term (christmas holiday period), with each parent on a week-and-week about basis.   [x] will spend time with the father from the commencement of this order: (i) on [x]’s birthday, if a school day, between 4:00pm and 7:00pm and on a non-school day for a minimum of 4 hours or as agreed between the parties and in the absence of an agreement from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (ii) on mother’s day with the mother from 9:00am to 6:00pm if the children are not otherwise living with the mother, (iii) on father’s day with the father from 9:00am to 6:00pm if the children are not otherwise living with the father, (iv) with the mother from 4:00pm on 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) in odd numbered years and from 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in even numbered years. (v) with the father from 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in odd numbered years and from 4:00pm 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) in even numbered years.   on [x]’s birthday, if a school day, between 4:00pm and 7:00pm and on a non-school day for a minimum of 4 hours or as agreed between the parties and in the absence of an agreement from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (ii) on mother’s day with the mother from 9:00am to 6:00pm if the children are not otherwise living with the mother, (iii) on father’s day with the father from 9:00am to 6:00pm if the children are not otherwise living with the father, (iv) with the mother from 4:00pm on 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) in odd numbered years and from 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in even numbered years. (v) with the father from 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in odd numbered years and from 4:00pm 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) in even numbered years.  ) on mother’s day with the mother from 9:00am to 6:00pm if the children are not otherwise living with the mother, (iii) on father’s day with the father from 9:00am to 6:00pm if the children are not otherwise living with the father, (iv) with the mother from 4:00pm on 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) in odd numbered years and from 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in even numbered years. (v) with the father from 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in odd numbered years and from 4:00pm 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) in even numbered years.  i) on father’s day with the father from 9:00am to 6:00pm if the children are not otherwise living with the father, (iv) with the mother from 4:00pm on 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) in odd numbered years and from 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in even numbered years. (v) with the father from 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in odd numbered years and from 4:00pm 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) in even numbered years.  ) with the mother from 4:00pm on 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) in odd numbered years and from 2:00pm 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in even numbered years. (v) with the father from 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in odd numbered years and from 4:00pm 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) in even numbered years.   with the father from 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) until 10:00am on 26 december (boxing day) in odd numbered years and from 4:00pm 24 december (christmas eve) until 2:00pm on 25 december (christmas day) in even numbered years.
a) real property at [u street, suburb d] in [city j], b) real property at [p street, suburb w], in the [city j], c) any monies standing in his credit in any financial institution or moneys held on her behalf by any person, d) motor vehicles, e) company shares, f) household contents and personal chattels, g) all furniture and personal effects presently in his possession, h) his superannuation entitlements.
b) real property at [p street, suburb w], in the [city j], c) any monies standing in his credit in any financial institution or moneys held on her behalf by any person, d) motor vehicles, e) company shares, f) household contents and personal chattels, g) all furniture and personal effects presently in his possession, h) his superannuation entitlements.
c) any monies standing in his credit in any financial institution or moneys held on her behalf by any person, d) motor vehicles, e) company shares, f) household contents and personal chattels, g) all furniture and personal effects presently in his possession, h) his superannuation entitlements.
d) motor vehicles, e) company shares, f) household contents and personal chattels, g) all furniture and personal effects presently in his possession, h) his superannuation entitlements.
e) company shares, f) household contents and personal chattels, g) all furniture and personal effects presently in his possession, h) his superannuation entitlements.
f) household contents and personal chattels, g) all furniture and personal effects presently in his possession, h) his superannuation entitlements.
g) all furniture and personal effects presently in his possession, h) his superannuation entitlements.
h) his superannuation entitlements.
a) any real estate, b) any monies standing in her credit and in any financial institution, c) motor vehicles d) company shares e) her business and all moneys generated by this business. f) household contends and personal chattels: g) all furniture and personal effects presently in her possession, h) her superannuation entitlements.
b) any monies standing in her credit and in any financial institution, c) motor vehicles d) company shares e) her business and all moneys generated by this business. f) household contends and personal chattels: g) all furniture and personal effects presently in her possession, h) her superannuation entitlements.
c) motor vehicles d) company shares e) her business and all moneys generated by this business. f) household contends and personal chattels: g) all furniture and personal effects presently in her possession, h) her superannuation entitlements.
d) company shares e) her business and all moneys generated by this business. f) household contends and personal chattels: g) all furniture and personal effects presently in her possession, h) her superannuation entitlements.
e) her business and all moneys generated by this business. f) household contends and personal chattels: g) all furniture and personal effects presently in her possession, h) her superannuation entitlements.
f) household contends and personal chattels: g) all furniture and personal effects presently in her possession, h) her superannuation entitlements.
g) all furniture and personal effects presently in her possession, h) her superannuation entitlements.
h) her superannuation entitlements.
mother’s orders sought
children that all previous orders in relation to the children [x] born [in] 2017 and [y] born [in] 2014 (“the children”) be discharged. parental responsibility that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children. lives with that the children live with the mother. the return of [y] to australia that within 14 days of the date of these orders, the father shall sign all documents and do all things necessary to effect the return of the child [y] to the commonwealth of australia by a time no later than six weeks from the date of these orders. within 72 hours of the date of these orders, the father is to advise the mother’s solicitor in writing of the arrangements that have been put in place to ensure the return of [y] to australia. upon the return of the child [y] to the commonwealth of australia he shall forthwith be provided to the mother to live with the mother. any costs referable to the return of [y] to australia pursuant to order 4 shall be met by the father. that the father is to do all things necessary to communicate to the child [y] and his mother [ms o], including by way of writing, that: he wants [y] to be returned to australia, the court has decided that a return to australia is in [y]’s best interests, an he expects [y] to return to australia. that the father shall forthwith file a written undertaking with the court outlining that: he understands his obligations under these orders, he understands that it has been determined that [y]’s best interests are that he be returned to australia, he understands he is to take active steps to have [y] return to australia, and he understands that if he fails to do so he may be subjected to further imprisonment and financial penalty. airport watchlist orders that forthwith upon the return of [y] to the commonwealth of australia, each party, their servants and agents be restrained from removing or attempting to remove or causing or committing the removal of the child [y] born [in] 2014, from the commonwealth of australia and it is requested that the australian federal police give effect to this order by placing the name of the child on the airport watch list in force at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia and maintain the child’s name on the watch list until the court orders its removal. that each party, their servants and agents be restrained from removing or attempting to remove or causing or committing the removal of the child [x] born [in] 2017, from the commonwealth of australia and it is requested that the australian federal police give effect to this order by placing the name of the child on the airport watch list in force at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia and maintain the child’s name on the watch list until the court orders its removal. time with the father during school term that the children will spend time with the father during [city j] gazetted school term time as agreed between the parties but failing agreement as follows: - for a period of 12 months of the date of these orders on each sunday from 9:00am to 6:00pm, and thereafter and upon the father providing a certificate of his completion of a men’s behaviour change course and a parenting course to the mother, from 6:00pm saturday to 6:00pm sunday in each week. time with the father during [city j] school holiday periods that the children will spend time with the father during [city j] gazetted school term time as agreed between the parties but failing agreement as follows: - for the first 4 term holidays from the issue of these orders from 9:00am monday to 5:00pm wednesday in the first week of each holiday period, thereafter for the next 4 term holidays from 9:00am monday to 5:00pm thursday in the first week of each holiday period, thereafter for the next 4 term holidays from 9:00am monday to 5:00pm friday in the first week of each holiday period, thereafter as follows: - for half of all term 1, term 2, and term 3 school holiday periods being the first half in all years ending in an even number and the second half in all years ending in an odd number, and on a week-about basis for the term 4 school holidays with the father to have the first week in all years ending in an even number and the second week in all years ending in an odd number. that for the purposes of these orders, school holidays are deemed to commence at 3:00pm on the last day the children are to attend school and to conclude at 3:00pm on the saturday prior to the first day upon which the children are to return to school. half the school holiday period is to be determined by dividing the number of nights equally and in the event that there is an uneven number of nights the father is to have the extra night in even numbered years and not in other years. changeover shall occur at 3:00pm at the relevant mid-point. time on special occasions that notwithstanding anything else in these orders the children shall spend time between the parties as follows: on each child’s birthday, with the parent with whom they would not otherwise be living or spending time from 4:00pm to 7:00pm on the day of the birthday, with the mother from 9:00am to 6:00pm on the sunday which is mother’s day, with the father from 9:00am to 6:00pm on the sunday which is father’s day, with the mother from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an even number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an odd number, and with the father from 9:00am to 1:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number and from 1:00pm christmas day to 8:00pm christmas day in years ending in an even number. changeover that for the purpose of these orders, changeovers are to occur as agreed between the parties but failing agreement at [q store, b street, suburb c], communication and authorities that the parent with whom the children are not spending time is at liberty to communicate with the children by telephone or video call on saturdays between 5:00pm and 5:30pm. that the arrangement for telephone or video calls pursuant to order 17 is as follows: the parent with whom the children are not spending time is to initiate the call, and the parent with whom the children are spending time is to facilitate the call. that except in cases of emergency concerning the medical health of the children or either of them the parents will communicate with each other in relation to issues concerning the child’s care, welfare, and development by use of the our family wizard parenting application. that in the case of a medical emergency for the children or either of them the parents will communicate with each other in relation to issues concerning the child’s care, welfare, and development by text message. that this order hereby authorises any school or educational facility attended by the children or either of them to provide information, notices, reports and other information and documents concerning the child/ren to each parent. that each parent shall authorise any medical practitioner who provides treatment or diagnosis to the children or either of them to speak to the other parent and shall provide the other parent with the name and contact details of any treating medical practitioner within 24hrs of any child’s attendances upon a medical practitioner for treatment or diagnosis and inform each other of any medication or treatment recommended no later than 2 hours of any such appointment. that in the event of a medical emergency, serious health issue or injury concerning the children or either of them the parent with whom the children are spending time shall advise the other parent as soon as practicable and in any event within 2 hours of such medical emergency, serious health issue, or injury. that both parents are at liberty to attend school events and any other such extra-curricular events to which parents are invited or permitted to attend, including but not limited to an assembly in which the child/ren is receiving an award, presentation nights, competitions, and performances. that each parent shall do all things to ensure that the children attend their respective extra-curricular activities whilst they are in their care. other matters that each parent is restrained from denigrating the other parent or members of the parents’ family in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them and shall do all things necessary to ensure that no other person does so. that in the event either parent has a change to their contact details (mobile number) they shall provide those updated contact details to the other parent within 72 hours of that change occurring. that without admissions each party is restrained from physically disciplining the children or either of them. and it is noted that: the mother has arranged english tutoring and [f centre] attendances for [y] to assist his transition back to australia, and the mother has arranged assistance at [f centre] for [x] concerning [y]’s transition to australia. property within 60 days of these orders the husband, at his election, must either: do all things necessary to transfer to the wife the [suburb d] property section [...] block [...] on deposited plan [...] unencumbered in any way or pay to the wife the sum of $850,000 into a trust account nominated by mark hanna lawyers on behalf of the wife. the husband must indicate in writing within 30 days of these orders which of the options in order 29 he intends to elect. if the husband elects to transfer the [suburb d] property to the wife, the wife will do all things and sign all documents necessary forthwith upon being provided with them to facilitate the transfer. the parties have liberty to seek to relist this matter in relation to the operation of orders 29, 30 and 31. the husband will indemnify the wife and keep her indemnified against any liability he owes or purports to own to his parents or either of them. that unless otherwise specified in these orders and except for the purposes of enforcing payment of any money due under these or subsequent orders: a) each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property including choses-in-action as well as superannuation, pensions, entitlements, long service leave, employment benefits and insurance policies in the possession of or to the entitlement or benefit of such party at the date of these orders, b) for the purposes of these orders, superannuation entitlements, pensions, insurance policies and entitlements of a like nature relating to or belonging to each party shall remain the property and/or entitlement of that party without splitting and/or flagging, c) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify each other against any liability in the sole name of such party, d) any joint tenancy other parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed,
a) each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property including choses-in-action as well as superannuation, pensions, entitlements, long service leave, employment benefits and insurance policies in the possession of or to the entitlement or benefit of such party at the date of these orders, b) for the purposes of these orders, superannuation entitlements, pensions, insurance policies and entitlements of a like nature relating to or belonging to each party shall remain the property and/or entitlement of that party without splitting and/or flagging, c) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify each other against any liability in the sole name of such party, d) any joint tenancy other parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed,
b) for the purposes of these orders, superannuation entitlements, pensions, insurance policies and entitlements of a like nature relating to or belonging to each party shall remain the property and/or entitlement of that party without splitting and/or flagging, c) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify each other against any liability in the sole name of such party, d) any joint tenancy other parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed,
c) each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify each other against any liability in the sole name of such party, d) any joint tenancy other parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed,
d) any joint tenancy other parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed,
independent children’s lawyers orders sought
minute of order sought by the independent children’s lawyer (icl) it is ordered that: - lives with the children [y] born [in] 2014 and [x] born [in] 2017, (hereafter referred to as the children), live with the mother. parental responsibility the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children. the mother must communicate in writing to the father any long-term decisions she makes for the children within 48 hours of making those decisions. time with the children communicate and spend time with the extended paternal family as agreed between those persons and the mother in writing. unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, the children shall spend time with their father commencing in february 2023, if the father is in no longer in the [z correctional centre] as follows: - for a period of six (6) months each sunday for no less than six hours as times as agreed between the parents in writing, but failing agreement from 10:00am - 4:00pm. thereafter for a period of 6 months: in week one 10:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday. in week two from the end of school wednesday to the commencement of school thursday. thereafter: in week one from after school friday to 5:00pm sunday. in week two from the end of school wednesday to the commencement of school friday. unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parents during school holidays commencing at the end of the term 2 school holidays in 2024 as follows: in the short school holidays for the first week of school holidays in even numbered years or years ending in zero and the second week in odd numbered years. in the long school holidays on a week about basis. for the purpose of order 6, the school holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of the last day of school and to conclude on the saturday immediately prior to the children returning to school. in the event that the number of nights is an uneven numbered the father will have the extra night in odd years and the mother in even years. both parents are at liberty to attend school events, extra curricular activities, parent teacher interviews, concerts or any other event that parents are invited and permitted to attend.. special occasions unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties and notwithstanding anything ese in these orders, the children shall spend time between their parents as follows: - on each child’s birthday with the parent they are not usually with, if a school day between 4pm and 7pm, if it is a non school day for a minimum of four hours a agreed, failing agreement from 10am to 2pm. from 9am to 6pm with the mother on mother’s day. from 9am to 6pm with the father on father’s day. with the mother from 9am to 1pm on christmas day in odd numbered years and from 1pm to 8pm in even numbered years or years ending in zero. with the father from 1pm to 8pm on christmas day in odd numbered years and from 9am to 1pm in even numbered years or years sending in zero. changeovers for any changeovers that cannot occur at school, they will occur as agreed between the parties but failing agreement at [q store suburb c]. return of y the father does all things necessary and sign all documents necessary to effect the return of [y] to the commonwealth of australia by no later than 23 december 2022. within 14 days from the date of this order, the father is purchase a one way airfare ticket for [y] to effect [y]’s return to the commonwealth of australia and provide the mother and/or her solicitor a copy of the airfare ticket. any costs associated to effect the return of [y] to the commonwealth of australia be solely met by the father. immediately upon [y] returning to australia he shall forthwith go into the mother’s care and live with the mother. immediately upon [y] returning to australia the mother shall be provided and keep in her sole possession any passport issued to [y] or [x] from the commonwealth of australia, or [country n]. the father shall forthwith file a written undertaking to the court that: - a) he understands his obligations under these orders, b) he understands the court has determined it is in [y]’s best interests to be returned to the commonwealth of australia, c) he understands [y] is to live with his mother, d) he understands he is to take active steps to have [y] returned to australia, and e) he understands that if he fails to comply with these orders, he may be subjected to further imprisonment, a good behaviour order and/or financial penalty. airport watch list that forthwith upon the return of [y] born [in] 2014 to the commonwealth of australia, each party, their servants and agent be hereby restrained from removing or attempting to remove or causing or permitting the removal of the child [y] from the commonwealth of australia and it is requested that the australian federal police give effect to this order by placing the name of the child on the airport watch list in force at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia and maintain the name of the child’s name on the watch list until the court orders its removal. each party, their servants and agent be hereby restrained from removing or attempting to remove or causing or permitting the removal of the child [x] born [in] 2017 from the commonwealth of australia and it is requested that the australian federal police give effect to this order by placing the name of the child on the airport watch list in force at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia and maintain the name of the child’s name on the watch list until the court orders its removal. communication and authorities the children are ale to communicate with the parent that they are not with each saturday between 5pm and 5.30pm, or at any other time as requested by the child. the parents shall do all things necessary to facilitate the making and receiving of the call. the parent with whom the child is spending time shall initiate the call. the parents shall communicate using the our family wizard or any other parenting application as agreed, unless there is a medical emergency. in the case of medical emergency the parents shall communicate by telephone or text message, providing sufficient information about the medical emergency including injuries, hospital admission and details of relevant hospital or medical facility the child is taken to. this order authorises any school, educational facility or extra curricular body to provide information to both parents including but not limited to notices, schedules, timetables, reports, newsletters, school photo forms or any other information that would usually be provided to a parent. this order authorises any medical practitioners, medical facility or health care provider who provides services to the children to provide information about the children to either parent as deemed appropriate by that medical practitioner, facility or health care provider. upon the father commencing overnight time the parents will exchange information about the children while in their care, such as routines, health, appointments etc, the purpose of such communication is to ensure that both parents can address any issues in their time and ensure attendance at appointments and extracurricular activities. other matters both parents are hereby restrained by injunction from denigrating the other parent, members of the other parents family in the presence or hearing of the children and are not to discuss or involve the children in any disagreements between the parents. the parents shall keep each other informed of any changes to their contact details and advise the other parent of any change within 72 hours of the change. if either parent is unable to care for the children for a period of more than 48 hours then the other parent should be provided first option to care. both parents complete a parenting after separation course within 6 months from the date of this order being made. pursuant to section 11 of the australian passport act 2005 (cth), the mother has sole parental responsibility for the children sufficient to apply for a passport on behalf of the children without the father’s signature and/or consent and that the australian passports office is requested to provide a passport for the children upon the mother lodging the application for the purpose of this order the children are [y] born [in] 2014 and [x] born [in] 2017. the costs of the independent children’s lawyer be paid equally by the parents, or as otherwise ordered by the court
a) he understands his obligations under these orders, b) he understands the court has determined it is in [y]’s best interests to be returned to the commonwealth of australia, c) he understands [y] is to live with his mother, d) he understands he is to take active steps to have [y] returned to australia, and e) he understands that if he fails to comply with these orders, he may be subjected to further imprisonment, a good behaviour order and/or financial penalty.
b) he understands the court has determined it is in [y]’s best interests to be returned to the commonwealth of australia, c) he understands [y] is to live with his mother, d) he understands he is to take active steps to have [y] returned to australia, and e) he understands that if he fails to comply with these orders, he may be subjected to further imprisonment, a good behaviour order and/or financial penalty.
c) he understands [y] is to live with his mother, d) he understands he is to take active steps to have [y] returned to australia, and e) he understands that if he fails to comply with these orders, he may be subjected to further imprisonment, a good behaviour order and/or financial penalty.
d) he understands he is to take active steps to have [y] returned to australia, and e) he understands that if he fails to comply with these orders, he may be subjected to further imprisonment, a good behaviour order and/or financial penalty.
e) he understands that if he fails to comply with these orders, he may be subjected to further imprisonment, a good behaviour order and/or financial penalty.
father’s oral evidence
oral evidence of mr ff
mother’s oral evidence
the expert report of dr g
... there is effectively no co-parenting relationship between the parties. [mr rong] and [ms huan] do not communicate to any regular degree. they do not conjointly attend events together for the children ([x]). they do not engage in any form of considered, immersive conversation in relation to decisions affecting the children. in the main, any correspondence pertaining to [y] and [x] occurs by the parties reflecting legal representatives. ... the circumstances in which [y] came to live in [country n] with the paternal grandparents, and remain there since [late] 2016, is the source of some dispute between the parties. [mr rong] maintains that [y] went to live with the paternal grandparents because the responded mother was struggling after the birth of their second child, and initially agreed to the child relocating. he has deposed out, “my parents travelled to australia to celebrate [y]'s third birthday. when they saw [y], they told me ‘he looks unhealthy and has put on weight. he spends too much time on [tv]. your house is also messy. you need to clean it’. i worked long hours and found little time to clean the home. [ms huan] provided little assistance. my parents then began to clean up the home and maintain the garden. my mother then asked [ms huan] and i, ‘can [y] stay with us in [country n]? i am worried he is not being properly looked after. he can study at a good school, too’. [ms huan] said, ‘no, this is my son, why does he have to go back to [country n]? why can't he study here?’ my mother replied, ‘you do not look after [y] well, and you are only concerned about money’. [ms huan] and i agreed for [y] to live with my parents in [country n] to help with his early education” ([mr rong] affidavit, 12/05/21). alternately, [ms huan] has deposed, “[y] is currently in [country n] with [mr rong]'s parents. i say that this was arranged by [mr rong] and his parents without my knowledge and i did not agree with it. this has been a major point of contention in my relationship with [mr rong] ...in 2016, i discovered i was pregnant with our second son. this was unplanned. it made me nervous as there would be no one to look after [y] while i was in the late stages of pregnancy . i was worried i would not be able to pass the probation at the [jj company] if i were trying to look after [y] while dealing with late stage pregnancy...[in] 2016, my mother in law ([mr rong]'s mother, [ms o]) suggested to me to send [y] back to [country n] for his education. [mr rong] thought this was a great idea. i was horrified at the idea that [y] would leave the family and live in [country n]. i said i would never agree to such an idea and was not interested...a few weeks later, [ms o], [mr rong] and i discussed my pregnancy and my concerns about the probation. [ms o] suggested... ‘ [y] could come to [country n] for a short period, until you have given birth to your new child ([x]) and return to work. then i could send him back to you ’...i realised her offer meant that i would be able to concentrate on work full time get through probation and not have to worry about making the money for the day-to-day fees for [y] for that period and ensure the baby and [y] were both safe . i agreed to [ms o] and [mr rong]’s proposal that [y] go short-term to [country n] to stay with his grandparents until i return to work after having my second child” ([ms huan] affidavit, 10/06/21). [y] has remained substantively in [country n] since that time. father argues that [y] is thriving living with the paternal grandparents, he also attends boarding school during the week days. [ms huan] has argued that she has made innumerable attempts to negotiate [y]'s return to australia to live with his parents and his younger brother, rather than be separated from them and attend school in another country. she has described that in 2017, she again raised the issue of [y] returning to australia, and that it was, “then that he revealed the plan all along was to keep [y] in [country n] till he was 18”([ms huan] affidavit, 10/06/21). she has further deposed that, “ i was traumatised. i felt powerless to stop it. [mr rong] and his family seemed to have all the power and [mr rong] was more than happy to do what they wanted. the only way i could solve this was to work out a way to convince them to bring [y] back to australia. i felt powerless. i must have argued 100 times with [mr rong] about returning [y] to australia since he left for [country n]. nevertheless, i was so confused as i was scared if i persisted [mr rong] would divorce me, throw me out of the house again like he did in 2015 or even take [x] away from me and send him to [country n]” ([ms huan] affidavit, 10/06/21). aside from the allegations of aggressive behaviour, and the dispute regarding [y] living in [country n], both parents have expressed other concerns. [mr rong] has referred to the respondent mother's ability to care for the children, claiming that at one point, the house became unkempt, [y] was unattended too by his mother, and that there were issues with the children's diet. he has further argued that, since separation, [ms huan] has made unilateral decisions relating to [x], and prevented him from playing a significant role in the younger child's life. [ms huan] herself has characterised the applicant father as disinterested and uninvolved in the children's care throughout the course of their young lives. she has described him as only available when the children were sick, and lacking in basic care competencies. moreover, she has characterised the entire paternal family as coercive, financially bullying, and overbearing. ... 14. the areas that the current assessment will address include: the final living arrangements for the two children of the marriage, [y] (7) and [x] (5), including the amount and configuration of their time in each household, the relationship between the children and each of their parents, including factors such as care history and prior involvement, the co-parenting relationship and capacity of the parties to effectively collaborate in relation to their children, the question of [y] returning to australia, the views expressed by the children and the weight these may reasonably attract, any risk arising from mutual allegations of aggressive behaviour made by each party, concerns expressed by the father regarding [ms huan] struggling to cope with the children after [x] was born, as well as claims she unreasonably prevented him from playing a role in the life of [x] after separation, concerns expressed by the mother about [mr rong] showing a lack of investment and involvement with the children throughout their lives, concerns about his basic parenting competencies with the boys, and allegations that she has been coerced and manipulated by the father and his family, including in relation to [y] moving to [country n] and remaining there since late-2016, interview data [mr rong] there was nothing clinically remarkable about [mr rong]’s presentation throughout the assessment. his mood, affect, and form-of-thought were within normal limits. he spoke with a straightforward and fairly simple (albeit competent) language code. although his narrative was largely internally consistent, there were instances where he appeared to deny or minimise different allegations put to him. he also impressed with a cursory knowledge of the children, including their interests, strengths, personality characteristics, routine, and activities. ... throughout the assessment, [mr rong] was quick to criticise the responded mother. even when asked questions about his own role with the children, he often pivoted to a description of how [ms huan] struggled to care for the boys. at one point he described, “ she didn't look after [y] very well. all i can see is that [y] is very skinny, didn't eat well, always (talking) in [language n]”, and, “she doesn't know how to look after the baby. she doesn't know how to cook. she never thought about someone else”. [mr rong] also complained best he responded mother had been unreasonably restrictive with his time with the children , especially following their separation. he remarked, “ she stopped me from having a relationship with [x]... after she's done the knife thing, when i would come home i noticed the light would be on when i came home, everyone was in bed, she would not allow [x] to spend time with me... she tried to stop me to have a relationship with [x]. i woke up and [x] came into the room to get me. he wanted to play the block (building) games... [x’s] mum was saying [x] come to me... she came to the room where we played the block game. she came to the room and took him away. [x] was saying no i want dad... what can i do? how can she do this to a child”. [mr rong] remained of the view that [y] should continue to live in [country n] . he characterised his son as settled and well adjusted , and was receiving a superior level of education. he acknowledged that the idea had originally come from his own mother, and that “we had a long discussion about this ”. he continued, “ at that moment, [y] was not very healthy ... in [country n] there is a lot of variety of food ... school is a long term decision...if she ([ms huan] ) disagrees, the whole thing won't happen. nobody give her pressure. and from the other side, it's good for the child. and their background is [language n] background... not learn (there) forever, just finished year 6”. he summarised, “of course he ([y]) wants to keep studying, keep playing [his musical instrument]. he loves his life now. he's lived in [country n] since after he turned 2 (years). he's lived there the last 5 years. he has friends in [country n]”. in terms of [x], [mr rong] expressed the desire to spend more time with his youngest son, explaining, “i want more time with him, of course. he says we never have enough time, 3 hours is not enough... if i was going to see him every day, that's possible... probably another few hours, building up, then one day overnight, then two days overnight”. [ms huan] [ms huan] impressed as pleasant, polite, and well dressed. although she was initially nervous at the beginning of the consultation, she became more settled as the conversation progressed. at times she was tearful, especially when discussing the impact of the conflict in the marriage on the children, and her distress at [y] living in [country n]. there was nothing otherwise anomalous about her mood, mental state, or reasoning process. indeed, she presented as sincere, the narrative was cogent, internally consistent, and persuasive, and she presented as genuine in her concerns about the children in the care of their father. ... when asked about the decision for [y] to move to [country n], [ms huan] explained that the proposal had only ever been put to her as a temporary solution to help in the months following [x] being born. she said that she had constantly implored [mr rong] and his family to have [x] come home. she said the decision had come after [mr rong] and his mother coercing her, “they keep saying i'm an unfit mother. i'm not a perfect mother that will raise my children as good as [mr rong]’s mum. i don't know why they have this judgement...because i'm from my rural area maybe, i'm not from a big city. i asked [mr rong]’s mother , why can't you let me raise my own children. she told me she raised her own kids, [mr rong] and [mr bb], and they're not good enough, and people laugh. so she needs to use [y], to prove to other people, especially her siblings, she can raise children”. she said also that whenever she had raised her desire for [y] to return to australia, “they've used the cut off method . whenever the court decision wasn't good for them, they cut off my connection” –effectively that child would become unavailable to talk to her on the phone. ... [ms o] [ms o] was consulted with the assistance of an interpreter, via video-link. she impressed with an assertive demeanour. she appeared somewhat inconvenienced by the process. she often dominated the conversation, at times, launching into tangential tirades or mission statements, resulting in the interpreter struggling to keep pace. there was a palpable lack of understanding of the complexity of the situation, including the need for [y] to have a relationship with both of his parents. [ms o] maintained that the respondent mother had always agreed to [y] moving to [country n]. she explained, “in 2016, when [y]'s parents brought him over at that time, [y]'s mum was pregnant...they said to me, [y] will be staying with us all the way until he finishes primary school... he will need a long-term visa ... the parents had to prepare materials to lodge a long-term visa application for [y] ...the visa application would require both of their signatures”. under repeated questioning, [ms o] admitted that the respondent mother had made an overture towards her for [y] to return to australia, describing simply that, “yes she did, but each time she brought it up, this issue, it was always when she was in a state of upset or throwing a tantrum. but once she calmed down, she did not bring up the issue again...actually, she only mentioned the change of their mind once”. she denied that she had ever attempted to influence [y] in his relationship with his mother, or restrict telephone access. she commented, “we have never discussed with the children, anything about the case... all she has been saying is lies... it's impossible for me to control the child, what sort of power do i have?”. [ms o] described that [y] was flourishing attending boarding school in [city ll]. she spoke of his academic achievements as well as his [music] skills, describing that he had won many awards and competitions in music. she felt it was in the best interests of the child to remain living in [country n] for the duration of his primary school, and that he could return to australia thereafter. she explained, “we respect the original plan, which was after graduation after primary school, he would come back to australia for his schooling”. when questioned about whether [y] would actually want to return at that point, she stated, “that's impossible. since [y] was able to understand things, we have always been telling him that after his primary education he will be going back to australia ... in terms of why we want him to study all the way through primary school, it's because [language n] is a difficult language to learn”. [ms mm] & [mr nn] the maternal grandparents were also consulted remotely from their home in [city j]. it was [mr nn] who made the majority of submissions. the grandparents described their daughter as a competent mother to [x]. they described their grandson as thriving in the care of his mother, despite suboptimal (temporary) living arrangements. they spoke of [ms huan’s] distress at being separated from [y]. it was their understanding that the decision for [y] to live in [country n] was a temporary one, explaining, “from what we have heard from [ms huan] is that [y] would be there for a few months”. they further expressed concern about the apparent dominance of the paternal grandmother, characterising [ms o] as intrusive and coercive. they were worried too about the possibility of [y] being deliberately disaffected from his mother by the paternal family, describing, “of course, over time adults would say things and teach him things”. [y] (7) [y]’ engagement during assessment was modest. unsurprisingly, given his age, he was somewhat distractible. it was also apparent that [y] was not alone when consulted (despite that request being made), repeatedly looking off to a fixed point out of camera when more pertinent issues were raised. [y]’s responses also appeared rehearsed. notwithstanding these issues, i was able to, complete some basic discussion about his family and current circumstances. [y] said that he was happy and settled living in [country n] and attending boarding school. he explained, “well, i have many friends at my school. our school also has good teachers. i'm very happy there. it's a school with a very good academic (sic) as well as cultural qualities. grandpa cooks good food. grandma helps me do my homework and she also takes me out playing and watches me when i play [music]”. [y] further stated that he understood he would return to australia upon completion of primary school, stating, “i'll go to secondary school in australia”. he said that he had a deep connection with his grandmother, who he characterised as the most important person in his life. [y] said that he was currently not speaking to his mother . he remarked, “ i don't like her... she doesn't love me, so i don't love her”. when asked to elaborate, [y] explained, “because when i didn't know her date of birth and i don't know her name, she yelled at me... it was like this, dad's birthday was approaching and then i was talking to mom and i said to mum, dad's birthday is approaching, we should celebrate his birthday, and she said what about my birthday , do you know when my birthday is? and i didn't know, and she yelled at me... also in terms of going to school, she took the initiative to approach my school to cancel the enrolment ... sometimes when she was having video calls with me she would ask me what i eat, then she stopped calling, she asked me why i was not talking to her and i said because you're not talking to me”. [y] said he could not recall any positive memories with his mother. he described a very different relationship with his father, whom he said he missed. he described, “he would show me some clips, he bought a lot of toys for me, bought me a watch and buy me some toys from those movies, he also listens to me when i play [music], he also corrects my english pronunciation... that is really nice to me”. [x] (5) [x] was consulted only briefly because of his age. [x] said that he enjoyed spending time with his father each sunday, explaining, “i eat, and then play [games], and then get out for a drive, watch some tv, and then i have to go back home”. he said that he would like to spend more time with [mr rong]. [x] confirmed that he understood his parents were not on good terms, acknowledging that he had rarely seen them interact. regarding his brother, [x] impressed with very little knowledge of [y], his personality, his mannerisms, and his behaviour. he said only that they speak occasionally via video-conference, although characterised this as cursory and perfunctory. observations in light of [y] remaining in [country n], observations were conducted only with [x] and each of his parents. with his father, [x] appeared comfortable. there were no obvious signs of distress. [x] invited [mr rong] to play a board game which the father reciprocated. while playing together, [x] made few spontaneous remarks. he appeared focussed on the game. there was no banter, laughter of levity. [mr rong] also seldom spoke. he made occasional encouraging remarks and took educational opportunities as they presented. indeed, [mr rong] impressed as highly focussed on [x]’s learning and achievement, potentially at the expense of more light-hearted interactions. with his mother, there was a less novel dimension to the interaction. although she was nervous, [ms huan] was warm, attentive and affectionate. [x] impressed as far more accustomed to being in her company. the pair settled on another board game, which they played happily together. [x] needed to explain the rules to his mother, which allowed invited jokes and levity. [x] appeared more engaged and relaxed with his mother, as though their interaction and play was a more normal and routine part of his care and daily life. evaluation the parents, [mr rong] (39) and [ms huan] (36), were in a relationship for around 7 years, separating under the one roof in march 2020. [ms huan] vacated the family home around 15 months later. there are two children of the marriage, [y] (7) and [x] (5). at the age of 2 years, under circumstances that are disputed, [y] left australia to live with his grandparents in [country n], remaining there ever since. the parents have not seen their son, in person, since late-2019, prior to the global pandemic. [x] has always lived principally with his mother since the parties physically separated, now seeing his father for 3 hours each week. the central dispute before the court revolves around [y]’s substantive place of residence, noting his mother’s desire for him to return to australia, as well as the longer term time and living arrangements for both children, particularly [x], for whom there is no proposal for him to live overseas. co-parenting relationship the coparenting situation in this matter is entirely sub optimal. although there is now no intervention orders that would otherwise prevent the parties from engaging more meaningfully around their children, their communication is sporadic, superficial, and at times combative. these are not two people who have amicably decided to embark in different directions, but rather parents who were embroiled in significant conflict prior to separation, disagreeing on myriad of issues related to the children, and clearly exhibiting differing parenting styles. there remains much of the ill will, hostility, and distrust. both parents have been reticent to communicate, although it is [ms huan] who is most resistant to interacting with the applicant father. what has followed is a situation in which the parents have not engaged in meaningful conversations about significant decisions affecting the children, they do not model appropriate exchanges in the presence of [x], and they have not held/attended joint events together creating a sense of unity for [x]. in all, the transition from marriage to separated co-parents has not been smooth. there are likely a multitude of factors that have contributed to the tension between these parents. at base, their marriage was undoubtedly conflictual. they obviously developed a level of mutual contempt. since parting ways, their views of one another have become even more entrenched. [mr rong] characterises the respondent mother as controlling and an inclusive. he has portrayed her as aggressive, reactive, and volatile during the marriage. he claims she is focused solely on money, effectively ordering him to work long hours in order to provide for the family. once they separated, he argues she became more overbearing, and refused to allow him a relationship with [x]. he prioritises the children's education, criticising the respondent mother in several aspects of our parenting, including her focus on their academic attainment. alternately, [ms huan] feels impugned and put down by [mr rong]. she characterises him as critical and overbearing. she perceives a power imbalance where she has been dismissed on account of her education and place of birth. she feels coerced and manipulated by the entire paternal family. she feels powerless. she interprets messages she has received from the applicant father as snide and irascible, in furtherance of the same dynamic that existed within the marriage. unfortunately, both of the children are aware of the difficulties between their mother and father. they, especially [x], have witnessed these first-hand the conflict prior to their mother vacating the family home. [x] was exposed to regular arguments, as well as periods where his parents would not talk. during the current assessment, both children made clear their understanding that their mother and father are not on good terms. [y], in particular, assumed a particularly tribal posture, clearly aligned with the paternal family, and increasingly rejecting of his mother and extended maternal relatives. it is safe to say that the discordant marriage, and ongoing lack of unity and collaboration, has impacted on these boys. it will continue to do so. at a basic level, it is clear that [y], and to a lesser extent [x], do not feel they have the emotional permission to have an unencumbered relationship with the other side of their family. i am particularly concerned by [y]’s presentation in this respect, as will be discussed below. although there is no strong clinical argument at this point for one parent to assume sole parental responsibility for the children, there is certainly a need to increase communication between the parties, and continuity for the children as they transition between their two homes (should [y] return to live in australia). at minimum, i would recommend that these parents exchange a routine weekly handover summarising events relating to the children. this should include information regarding the children's education, medical/psychological issues, behaviour, and extracurricular activities. initially this should occur in written form, although eventually, it should be an aspiration for these parents to discuss these types of areas directly. it should also become practice for [ms o] to correspond with the parties while [y] remains resident in [country n]. it is also important that the children are made aware that their mother and father will be providing a handover to each other summarising their time in each household, to increase the sense of unity. i would also encourage the parties attending upon an independent clinician to develop a joint set of rules, routine, and expectations for the children that can be implemented in both households. this is designed to ensure that the level of disruption associated with the children's transition between their mother and father is minimised. finally, the court may wish to consider restraining by injunction the parties from discussing matters in the presence of [y] and [x] that may be of a more adult nature (e.g., school enrolments, travel, financial issues), or potentially denigrating and belittling. parent-child relationships having now consulted with the parents and children, and conducted an observation with [x] and each of the parties, it is evident that these children have very different relationships with their mother and father. [x] clearly has a loving bond with [ms huan]. she has been the predominant care figure for this child throughout the entire day of his life. she is the person with whom [x] is most comfortable and secure. there are no immediate concerns in relation to the bond, connection, and attachment between [x] and his mother. with his father, there is a more cursory dimension to the relationship. [x] is far less acquainted with his father. he is less familiar with [mr rong]'s routine, parenting style, and care practises. this is unsurprising given the differing roles that each party has played in his upbringing to date. while there is no evidence of fear or unease in [x] when in the company of his father, it would be erroneous to conclude that the bond he has with his father at all approximates that he has with his mother. this will be an important consideration when determining [x]’s living arrangements, as [x] will not cope well with immediately spending protracted periods away from his mother, and in the company of his father, with whom he is undoubtedly less acquainted. there are far more concerns regarding the relationship between [y] and his parents. [y] was openly hostile in relation to his mother. he was bordering on rejecting of her. he claimed to be unable to recall any positive interactions with her throughout the course of his life. he was concrete and obstinate, assuming a highly adversarial posture. when asked about his father, [x] was aggrandizing. he venerated [mr rong], highlighting only positive attributes. notwithstanding [y]’s commentary about the relationship he has with each parent, analysis of his submissions demonstrate that he is largely unfamiliar with either parent. he had spent little time with them throughout the course of his life. he will have no working memory of life growing up with either [mr rong] or [ms huan]. this is not a little boy who has a loving, immersive relationship with his biological mother and father. his care history would evidence that his principle attachment figure he sees is the paternal grandmother. i am particularly concerned that there may be an emergent alienation dynamic occurring in the case of the older of the two boys. the fact that [y] was so dichotomous in his appraisal of his parents is alarming. the fact that he would find fault with everything that his mother has done is clinically remarkable. that i [y] has been informed, presumably by his father or paternal grandmother, of certain actions taken by his mother, or her desire for him to return to australia, is damaging and manipulative. there is ample clinical evidence, based on the presentation of this child, that he has been influenced by the paternal grandmother, passively, and very likely, in a more deliberate way. [ms o]’s criticism and disdain for the respondent mother was ill-concealed during the current assessment, and i suspect will have been absorbed by [y], having lived with [ms o] for the majority of his life. i would also interpret the fact that [y] has been informed of certain issues of a more adult nature, as a knowing, pernicious attempt to demonise [ms huan] in the mind of the child. the question must be raised regarding whether, should [y] remain living in the care of his paternal grandmother, this process will continue unencumbered, resulting in [y] eventually rejecting his mother entirely, for the longer term. given the clinical data available at the time of assessment, there is a significant risk that this boy will become alienated from his mother should he remain in the care of his paternal grandmother over the next 4-5 years of his primary education. children’s views pursuant to s60cc(3)(a), the expressed wishes of the children were fairly straightforward. [y] was adamant that he wished to remain living in [country n] with his grandparents, and attending boarding school there, while [x] stated he wished to continue living mainly with his mother, albeit with increased time spent with his father. other relevant data points to emerge from consultation with the children were that (i) both boys were aware of the ongoing tension and disunity between their parents, (ii) the children made little reference to their connection with one another, and (iii) [y] described feeling happy and settled at his current school, and (iv) [y]’s submissions impressed as rehearsed, concrete, and potentially provided with the ambient influence of someone in the room during the consultation. notwithstanding the views that these children have expressed during the current consultation, it is my opinion that the weight that the court should place on their wishes should be limited, given their ages. children under the age of 13-14 years, tend to reason through complex decisions, such as their living arrangements and relationship with each parent, in a predictably underdeveloped way. they tend to focus on short-term outcomes rather than long-term gains. they can be suggestible and easily incentivised. they can prioritise notions of parity, equality, and fairness. they can fail to consider the practical challenges that may ensue from a given living arrangement. they can be emotionally driven in their decision making. in the case of [y] and [x], some, if not many, of these features were apparent. i would note also [y]’s presentation when consulted – he has clearly been privy to information that is inappropriate, such as his mother seeking to unenroll him from his school. the fact that there was a third party in his vicinity when he was assessed, will assuredly have impacted on his submissions. the tribal, concrete, and inflexible posture [y] demonstrated would also suggest some level of influence by those around him, notably the paternal grandmother. in all, for a variety of reasons, quite aside from their age/stage of development, the expressed wishes of these boys should not be determinative as the court adjudicates their parenting arrangements. risk pursuant to s60cc(2)(b), the central risk issue in this matter revolves around mutual allegations of aggressive behaviour alleged by both parents. [mr rong] has alleged that [ms huan] was verbally abusive, physically overbearing, and at one point, she threw a kitchen knife at him. [ms huan] claims that she was called names, put down, impugned, and slapped by the applicant father. it is ultimately a matter for the court to test the evidence and determined which narrative may most closely align with events during the marriage. the allegations as they exist currently are a matter of disputed fact. what is clear, however, is that the marriage between [mr rong] and [ms huan] was highly conflictual, replete with arguments, agitated exchanges, and periods in which the parents would avoid each other and occupy different rooms within the house. it does appear at times that both parents escalated and became combative. police have been called. it is safe to conclude that their marriage was volatile, and impacted by the involvement of the extended paternal family, whom seem to have oft sided with [mr rong], agitating behind the scenes, and further decrying the respondent mother. even by [mr rong]'s own submissions, his mother directly confronted [ms huan] and berated her about her competencies and parenting, rather than availing support, comfort, and advice. without being able to definitively confirm either parent’s specific claims about the other, i am of the view that there was mutual conflict during the marriage. further, i would suggest that any aggressive behaviour that did emerge in the years prior to their eventual breakup impresses as situational, rather than resultant of a coercive-controlling dynamic in which one parent entirely dominated the other. their conflict emanated from incidental and varying issues, rather than one parent’s need to an attempt by one parent to rule, dictate, isolate and terrorise the other. i would note that the behaviour by the paternal grandmother has, in my view, been coercive, domineering and manipulative. however, the dynamic within the marriage between [mr rong] and [ms huan], which likely resulted in mutual aggression, appears to have related to situation (albeit recurring) issues. assuredly this has been damaging for the children and it certainly failed to model for them respectful conflict resolution strategies. still, it is my view that the risk of recurring confrontations is probably reduced now that the parties are separated. there is still some likelihood that disagreements and conflict will emerge from time to time - given also that these parents have differing priorities and approaches to parenting the children - however [mr rong] and [ms huan] now occupying different households does reduce the opportunity for them to descend into outward hostilities. this is a positive overall for [y] and [x]. i would not consider there to now be an unacceptable risk to the children, arising from the mutual claims of family violence, to the boys in the years ahead. the concern for these boys of the ongoing discord between their parents is of an emotional/psychological nature. parental concerns aside from any issues of risk, both parents have expressed concerns about aspects of the other parties’ conduct as it relates to the children. [mr rong] has accused the mother of struggling to care for the children, keeping an unkempt household, and otherwise failing to allow him reasonable time with [x]. conversely, [ms huan] has characterised the applicant father as largely absent from the lives of the boys, disinterested and uninvolved, and speculated that he likely lacks the basic ability to competently care for the children. she has further posited that there has been a degree of coercion and manipulation of [y], including by severing her ability to contact him remotely while he is in [country n]. regarding the issues raised by [mr rong], i do believe that there is merit in the thesis that [ms huan] was anxious and concerned during the period leading up to the impending birth of their second child, [x]. she was on probation at her new job, she was largely without assistance from her husband on account of his work obligations, she was a relatively young mother, living in a country without her parents, there was financial stress, she was subject to overt criticism and conflict from the paternal family. assuredly, this would have rendered even the most competent of parents feeling overwhelmed. to restate, i have no doubt she was overwrought by the prospect of another child coming along in the period leading up to [x]’s birth. to suggest, however, that [ms huan] is a fundamentally unattuned, incapable, and unfit parent, is, in my view, unreasonable. she has availed an adequate, if not sophisticated and efficient (given the pressures) level of care, for the children. there is no clinical information to infer that [x] is not thriving in her care. lamentably, she has not had the opportunity to do the same for [y]. turning to the question of [ms huan] unreasonably curtailing [mr rong]'s involvement with [x], the key term is unreasonably. she may well have rebuffed [mr rong]'s requests for increased time with [x]. she is certainly the predominant and ascendant care figure for this child. context, however, is important. [ms huan] is a woman who has been removed from the life of her first born son. she had minimal input from the children’s father during their early life, by his own admissions, on account of his work schedule. she had been bullied, undermined, and coerced by the paternal family. against this backdrop, and with well-founded concerns regarding [mr rong]'s investment/knowledge/parenting acumen, she may well have been circumspect about relinquishing the care of [x] to his father. in terms of the issues raised by the respondent mother, i have formed the view that [mr rong] had a role with the boys that was far secondary to her during their early life. patently, [mr rong] has deferred to his mother in a number of respects. he also had work obligations, exceeding that of [ms huan], at least for some period. i would query also whether [mr rong] himself is beholden –psychologically and financially – to his mother. [ms o]’s footprint in the lives of these young parents has been profound, and in large measure, leads to the situation currently before the court. given the information available, i am strongly of the view that (i) [mr rong] has had, at time, very little input into the lives of the boys, (ii) he has colluded with his mother to influence decisions relating to [y], and to a lesser degree, [x], (iii) [mr rong] and his family have not support and assisted [ms huan], and (iv) [mr rong] demonstrates only a superficial connection with the children, for reasons or prior involvement (among other factors). time and living arrangements the question before the court pertains to the final living arrangements for the two children of the relationship, [y] (7) and [x] (5). namely, whether [y] should return to australia or remain in [country n] with his paternal grandparents, and secondarily, the time/living arrangements for the children between each parent. [y] has been in [country n] throughout the duration of his early childhood. the circumstances of this are disputed. irrespective, [ms huan] has, unquestionably, by [ms o] and [mr rong]'s admissions, sought for him to return to australia. that request, by a loving, invested, biological mother, has been denied. still, [y] wants to stay in [country n]. he identifies his paternal grandmother as his primary care figure. no doubt she is. however, this little boy is being denied a relationship with the two most important people in his life, namely his mother and father. he is also effectively excommunicated from his younger brother. his presentation is such that, if not amended, he will, in all likelihood, come to reject his mother entirely. this is not only a case where living arrangements are relevant, this is a matter of burgeoning alienation. [y], in my view, is in the process of being disaffected from his mother. were he to remain in [country n], there is a very real likelihood of him never returning to australia, or if he does, never having a meaningful relationship with his mother (and her family). while there will be unquestionable disruption for this boy to come back to [city j] – certainly against his wishes – [y] has the legal right to have a meaningful relationship with both parents, under s60cc(2)(a), something that he is currently denied. also, the fact that he has no proximate connection with his brother, is distressing. [y] and [x]’s lack of connection, as is currently the case, will have life long implications. if the court deems it important for this child to have a relationship, a truly meaningful relationship with his mother and father (and brother), then he must return to australia. regarding [x], this boy needs to live mainly with his mother. his age, care history, and differing relationship with each parent, should dictate such. he should, however, spend more time with his father. the current, interim arrangements are not sufficient in the longer term. i would share [ms huan’s] concerns regarding [mr rong]'s involvement and competencies, although [x] is now an older child – more reliant, communicative, and competent. he should progress to overnight time with his father, at a suitable pace, commensurate with his best interests and adjustment. it is not unreasonable to aim for this boy to eventually spend multiple nights each week with his father, somewhere along the lines of a 10/4 fortnightly arrangement. in absolute terms, my recommendation to this honourable court is that [y] return to australia, that there be a moratorium on his time and communication with the paternal family, that [x] progressively increase his time with his father (culminating in two nights each week), and that eventually, both boys live with each parent in a 10/4 fortnightly schedule, remaining mainly with their mother, while spending meaningful time with [mr rong]. i would, however, counsel the applicant father to ensure he better manages the pernicious influence of his extended family, so that [y] and [x] can enjoy a relationship with both sides of their family unburdened. outcomes in line with these opinions, there are several outcomes/recommendations submitted: that, the parties should exchange a routine weekly handover summarising the children's time in the care of each parent, including information relating to their health, education, behaviour, and extracurricular activities, that, both parents should complete a parenting after separation program, that, the parents should attend upon an independent clinician to develop a conjoint set of rules, boundaries, routine, and expectations that can be implemented in both households, that, there is no strong clinical argument for one parent to assume sole parental responsibility for [y] and [x], that, the court may consider an order restraining by injunction the parents from denigrating or belittling the other in the presence of the children, in addition to discussing matters of a more adult nature, such as property disbursement and financial settlement, that, the conflict between the parties during their marriage most likely falls in the situational category of family violence, with a reduced risk now that [mr rong] and [ms huan] are separated, that, further review of the father’s mental health is clinically indicated, that, [y] should return to australia to live primarily with his mother, that, [y] may need professional support to acclimatise if he is compelled to leave [country n], that, the children should live with each parent, commensurate with the recommendation of paragraph 55 and 56,
single expert’s oral evidence
written submissions on behalf of the father
background the father is 40 years old. the wife is 37 years old. they commenced cohabitation in 2014 in [city j]. they were married [in] 2014 and separated in about march 2020 but continued living under one roof until may 2021. the cohabitation was therefore about 7 years. two children were born of the marriage: [y] who is 8 years old, and [x] who is 6 years old. both parenting and property issues are in dispute. parenting: the law part vii of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”) is where the legislative provisions concerning parenting cases can be found. the purpose of the legislation is to provide a pathway for the court when making parenting orders. the central focus underpinning the legislation is to make parenting orders which are at all times in a child’s best interests. a parenting order can encompass and deal with all aspects of a child’s care, welfare and development, or any aspect relating to the parental responsibility for a child. in making any parenting order the court must have regard to the aims of the legislation set out in section 60b(1), which provides as follows: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles underpinning the aims of the legislation are contained in section 60b(2) which provides: (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). in determining what is in a child’s best interest, the court is to have regard to a long list of considerations set out in section 60cc of the act. those considerations are separated into primary considerations and secondary considerations. the primary considerations to which the court is to give greater weight are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence the additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views, (b) the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views, (b) the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,   the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,   each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,   to participate in making decisions about major long term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,  ) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,  i) to communicate with the child,  ) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family—any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family—any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   if the child is an aboriginal or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family—any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family—any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family—any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family—any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,  ) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,  i) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,   any other relevant matter,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
parenting: application of the law to the facts [y] lives with his paternal grandparents in [country n]. he has done so since [late] 2016. that is, for 6.5 years of his 8.5-year life. he attends a boarding school. he is an accomplished [musician]. his unambiguous wish is to remain in [country n] with his grandparents. the father has maintained consistent evidence about the plan devised by he and the mother prior to leaving [y] in [country n] for him to undertake his primary education in that country and return to australia to commence his secondary education in about 2026. the mother and father travelled to [country n] with [y] in [late] 2016 and jointly applied in [city j] for a visa to allow [y] to stay in [country n] with his grandparents. [y] is not only an accomplished [musician], but he has received multiple scholastic awards including certificates of honour and achievement awards. in the father’s submission, it would simply be devastating for [y] to forcibly remove him from all that he knows and loves in [country n] so as to bring him back to australia now. to do so would visit upon him undeniable psychological harm in the short, medium and long term. in his oral evidence the single expert, [dr g], said the following :  ’s primary attachment figure is his paternal grandmother. that’s right, isn’t it? well, the – attachments is a – a – a difficult concept. i – i think it’s safe to say that the paternal grandmother is the person to whom [y] is – is closest and – and most emotionally connected, yes. sure. i think you’ve included in your report, at paragraph 31, that he told you that she was – meaning, the paternal grandmother, was the most important person in his life. do you remember writing that? yes, yes. and it will be a harrowing process for him. and there’s – there’s no other way to put it, that that will end what he has known most of his life. am i right in saying that there would be some short, medium and long-term effects if that were to happen, visited upon [y]? yes. so is that right, firstly? there’s ? i – i think that that’s right. i think that in the short-term, for example, he would immediately feel some loss of his routine and the relationships that he has in [country n]. and he would be sad about that, is that fair? yes. right. medium-term, there might well be, beyond that initial sadness, like, a grief that might end up in him – i think you’ve touched upon this earlier today in questions from my learned friend, in your answers, that there could well be a real basis for him becoming difficult, acting out, defiant ? yes. all that? yes. and then looking at the long-term, if that – i’m using the word “attachment”. but i understand your meaning of the – anyway, the relationship between he and his paternal grandmother – if that’s broken now, i’m suggesting there might also – in the longer term, he might develop or have difficulty with his mental health in the long term such as suffering from anxiety or depression, that’s possible too, isn’t it? it is possible. the father’s preferred orders reflect his case that, in line with [y]’s expectation and wish, he remain in [country n] to finish his primary education (but spending time and communicating with his parents and brother in australia) until moving to [city j] to live with his parents thereafter. in that way, the known, guaranteed or certain risk to [y] of psychological harm of the forced move now is avoided versus the possible risk of the loss of the relationship between the mother and [y] by allowing that time in [country n] to occur as planned. in summary, the court is obliged to give greater weight to the primary considerations and, within them, to protect children from psychological harm. in circumstances whereby the father’s proposal ensures the benefit to [y] in maintaining his relationships with both his parents but avoid the harm that will come from a forced move away from his settled home now the court would prefer those orders. in respect to the child [x], the father’s proposal is to gradually increase the time he is to spend with him over some 7 months. in respect of that proposal [dr g] gave the following evidence: you recall that. yes. again, do you have a copy of the father’s preferred orders there, the minute? anyway, i will take you through it, [dr g]. what he’s suggesting to the court should occur is that, for a period of four weeks – because you understand he has only seen – i think my learned friend put to you the status quo remains and he’s having three hours with [x] each week. what he’s suggesting would happen, [dr g], is that for a period of four weeks [x] spends time with him from 9 o’clock in the morning on sunday until 4 o’clock that afternoon? yes. and then for a period of three months, in week 1, from saturday at 10 o’clock until sunday 10 o’clock – sorry, 5 o’clock sunday. so saturday morning, sunday afternoon in the first week? yes and then in the second week, from after school on wednesday until the commencement of school the following thursday? yes. and then for a period of three months after that, in the first week, from after school friday until before school monday. and then in the second week, from after school wednesday until the commencement of school on friday. so just pausing there. the regime increases but that’s a fairly graduated increase of the father’s time, isn’t it, with [x], do you agree? yes. and would you agree with me that that’s both child-focused and appropriate? yes. of course [x] would also stand to suffer should [y] be forced back to australia against his wishes. it is plain that such a transition would be a volatile and difficult one. [x] would be in the middle of such conflict. again, [dr g] opined: and it’s going to be – that situation, if that were to happen, would be bad for [x] too, wouldn’t it, because [x]’s going to be stuck in the middle of it? yes. there – almost certainly there will be – there will be a toll and encumbrance on the young – on the younger of the two children. i guess it’s how – how long that extinction burst lasts for. extinction bursts are a very well researched behaviour phenomena where you introduce the change or the intervention or the shift and if it’s contrary to a child’s, you know, pretty concrete views, there can be a spike in, you know, behaviour outbursts and difficulty and rejection and resistance and all those sorts of things. it depends on how long that lasts for. if that – if that extinction burst is – and there’s difficulties over months and months and months, then, obviously, there’s a cumulative impact on little [x]. but if it’s more short-term, so weeks, i think that that’s probably – probably bearable given the potential benefits that could flow from restoring the sibling relationship.
property: the law in determining an application under s 79, the court must be satisfied it is just and equitable to make an order adjusting the property interests of the parties (s 79(2)) and it must consider each of the matters set out in s 79(4)(e). it has long been the approach to employ the “four step process” set forth in hickey and hickey and attorney general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143, as follows: identify and value, the parties' property, liabilities and financial resources at the date1. of the hearing, identify and assess the contributions of the parties as referred to in s.79 of the act and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties, whether examined on a global approach or an asset by asset approach, identify and assess the other factors relevant including, the matters referred to in s.75 of the act and determine the adjustment (if any) to be made to the contribution entitlements at step two, and consider the effect of the above and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case. in stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108 (“stanford”) the high court made clear at [37] it is necessary to begin consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. the full court in bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) flc 93-545 (“bevan”) at [72]–[73] has held that the decision in stanford has not overruled the four step approach. stanford made clear that requirement pursuant to s 79(2) that it would be “just and equitable” to make orders altering property should not be conflated with the requirements of s 79(4). the full court in bevan emphasised that although the pre-condition to making any order for property adjustment is a finding that it is just and equitable to do so in accordance with s 79(2) of the act, such a finding does not form a threshold issue, nor must the requirements of s 79 be followed in a particular order. stanford also emphasised that the discretion reposed in the court by s 79 must be exercised judicially (at [38]). at [39], the court expressly emphasised that in australian law there is no concept of “community ownership” arising from marriage and whether it is “just and equitable” to make an order “is not to be answered by assuming that the parties’ rights to or interests in marital property are or should be different from those that then exist”. the very fact of separation may lead to the ready satisfaction of just and equitable requirement: stanford at [41]–[42]. property: application of the law to the facts at the commencement of cohabitation the father had the [suburb d] and [suburb w] properties which are now valued at a combined agreed $2,260,000. he also had motor vehicles, some superannuation, household goods and personal possessions. the mother had little assets and agreed in cross-examination that she had at cohabitation less than about $50,000 standing to her name. any assessment of contributions is, however, in this case, otiose. unfortunately for the parties, from the outset of the relationship the father already had a considerable debt ($2.6m) owed to his parents: see annexure j to the father’s trial affidavit. that loan agreement was executed in [mid]-2011 (almost 3 years prior to cohabitation) by the father and his parents and fathered by lawyers. its authenticity was not successfully challenged, and it must be a finding that the father remains in the debt of his parents to that extent. the monies loaned from his parents were applied to the purchase of the 2 pieces of real property, living and accommodation expenses, business expenses and the father’s tertiary education in australia. further, beyond the a$2.6m the subject of the loan, further monies were loaned to the father from his parents to cover business and household expenses during the marriage. the mother conceded as much in cross-examination.
i want to suggest to you that the reason you were able to keep things afloat and to keep living the way you were living was partly because [mr rong] was receiving lots of money from his parents. is that fair?---yes. [t:243] the evidence of the father being annexure k to his trial affidavit (being not objected to section 50 ea summaries of loan advances to the husband from his parents) add further significant amounts to the outstanding debt (for example, over $1,220,777 for living expenses, [business] expenses and mortgage re-payments) beyond the a$2.6m. the effect of the legitimate loans owed by the father to his parents is to make nugatory the balance sheet. the parties have a negative asset pool. beyond the orders sought by the father in terms of the parties retaining the assets and / or liabilities in their respective possession, there should be no other orders in respect to property made. it is the father’s case, and respectfully the court would find, that it would not be just and equitable for there to be any property adjustment.
written submissions on behalf of the mother
the evidence of the father concerning communication & attitude the father’s evidence in the father box confirmed his negative view of the mother and his non-existent communication with her. the lack of communication extended over a lengthy period and related to important issues, including not troubling himself to tell the mother that her son had commenced school as a boarder in [country n] other than through his lawyers and after the mother had enquired. he enunciated his position that the mother held little interest in the children and only in money, which he alleged was ‘always her first thought’. he accepted that he thought the mother was uneducated and had called her such. he could not accept that the mother loved [y] because she held a different view of his best interests than his. he thought that the proceedings were being pursued by the mother purely to obtain centrelink benefits. the attitudes were, as observed by the single expert, entrenched. the father’s evidence was that he had not considered the impact of these attitudes, which he had communicated to the mother, because they were ‘the truth’ in his eyes. he reiterated that if he was telling the truth, it did not matter to him what the impact of his saying negative things might be on the mother, even though it affected [x]. the focus of the father’s view seemed to be his rigid determination that [y] should remain in [country n]. his rigidity generally, as well as on this subject, was a remarkable feature of his evidence. the father expressed that a [country n] education was the most important thing for the children. he seemed unable to consider any viewpoint not his own. this was particularly notable given the evidence of the single expert regarding the range of developmental impacts for both children in a situation where [y] remains living in [country n]. ultimately, his view of the matter appeared to be that the only way anyone could express love for [y] was to do what [y] wanted, a troubling proposition where [y] is aged 8 years. certainly, the father could articulate no plan he had or thought necessary to improve his communication with the mother. the rigidity of thinking was not confined to the matter surrounding [y]. unfortunately, it permeated much of the father’s evidence, not least his concession that he did not spend time with [x] that the mother offered him before the interim hearing of the matter as he did not consider that time sufficient. the father extended that rigidity to giving evidence that the children needed to be told ‘the truth’ that their mother was ‘a bad mother’ when they were adults. concerning the children the father’s evidence concerning the children exhibited a similar rigidity in his attitude towards the mother. the father could not see or understand any possibility other than [y] remaining in [country n] until the completion of primary school. the father was unable to understand or contemplate the difficulty in espousing the view that [y] should stay in [country n] because he wants to now and his view that it was impossible that [y] should ever want to stay in [country n] after the conclusion of primary school. the father gave evidence that it did not matter what anyone else thought. he would do nothing to have [y] return from [country n]. he believed that at age 8, [y] could decide what country he should live in. the father expressed no qualms that his mother was following whatever [y]’s views were and saw no difficulty with that course of action. the approach generally to [y] by the father concerning the orders for [y]’s return was also a point of concern from the father’s evidence. the father appeared to superficially acknowledge that the orders for [y] had not been complied with and, despite having been gaoled for non-compliance, rigidly adhered to the rightness of his position. the father admitted to doing effectively nothing substantive at all to comply with the orders made for the return of [y] to australia. his evidence inspired little confidence that his proposed orders for [y] to spend holiday time with the mother would ever result in time occurring. beyond [y], the father had an unrealistic and impractical view concerning [x]. his wish to spend more time with [x] did not extend to giving thought to the need to detail how he would feed [x] or how he would reduce his work hours to allow his proposal to take effect so he could care for [x]. almost at every stage for the father, there was a lack of planning and reflection on [x] as an individual with needs that will grow and evolve. the father’s evidence, in totality, displayed very little consideration of [x] and gave very little detail concerning his perception and knowledge of [x] as a person. the most concerning aspect of the father’s evidence concerned his perceptions of the relationship between [y] and [x]. he did not consider that relationship important in what he termed ‘the current situation’. he held a view that somehow the siblings would rebuild a relationship if they continued to be raised in different cultures and with different languages. the basis for this view or hope was not articulated. allegations of family violence the father made serious allegations of family violence against the mother. concerning one particular incident, he alleged that the mother had on at least two occasions on a single event thrown a kitchen knife at him, broken a chopping board, and hurled [food] and both halves of the chopping board into the backyard of their property, all whilst holding a child in her arms. the father’s descriptions were improperly evidenced and physically impossible for the mother to have done in the manner described. further, on at least two occasions of incidents of violence, the father had open to him a family member of his own he could have brought to court to verify his version of events, and he did not do so. conversely, the father admitted to denigrating the mother during the relationship in his evidence. his attitude in the father box towards the mother pointed directly towards many of the contentions made by the mother concerning the father’s behaviour during the relationship. indeed, the father’s rigidity regarding [y], if seen through his prism of the mother only being interested in money, centrelink, and child support, can only point towards the coercive nature of his proposals. the evidence of the single expert the evidence of [dr g] provided significant illumination. the father’s submissions have selectively quoted from [dr g]’s evidence and ignored large swathes of opinion that point squarely away from the father’s case. key amongst his evidence are the following matters: - that if [y] is returned to australia, he will suffer a series of adverse effects, that the expert maintained [y] should be returned to australia despite his expressed views and that [y] feeling ignored or not listened to is part and parcel of being a child of that age, that the expert balanced the impact on [y] of being brought back against the view that if he returned as proposed by the father, his opportunity to have a meaningful relationship with the mother and [x] would have closed and be irrecoverable, given the father’s contravention of orders, there is a significant question mark over whether the father would choose to follow his own proposal if made by the court, that the father’s proposal did not allow the mother to have any real or immersive connection with her son, nor did it allow [y] and [x] to have a real or immersive connection, that the father’s attitudes towards the mother are counterfactual and, at times, absurd in the extreme, that his view was that equal shared parental responsibility was not appropriate on the evidence that he had now seen about the father’s entrenched attitude, empowering [y] in the way proposed by the father had significant developmental detriments for [y], that [y] and [x] play an important role in the formation of each other’s identities, and the longer they are kept separate, the more problematic it is for each of the children, that the father would need to be able to manage any increase in time with [x] with sensitivity for it to be successful for [x], that the father presented as an under-resourced parent with a lack of reflective ability, that there is a significant concern that [y] was directly coached for his interview and being inappropriately alienated or involved in proceedings by the paternal family, and that there were unambiguous markers of a deliberate campaign by the paternal family to extricate [y] from the mother’s sphere of influence. the court child expert’s evidence succinctly and fairly set out the risks for these children. he sensitively expressed a view as to their balance and concluded that the children should live with the mother. the evidence of the mother the mother’s evidence was open, honest, and demonstrated a significant degree of insight. she made reasonable concessions that she did not have to make. she impressed as a mother who wanted desperately to see [y] and had tried hard to work with the father against strident opposition from him. unlike the father, the mother was able to concede to a degree of fault, whereas the father could not readily admit to any parenting weakness. the mother acknowledged sensitively the difficulties for each of the children in living with her and expressed appropriate management strategies for the reintroduction of [y] and [x] as well as managing any defiance on [x]’s part. she explained the flexible recourse she would have to experts to deal with the difficulty and listed the range of supports she had set up to prepare for such an event. overall, her evidence impressed as child-focused and realistic regarding the challenges she would face if her orders were made. parental responsibility sole parental responsibility should fall to the mother. the parties simply have no proper ability to communicate and meet the requirements for s 61da to operate as set out in marvel & marvel (no 2) [2010] famcafc 101. beyond that, the father’s admission to denigrating the mother in his evidence would bring the matter within s 61da(2). that is particularly so where it could be cogently argued that the father doing little, if anything, to facilitate [y]’s return from [country n] represents further coercive and controlling behaviour on the part of the father. meaningful relationship the mother asserts that both of the children benefit from a meaningful relationship with her. the father effectively denies the proposition. the father’s orders are not such that he would have a meaningful relationship with [y]. the single expert supports the mother’s view that each of the children will benefit from a meaningful relationship with their mother, despite any future challenges that [y] may pose. the benefits to both the children are long-term and short-term benefits that simply cannot be met on the father's proposal, not just due to the tyranny of distance but also due to the attitude of the father and his family to the mother. in these circumstances, the only way the children can enjoy the benefit of that meaningful relationship with each of their parents is through the mother’s orders. risks the balance of risk points squarely towards the mother's proposal. there are several complex risks in this matter set out in the case outline of the mother. the three most prominent risks are the risk of serious psychological harm falling within the definition of abuse to each of the children of being denied a sibling relationship, the risks of serious psychological harm to each of the children of [y] being denied a meaningful relationship with each of his parents, and the risk to [y] of being exposed to serious psychological harm by way of a deliberate campaign to extract [y] form the life of the mother. dealing with the first of those risks, the single expert outlined at length the psychological impacts of being denied that relationship for each of the children. the father's proposal allows no real opportunity to build a relationship. the idea that one of any quality can be built where the children have grown up in entirely different cultures with entirely different languages warrants an almost intemperate description. the notion is flawed. it is unsupported by any evidence. it relies on a misplaced and unsupported hope on the father's part. it relies on a faulty parenting premise that somehow an agreement about a child's education in [country n] that allegedly occurred prior to the parent's separation could be relied upon by everyone in any possible permutation of circumstances. such a position may be culturally influenced, and to that extent, it might, if one is generous, be understandable, but it is not child-focused. the orders the mother proposes directly address this risk, which is a real and not remote possibility. the harm that will be caused to these children by the father's proposal can be ameliorated by the mother's proposal. dealing with the second risk, the expert similarly outlined the risk to [y] of being denied a meaningful relationship with each of his parents. somewhat strangely, the emphasis is appropriately placed on the word 'each' because the father's proposal does not allow for the father to have a meaningful relationship with [y]. the mother's proposal focuses on the long-term benefits for [y] in his life beyond education. the long-term and short-term risks for [y] of not having a meaningful relationship with each of his parents are significant, and those risks are real, and in action the longer [y] is kept in [country n]. dealing with the third risk, the single expert has confirmed this risk is significant, and it is certainly not one that is remote. the risk is corrosive and amounts to the abuse of [y]. attributing fault for those circumstances is less important than ameliorating the effect upon [y]. it could not be seriously believed that if the father successfully pursues his relief, that will somehow ameliorate the pressure on [y]. quite the opposite. that is particularly so where there appears to be such an absolute conviction that [y] will return at the conclusion of primary school, where such conviction simply seems nonsensical in light of the justification for keeping [y] in [country n]. on the one hand, the father says [y] wants to stay, so that is the end of the matter, yet on the other hand, he says at the end of primary school, if [y] wants to stay, he does not get to because school in [country n] after that age is "very stressful". being as kind as one can to the father, the stress to his own child under the father's psychologically damaging proposal is perhaps a focus for the child that should be given greater priority. likely effect on the children the likely effect on the children of the mother’s proposal is significant. the proposal will be disruptive for each of the children. the mother has set out a careful and sensitive plan to deal with those matters in her evidence. the mother was realistic about those difficulties in her evidence. however, the mother points towards the benefits to the children of having a relationship between them. the mother’s orders allow this to occur, and they guard against any misfortune for [y] in [country n] in circumstances where he is only cared for by two elderly relatives to whom anything might happen at any point. the father’s proposal means that [y] will be more and more distanced from his mother, father, and brother. he will be more and more distanced from the cultural landscape of australia, to which the father proposes a plan that he will return. essentially the father proposes to do everything he can to make [y]’s transition back to this country and his important relationships as difficult as possible if it ever does occur. certainly, the lack of the father’s proper encouragement of the important relationships for [y] to date points towards the inevitable future involved with the father’s proposals. attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood the father's attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood is deficient. the father's reflective ability is limited, and he appears to be disjointed from the realities of everyday parenting. such an approach is consistent with the mother's evidence concerning the father's lack of involvement in the children's early lives. the father's approach to the orders of the court for [y]’s return and the staunch maintenance of his view, even having been gaoled that his perception of [y]’s best interests should overrule everyone elses has within it the seeds of further deficiencies in his attitude. those deficiencies are not a matter of assigning priorities but extend beyond that to a lack of recognition of his responsibilities and obligations to the children. the father at no point led any cogent evidence to suggest he made any substantive attempt to challenge his mother's views and domination of [y]. rather, the evidence demonstrates he has chosen to abrogate responsibilities. the contrast with the mother could not be more stark. the mother has facilitated the orders without demur. the mother has done so even in circumstances where the father chose not to comply with the orders, and one could have understood if there was a measure of retaliation. the mother has even facilitated the father seeing the child when the father was incarcerated. the mother demonstrates a remarkable sensitivity to her responsibilities and the benefits for the children on these facts alone before one turns to her careful and child-focussed evidence. views troublingly, the father’s case seemed to propound that [y], being 8 years old, got to make major decisions about his own life. the difficulty of this approach and of placing weight on this view was aptly set out by the single expert and was done so before the issue of the coaching of [y] was dealt with. any position that says that [y]’s views should be determinative or should form the basis for a risk that would cause the father’s orders to be preferred is not only unsupported by the evidence but is refuted by the clear immaturity and lack of rational basis for [y]’s own views as expressed to the single expert. other matters the mother seeks orders for the father to undertake a range of courses to improve his parenting. these were recommended by the single expert. the father completely ignored that recommendation. those orders can only benefit the children and should be made. there is a question about the enforceability of any orders for [y] to return to australia in the face of the father’s resistance. the reality is that the court is enjoined to make the orders that are in the best interests of children and not those that a person may agree with or are those which are the best enforceable orders that can be made. the mother’s position is that the orders should be made on the basis of best interests with the focus on the children and those orders being within power rather than casting a lens of enforceability. brief responses the father asserts that returning [y] to australia would be ''undeniably devastating'' because it involves removal from ''all he knows and loves in [country n] . that position is meaningless in terms of the assistance it offers the court. that is because the father's evidence is that he plans to apply such devastation in any event when the child completes primary school by returning the child to australia. the issue is simply a matter of timing, not the return to australia if the father's evidence is to be believed. it is difficult to understand how he says that is better done later when there could be no proper characterisation of the single expert's evidence other than it is better that [y] is returned now rather than later. this aspect of the father’s case is particularly perplexing where the father says, on his proposal, [y] shall have week about between the parties on his return to australia. clearly the father trusted the mother to significantly manage any upset from [y]. the father asserts that the risk of a loss of relationships for [y] is a ''possibility''. to suggest that such a risk is merely a possibility in light of the single experts evidence is to misconstrue the evidence. the submission engages in an artificial weighing of certain risks again possible risks. the legislative framework provides no such delineation, nor should it, the task the court is enjoined with is to weigh all the possible risks and reaches a decision that best balances them to achieve an outcome that is in the best interests of each of the children. given the evidence, the conclusion can only be that the mother's proposal best reflects the appropriate balance. the father's suggestion that his proposal allows [y] to have a relationship with each of his parents is simply nonsense. that is before one turns to the reality that the words of the legislation refer to a ''meaningful relationship'' and not merely a ''relationship''. the position reflects no understanding at all of the longstanding authority that aptly describes the features of a meaningful relationship. that authority was available to the father, as it is cited in the case outline of the mother. the reality is that there is no reading of the respectful and learned commentary of brown j in mazorski & allbright [2007] famca 520, (2008) 37 fam lr 518, approved by the full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, [2009] flc 93-405 that could possibly support the assertion that the father's proposal allowed for a meaningful relationship. the father's suggestion that the single expert supported his proposal for [x] was based on the transcript of a father affirming that he understood that was the proposal was concerning. any proper evaluation of the totality of the evidence of the single expert could not rationally conclude that the father's proposal for equal time with [x] was supported, realistic, or reasonable, let alone in [x]’s best interests. property matters assets, liabilities and superannuation of the parties the parties agree that the following are assets of the relationship: husband’s [suburb d] property - $985,000 husband’s [suburb w] property - $1,275,000 husband’s 1% interest in [rong pty ltd] - $5,157 wife’s [motor vehicle 2] - $31,000 husband’s [motor vehicle 3] - $30,000 both the husband and wife have minimal savings. there is no dispute that these savings have been accrued by both of them post-separation. both parties have modest household goods, including for the husband’s [games] collection. both have some superannuation. the wife has approximately $113,574, and the husband has $33,543 (per his affidavit). there are two liabilities asserted by the husband: an amount of $29,136 that he owes as a director’s penalty for [rong pty ltd], and a loan from his parents. the wife accepts that the husband owes the director’s penalty but does not accept that a penalty he accrued in his capacity as a director of the company and not in his personal capacity is properly a debt of the relationship. there is no reason why the wife should share in the payment of this penalty. both parties agree that she did not have any role in or oversight of the business, and the husband himself is only a 1% shareholder. the wife does not accept that the husband has a valid loan payable to his parents. she does accept that he has received money from them both before and during the relationship and as such, this will properly be assessed as a contribution made by them on his behalf. the loan(s) from the husband’s parents the husband asserts he owes his parents the rather specific sum of $6,080,901.40. he has not been able to provide the court with an accurate accounting of how he arrives at this figure, or any consistent or cogent explanation of it. his position is that this sum is pursuant to a loan agreement between himself and his parents from 2011 which represented funds they had already given him, but they have also provided the amounts set out in annexure k to his affidavit (some of which predate the agreement). in support of his position, the husband provides a loan agreement signed by himself and his parents on an unspecified date in 2011 for the sum of $2.6 million. there are significant factors that point away from this being considered a valid loan agreement: the agreement is undated (other than a typed reference to 2011 at the top), both the husband and his mother have asserted they have difficulties regarding the english language and required a translator, yet the document does not purport to have been translated or interpreted in any way. the solicitor who prepared and counter signed the document gave no evidence of their perception of the parties’ understanding or what had been explained about the agreement. the husband gave evidence that there was no one translating when he and his mother signed it the risk of it being capable of being set aside on this ground alone by either party to the agreement should the matter be litigated would, it is submitted, be considerable, no attempt has been made to enforce the terms of the loan or its ongoing repayment – the husband made some ad hoc small payments from 2019 for coinciding with separation and challenges to his child support assessment, and the terms of the loan have not been complied with in relation to how much the parents could provide on an ongoing basis. any action to enforce repayment of the loan would be statute-barred. the limitation period would be 6 years. for loans repayable on demand, the cause of action first accrues at the time the monies were advanced. it would not be appropriate to include the loan in the balance sheet as part of the current liabilities of the husband because he could avoid payment of that liability claiming it is statute-barred. his affidavit evidence, and that which he gave orally, was to the effect that the $2.6 million had already been given to him before he signed the loan agreement and that he brought this debt into the relationship. his evidence was that he could not produce any documents showing his actual receipt of this particular sum as it was advanced in smaller amounts over the years since he had arrived in australia (being from late 2001 to the signing of the agreement in 2011) and involved things like paying for educational, accommodation and living expenses. the husband’s evidence is that he never saw or was provided with any evidence that demonstrated to him that this was indeed the sum that he had received from his parents (as it was cumulative), he just trusted his mother’s word that this was the case and his lawyer did not take steps to obtain such information and provide it to him. the husband had no memory of who was present for the signing of the loan agreement. he gave evidence that his lawyer (who is also his lawyer in these proceedings) was also his mother’s lawyer for the loan agreement. this was incorrect and was clarified with him in cross-examination by counsel for the wife. he accepted that he must have been mistaken about this but did not seem to have much in the way of recollection of the circumstances around the signing of the agreement. the figures set out in annexure k of the husband’s affidavit were not supported by primary evidence of bank statements, deposit slips, transfer documentation etc that would prove that the funds asserted were actually received. however, even if it was accepted that each of the sums asserted was received by the husband, this does not make them either funds loaned to the husband, or a debt of the relationship. some key issues in relation to these asserted “loan” amounts in annexure k are as follows: all of the figures pre-2011 were presumably part of the $2.6 million the husband had received by the time the purported loan agreement came into existence sometime in 2011. to include these sums again in the amount owing would be to double count them. funds provided for the parties’ wedding would be characterised as a gift to both of them and not a loan that anyone needs to pay back. over $50,000 was purportedly provided for shares in 2016. the husband’s evidence appears to be that he engaged in online trading and lost it all. significant sums (in fact the vast majority of the amounts set out in annexure k) were associated with [rong pty ltd] and not the husband in his personal capacity. these could not be properly included. significant sums were for legal fees associated with these proceedings. these could not be properly included. sums for his dental treatments post separation (of which there was absolutely no evidence) could not properly be characterised as debts of the relationship. quite why the funds advanced to the business are repayable by the husband who owns 1% of the business and no sum is repayable by his brother who owns 99% of the business remained entirely unexplained. in truth, the funds provided by the husband’s parents for the benefit of the business should have been recorded as a loan to the business and become a debt of the business. the husband, and his family, appeared to have little regard for (or perhaps little understanding of) concepts of separate legal entities, or basic accounting principles. it was eventually established that the director’s loan listed in the company accounts is not payable to the husband. the husband did not know what a director’s loan was, but his brother did, and his evidence was that the director’s loan was payable to him. the husband accepted that there was no way he could ever realistically pay back a sum of this kind (or even the $2.6 million in the agreement) to his parents. it is submitted that this could hardly come as a surprise to his parents who had also been propping up the [rong pty ltd] business and are well aware of the dire financial circumstances of this entity. it is submitted that this is not a bona fide loan and that a document was created as a fig leaf with a fictional number provided by the husband’s parents for their own purposes. it cannot be definitively asserted what these purposes were, and speculation would not be proper or advance this case. suffice it to say that it is clear from all of the evidence that the husband has been, throughout his time in australia, a puppet or conduit for his mother’s financial manoeuvrings. he does not understand them and appears to have had very little, if any, say in them. to assert that there is no valid loan however is not the same thing as to deny that the husband’s parents made contributions to the property pool. this is undeniably so. financial contributions by the husband’s parents the evidence from the few historical bank statements produced by the husband indicates that his parents provided him with approximately $400,000 for the purchase of the [suburb d] property and approximately $700,000 for the purchase of the [suburb w] property. it does not appear that the husband contributed any of his own money to these properties. he owned these properties before cohabitation. the husband could not explain why the [suburb w] property sat vacant for so long (from sometime in 2013 to sometime in 2017) while the husband's brother lived with the parties. he indicated there were issues with the intercom and some fencing for a dog but primarily the issue was that the brothers needed their parent's permission for [mr bb] to move into the property, and for some reason that remained unclear, this was not provided until 2017. it does appear that the husband's brother is now paying some rent to reside in the property – which would be income of the husband, though whether this is being declared is difficult to say. the husband’s parents made contributions from time to time to the living expenses of the parties. they have also paid for the maintenance and education of [y], albeit in recent years while retaining him in [country n] contrary to repeated orders of this court. while it may well be the case that the husband’s parents also provided him (and/or his brother) with funds to establish and keep afloat their business, funds advanced to a commercial entity for the use of that entity is not the same thing as a contribution to the matrimonial property pool. contributions – the wife’s case the wife accepts that the husband brought the [suburb d] and [suburb w] properties into the relationship. she does not accept that he owed his parents $2.6 million dollars. on this scenario he made greater initial financial contributions. throughout the relationship both parties worked. it is an agreed fact that the wife earned more than the husband throughout the relationship, even taking into account her periods out of the workforce on maternity leave to care for the parties two children, but that the husband’s parents did provide them with some funds to assist with living expenses and paid some of [y]’s expenses. the wife made greater non-financial contributions as parent and homemaker, including in relation to the husband’s brother living with them rent-free when he could have been residing in the empty [suburb w] property. the wife submits that the parties made equal but different contributions throughout the relationship. post separation neither party has had to pay accommodation costs. the wife has had the far greater responsibility for the care of [x] and the husband has paid some child support. the wife submits she has made higher post-separation contributions. the wife’s case is that contributions should be assessed as 80% to the husband based on his initial contributions (made on his behalf by his parents) and the sporadic contributions made by his parents to the parties living expenses during the relationship and 20% to the wife. she then seeks a future needs adjustment as detailed below. despite repeated questions from both counsel for the wife, and his honour ,the husband could not indicate what contributions percentage he considered appropriate. the written submissions on his behalf do nothing to clarify this, and we are left with the position that his case is unclear other than that he says there should be no adjustment to the wife. future needs the husband appears to have a lower earning capacity than the wife. he could earn a wage working for somebody else in [hospitality] rather than in his own business, so even should his company be wound up he is not unable to work. his income variability limits his ability to contribute significantly by way of payment of child support. at the time of the trial he was in arrears for over $5000. the wife will have far greater responsibility for the care of [x] who is still young. she seeks that [y] return to her care and that she will also be primarily responsible for his care. the husband has the benefit of the financial resources that he asserts in his evidence that he has routinely received since he moved to australia. on his evidence his parents have given him nearly $6 million dollars. though his evidence is now that they will not assist him further, the court would find it difficult to accept that following these proceedings and once the family is outside the eye of the court that the pattern of a lifetime would alter. the wife submits that an adjustment to her of 15% to account for the lack of child support, greater care of the children, and to account for the far superior financial resources of the husband is appropriate. if the court does not order that [y] is to return to australia in the near future then the wife will still need to meet the costs of his care when he does return, as well as the therapeutic supports that it does not appear to be controversial that he will require upon his return. [y]’s father and grandparents have certainly made no offer to meet or contribute to the costs of any such supports so these too are likely to fall to the mother to pay for. what each party seeks the husband seeks that each party retain the assets and liabilities in their own names. this would mean that the wife would retain her car, any post separation savings, her household and personal goods and superannuation. this would amount to a total combined pool of assets and superannuation of approximately $169,520 as at the time of hearing (based on bank account balances proximate to trial). the husband would retain both the [suburb d] and [suburb w] properties unencumbered, his shares in [rong pty ltd], his car, his post separation saving, his personal and household goods and his superannuation. this would amount to a total combined pool of assets and superannuation of approximately $2,300,086 as at the time of hearing (based on bank account balances proximate to trial). the husband asserts that this means that he would in fact have nothing as he owes more that the total of these assets to his parents. the wife says that this is a false reflection of the financial reality as he would still be living in the house, driving the car and spending the money as he would not, in fact, be paying back the asserted loan. if liabilities are not taken into account (as the wife says they ought not to be) then this would be a division of 7% to he wife and 93% to the husband. the wife’s position is that she should receive 35% of the total pool ($864,362), and that taking into account the $169,520 she has in her own name, the remaining $694,842 should be made as a cash payment by the husband. in addition the wife seeks that the husband be ordered to pay her the amount owing as a result of the outstanding costs order made in the contravention proceedings, being$21,719.20. justice and equity if no adjustment is made then the wife would own no real estate to house herself and the children of the relationship. she would receive no cash to assist her to acquire a property for them to live in (or to pay rent if she so chose). she would have superannuation that she could not access for some considerable time. she would have some post separation savings and a motor vehicle she purchase post separation. she would obtain no benefit from the matrimonial pool and her contributions both financial and as a parent and homemaker would be unacknowledged. the husband would have an unencumbered property to live in. he would own unencumbered the property his brother and his family live in and have the benefit (potentially, depending upon what arrangements his mother allowed) of any rental income from that property. enforcement the husband makes no submissions concerning how he says any orders of the court should operate or be enforced if the court does not make the orders he seeks, which is for no adjustment to the wife. he does not contemplate any situation in which he does not get what he wants, and thus provides the court with no practical assistance on the issue. the husband should be ordered to pay the funds to the wife in a specified amount in a specified timeframe and be permitted to identify the manner in which he sources those funds. he could, as an alternative, choose to transfer one of the properties to her. the difficulty with the transfer option is that the wife concedes that this is likely to mean that she needs to make a cash payment back to him given the value of the property. this is not impossible, but no evidence was led at trial on this issue. if the husband is unable or unwilling to make the payment from borrowing against the properties or borrowing from his family, then the most appropriate option may be a default sale order the he sell the [suburb w] property (in which his brother resides). if the husband’s brother wants to purchase it he can always do so. the amount the husband sells it for is really up to the husband, so long as he receives the funds necessary to make the ordered payment to the wife. the husband’s parents placed caveats over each of the [suburb d] and [suburb w] properties [in late] 2021. the husband has made no application to lapse these caveats. he can, and should, do so. both properties are held in the husband’s sole name. the wife can make no application to lapse the caveats. the husband can be subjected to an in personam order that he do all things necessary to cause to lapse or procure the removal of the caveats from the properties. given the approach taken by himself and his family towards compliance with court orders unfortunately an order of that kind would not provide the court or the wife with much comfort, but could ground contravention or enforcement proceedings which may provide some remedy, albeit potentially of a different kind. the court could also order him to pay the wife a property settlement by way of instalments and to continue until the sum is paid or it becomes due and payable upon the sale of one of the properties. the difficulty with this is that given the husband’s uncertain income there is no guarantee that this would result in any payments to the wife and would simply lead to further litigation on enforcement. there is no simple solution that would ensure the wife receives a just and equitable division of the parties’ property. it is anticipated based on past experiences that enforcement proceedings may be required.
independent children’s lawyer’s written submissions
the evidence of the father the icl submits that the court would have significant concerns about the evidence of the father. the father was dogmatic in his view that the most important thing for the children was a good education and that this should priortised over anything else, especially in relation to [y]. the father’s evidence showed a lack of insight into the impacts on the children of remaining separated from each other. the father gave evidence that in his opinion it would not be hard for the brothers to build a relationship upon [y] returning to australia after he finishes his primary education in [country n]. the father gave evidence that [y], at the age of 8, should be the one to decide where he wants to live and that he supports [y]’s decision. the father had no plan of what he would do if [y] refused to return to australia after his primary education was completed or what he would do if the paternal grandmother refused to return [y], as has been occurring to date. the father had no plan about how he would care for [x] if there was a shared care arrangement put in place and he had not considered the most basic things like changing his work arrangements. the father’s attitude towards the mother can only be described as negative and condescending. he gave evidence that he did not think that the mother loved [y] as if she loved him she would let him finish school in [country n] saying “if she really really loved him, let him finish” the father’s view of the mother was that she was only concerned with money and that the reason she wanted [y] returned was to get child support and centrelink payments. when questioned further on this the father’s evidence was that if child support and centrelink were not the reason, then why would she seek for him to come back and “destroy his life”. the father gave further evidence that he thought it appropriate to tell the children that their mother was only concerned with money. the icl submits that the court cannot have any confidence that the father will comply with any orders that this court makes in relation to [y] and his return to australia. despite having been imprisoned for contravening previous orders, the evidence given by the father remained that [y] should stay in [country n] to complete his primary education and that he has no plans to return [y] to australia prior to this. it is open to the court to find if [y] elected to remain in [country n] after completing his primary education, the father would do nothing to affect his return to australia and would support his son’s views and wishes. the evidence of the mother the icl submits that the court will likely assess the mother’s evidence as open, honest, insightful and credible. the mother made concessions where necessary. it was clear on the evidence of the mother that she is willing to maintain a relationship between the children and the father. she showed insight into the challenges that will face [y], [x]and herself upon [y]’s return to australia. the court would be comforted by the fact that the mother had already made contact with services to assist her with these challenges such as contacting [f centre] for support, making arrangements for psychological sessions for [y] and speaking to her employer about needing time off when [y] returns. the evidence of [dr g] the icl submits that the court will place considerable weight on the evidence of [dr g]. [dr g] remained steadfast in his opinion that [y] be returned to australia and placed in the mother’s care. [dr g] explained the complex dynamics of the decision before the court. [dr g] confirmed in his oral evidence that upon [y] returning to australia there needed to be a moratorium on his contact with the paternal family including the father. [dr g] indicated that the longer [y] remained in [country n] the longer the moratorium needed to be and that if [y] was spending time with his father during the moratorium that he had no confidence that the father would comply with an order that he not bring [y] in contact with the paternal grandparents. [dr g] gave evidence that [x]’s time with his father should continue during any moratorium. [dr g] was balanced and considered in relation to the significant impact on [y] of being returned to australia stating that [y] will experience displacement, feel homesick, yearn connection, be angry, and that it will be a harrowing experience that will upend his life. he was clear there would be an impact on [x] as well. despite this, [dr g] was clear in his evidence that if [y] remained in [country n] to complete his primary education that [y]’s relationship with his mother and brother will be irrecoverable. in relation to the father’s proposal that he would pay for [y] to visit australia 4 weeks a year and that this would help [y]’s connection with his mother and brother [dr g] gave evidence that: two assumptions warrant scrutiny. the first being whether the father would actually follow the proposal and comply with orders. he indicated that the father’s contravention was “not a positive indicator of him adhering to court’s orders”. the second was whether the mother spending time with [y] for so little time would be enough to form “meaningful immersive connection” with his mother. [dr g’s] view that the proposed time would not lead to a rekindling of a bond and a loving relationship stating “parent child bonds are not forged through nice experiences but by routine, cuddles, homework, doctor office visits, it’s the mundane regular routine that build meaningful relationships”. [dr g] gave evidence that [x]’s time with his father should extend to overnight time and that this should occur at a graduated pace over 3 – 6 months for a few nights a week, but remained of the opinion that a shared care arrangement was inappropriate for the children. section 61da parental responsibility the icl submits that the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is rebutted in this matter and that sole parental responsibility should fall to the mother. in the family report of [dr g] at paragraph 37 he described the co-parenting relationship as “entirely sub optimal” and that the communication between the parties is “sporadic, superficial and at times combative.” the icl submits that the evidence of both parties given at trial spoke truth to [dr g]’s observations in his report. while [dr g] in his report supported equal shared parental responsibility, his position changed when he gave oral evidence and no longer supported an order for equal shared parental responsibility. both parties made allegations of family violence in these proceedings, it is submitted that the evidence of either party will not allow the court to make definitive findings about this matter. the court is, however, likely to find is that the relationship between the parties was highly conflictual including in the presence of the children, that there was disharmony within the home, verbal aggression and denigration. neither parties’ evidence would raise confidence that the co-parenting relationship would improve to such an extent that equal shared parental responsibility is appropriate. the positions of the parents in relation to [y] and his return from [country n] is the most glaring example of this. 60cc(2) primary considerations the children have a right to have a meaningful relationship with both parents. sadly, in this matter [y] is being denied the ability to have a meaningful relationship with his mother and his brother. the orders sought by the father do nothing to resolve this issue and if made would lead to a situation in which the relationship between [y] and his mother and brother will become irretrievable. [dr g] was clear in his report and evidence that if [y] remains in [country n] he will come to completely reject his mother and at paragraph 54 of his report states “this is not only a case where living arrangements are relevant, this is a matter of burgeoning alienation. [y], in my view, is in the process of being disaffected from his mother. were he to remain in [country n], there is a very real likelihood of him never returning to australia, or if he does, never having a meaningful relationship with his mother.” interestingly, the orders sought by the father deny [y] from having a meaningful relationship with him also and it is of significant concern that the father does not see or recognise this issue. it is submitted that the court can have confidence in the mother facilitating a meaningful relationship between the children and the father, and the siblings with each other. [dr g] in his oral evidence was firm in his view that this is a case of alienation, being that [y] is being alienated from his mother. in both his report at paragraph 43 and in his oral evidence [dr g] raised significant concerns about how polarised [y]’s views were in relation to his mother and father. at paragraph 43 [dr g] states:
“the fact that he would find fault with everything that his mother has done is clinically remarkable. that [y] has been informed, presumably by his father or paternal grandmother, of certain actions taken by his mother, or her desire for him to return to australia, is damaging and manipulative.” in his oral evidence [dr g] stated that if the court finds there has been alienation, than that is psychological abuse of a child. he stated that the outcomes for such children are “not favourable, they become very disturbed adults, have problematic relationships, can be alienated from own children, has lifelong consequences –clinical markers are there for me. is it abusive – of course it is- are there lifelong consequences – that is well established. it is submitted that the orders sought by the mother and icl for [y] to be returned to australia and placed in the care of his mother are the only orders that will ameliorate the above risk. the court is likely to find that the risk of the children being exposed to ongoing family violence is reduced given the separation of the parties, this is likely to be further reduced by an order for sole parental responsibility. while [dr g] describes the father as under-resourced as a parent, it is submitted that the court will not have significant concerns as to his ability to meet the day to day needs of the children.
60cc(3) additional considerations the icl submits that no weight can be given to the views of the children given their young ages and developmental capacity to understand the long-term impacts of their views. further, the court would have significant concerns that the views expressed by [y] to [dr g] have been influenced. it is not in dispute that the mother is [x]’s primary carer and attachment figure. nor would parties dispute that [y]’s primary attachment would be to his paternal grandmother and that at present there are serious concerns in relation to [y]’s relationship with his mother. in considering the nature of the relationship between the children and their father, the icl draws the courts attention to paragraph 52 of [dr g]’s report and submits that this is an accurate description of the relationship. there was no evidence presented at the hearing that would have the court form a differing view. it is submitted that the court will find that the mother has taken every opportunity open to her to try to communicate, spend time with and make decisions for [y], but that this has been thwarted by the actions of the paternal family. the father appears to have delegated all parental responsibility for [y] including financial responsibility to his parents. there is no doubt that there will be a significant impact on the children with either parties’ proposal. the mother’s proposal will have a significant impact on [y] and [x] both emotionally and psychologically. it is submitted that the court will find that the mother is aware of these impacts and has already engaged with support services to assist her upon [y]’s return. the impact of the father’s proposal will also have significant impacts on the children, with the most obvious and significant impact being the end of any relationship between [y] and [x] and [y] and his mother. the consequences of this is clearly articulated in [dr g]’s report and in the evidence he gave at trial. if the court was to allow [y] to remain in [country n], the practical difficulties in him spending time or communicating with his mother and [x] are clear. the icl submits that the court could not have any confidence that the father would comply with his proposed orders in relation to [y] coming to australia, in circumstances where the father has and continues to contravene orders of this court. in relation to [x], there are no obvious practical difficulties in the child spending time with or communicating with his father. the icl submits that the orders sought by her, or the ones sought by the mother are in the children’s best interest and should be made. the icl submits that the spend time with arrangements proposed by her, are in line with [dr g]’s recommendations and would allow the children to upon overnight time commencing to spend an uninterrupted weekend with their mother and allow the father to be involved in the children’s schooling. in relation to [dr g]’s recommendation that upon [y] returning to australia there be a moratorium on [y]’s time with the paternal family including his father, it is broadly supported by the icl and while it is difficult to determine the length of time that it should be, the icl notes that [dr g] gave evidence that it is more likely months than weeks.
written submissions in reply on behalf of the father
so do i take it if that connection was to be- so, against his will, broken by him returning to australia now, rather than when he wants it to happen – that is, when he commences his secondary education, that could be pretty devastating for him. is that fair? --- that’s entirely fair. further, the mother advances nothing that answers the very real concern that if the court orders [y] to return now and he does so but does not have the benefit of seeing his father with whom he has the strongest relationship (for an unknown length of time which is the mother’s preferred orders) what that might mean for [y]. the mother and the icl ignore that very real risk to [y] and to [x] should the move happen now before [y] finishes primary school in [country n] and before his relationship with the mother and his brother has a chance to improve and develop. no concrete plan for therapy, counselling or other supports are in the mother’s mind let alone part of a detailed roadmap that would give the court some modicum of confidence that a return now would work. what the court is therefore faced with is a possibility that [y]’s relationship with his mother and brother will suffer if he does not return now versus the absolute certainty that his return will visit upon him harm that may well last a lifetime. the mother submits (at paragraph 11) that the father “did not consider [the relationship with [x]] important. his evidence was, in fact: i don’t think it’s hard to build a relationship between the brothers, but i still – i still believe for now, because [y] already half – halfway through his studies, it’s better for him to finish and come back. [t21.11.22 p38] in respect to property, the submissions advanced by the mother (filed 29 may 2023) once again ignore realities in respect to facts and advance propositions at odds with settled law. for example, to disregard the loan agreement of 2011 because of “factors pointing away from it being considered valid” would be an error. sums were being advanced as late as september 2022 and no demand had been made for repayment. not to consider the monies owed to the father’s parents a liability to be reflected on the balance sheet and to just “disregard” them ignores established law that liabilities are taken into account as an intrinsic part of the equation so as to determine the property of the parties. that is, the court must follow the well-recognised four-step process (see hickey & hickey & attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143) including identifying and valuing the assets and liabilities at the date of hearing for the purposes of division. to ignore the loan agreement and the evidence of the father concerning the loan (and the concession made by the mother about the sums of money being advanced to the parties throughout the relationship) would be to fall into error. if the court is against the father on that issue, an assessment of the parties’ contributions must find the father’s to be overwhelmingly superior to the mother’s. her claim of $700,000 representing an entitlement of 35% of the mother’s preferred asset pool must be considered an ambit claim. it is not supported by the evidence. in reality, there is nothing in the asset pool so as to allow such orders to be made. the court must deal with the reality – not what a party would like it to be.
outline of principle: parenting
... maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents, obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement having been incurred.
... it must not be assumed that one parent (the father) cannot move and that the mother must, in every case, subordinate her ambitions and wishes, not to the needs of the child, but to the wishes of the father to pursue his life in a place of his choosing. it is the interests of the child which are paramount, not the interests or needs of the parents, let alone the interests of one of them.  4] the problems that family law legislation deals with are human problems: with all their attendant variety and complexity. and at the end of a court proceeding under such legislation, a judge must make an order - usually an order that says yes or no to some application. "[a] complicated mass of human experience has to be reduced to the simplest possible terms." because the problems are human problems, because they are as varied and complicated as they are, the legislature speaks in terms more often found in statements of aspiration than legal prescription. it is, then, hardly surprising that the guiding principles prescribed by the legislation for application in cases concerning the guardianship or custody of children or related issues, are principles that seldom, if ever, permit syllogistic reasoning. [205] further, when considering the reasons given by a judge who has made an order in an application about the guardianship or custody of children, it is necessary to bear steadily in mind that the judge must grapple with the chaotic complexity of real life, make predictions not only of what he or she concludes may happen in future but also of what will be "best" for the child, and do so having regard to what the parties have chosen to contest or emphasise in the course of the hearing.
on the one hand, the appellate court is obliged to “give the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first instance.” on the other, it must, of necessity, observe the “natural limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on the record. these limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the “feeling” of a case which an appellate court, reading the transcript, cannot always fully share. furthermore, the appellate court does not typically get taken to, or read, all of the evidence taken at the trial. commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the obligation at trial to receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence and to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.   the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))  ] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s 60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.  ] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision-making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.  ] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):  6] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.  ] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
we also observe that in champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 the full court (thackray, o’ryan & benjamin jj) observed at [103]:
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994.) (emphasis in original)
the full court also observed at [191]: “the first and very important observation we would make about this complaint is that the expression ‘meaningful relationship’ is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’ ”.  7] for our part, we echo the view expressed by the trial judge of the serious nature of depriving the father of contact in circumstances where that appears to have been engineered by the mother, without any fault on the part of the father at all. this cannot be in a child's best interests. [178] it also does not appear to us to be appropriate for a parent to be able to manipulate the family law system to such an extent that the other parent's hope of ever seeing the child again, rests upon the possibility that she may wish to seek him out in later adolescence or adulthood. [179] we think that a family court would not be doing its duty if it were to simply give in to these sorts of considerations, except in the most extreme case and only then, when a positive determination is made that the welfare of the child requires it.
given the overriding consideration of the welfare of the child, the court must consider the conduct of the parents, not with a view to rewarding one or punishing the other, but to ascertain from such conduct whether the welfare of the child will be better served in the custody of one or the other.
consideration and disposition: parenting   i agree with and accept the comments by dr g regarding each parent, notably the significant and multiple areas of deficiency of the father, and the mother’s generally significant capacities as a parent who is in an intolerable situation as a result of the actions of the paternal grandparents, with whom the father is complicit in y remaining in country n and the growing estrangement between y and his mother (and brother), (b) the father was (and remains) very much a parent with little insight into the needs of his children, and who has, in every relevant respect, “outsourced” the parenting of y to the grandparents, and who also provides little or no support to the mother in her care of x. he was and remains completely negative towards the mother. as noted by dr g, the father’s parenting capacities are significantly deficient and, alarmingly, he is either oblivious to them and/or does not care about them, (c) it follows from the reasons already given that the father has very limited capacities as a parent, while the mother has (and is required to have) constant capacities and attention to the needs of x, all the while trying to cope with having y alienated from her and living in country n with little prospect of him returning to australia, or spending any time with her or x, (d) it also follows from the reasons already given that the father’s attitude towards the children is very “hands off”, and that his attitude more generally towards the responsibilities of parenthood are similarly very limited. he is the quintessential “bachelor parent”, someone with a title of parent but minimal care and little responsibility. it is also the case and follows from what has been said already that the father barely fulfils his responsibilities regarding the maintenance of the children, (e) finally, in relation to these matters, i note that dr g commented that the alienation of y from the mother (and effectively also from x) constituted “psychological abuse” and would almost certainly lead to long-term adverse effects.   the father was (and remains) very much a parent with little insight into the needs of his children, and who has, in every relevant respect, “outsourced” the parenting of y to the grandparents, and who also provides little or no support to the mother in her care of x. he was and remains completely negative towards the mother. as noted by dr g, the father’s parenting capacities are significantly deficient and, alarmingly, he is either oblivious to them and/or does not care about them, (c) it follows from the reasons already given that the father has very limited capacities as a parent, while the mother has (and is required to have) constant capacities and attention to the needs of x, all the while trying to cope with having y alienated from her and living in country n with little prospect of him returning to australia, or spending any time with her or x, (d) it also follows from the reasons already given that the father’s attitude towards the children is very “hands off”, and that his attitude more generally towards the responsibilities of parenthood are similarly very limited. he is the quintessential “bachelor parent”, someone with a title of parent but minimal care and little responsibility. it is also the case and follows from what has been said already that the father barely fulfils his responsibilities regarding the maintenance of the children, (e) finally, in relation to these matters, i note that dr g commented that the alienation of y from the mother (and effectively also from x) constituted “psychological abuse” and would almost certainly lead to long-term adverse effects.   it follows from the reasons already given that the father has very limited capacities as a parent, while the mother has (and is required to have) constant capacities and attention to the needs of x, all the while trying to cope with having y alienated from her and living in country n with little prospect of him returning to australia, or spending any time with her or x, (d) it also follows from the reasons already given that the father’s attitude towards the children is very “hands off”, and that his attitude more generally towards the responsibilities of parenthood are similarly very limited. he is the quintessential “bachelor parent”, someone with a title of parent but minimal care and little responsibility. it is also the case and follows from what has been said already that the father barely fulfils his responsibilities regarding the maintenance of the children, (e) finally, in relation to these matters, i note that dr g commented that the alienation of y from the mother (and effectively also from x) constituted “psychological abuse” and would almost certainly lead to long-term adverse effects.   it also follows from the reasons already given that the father’s attitude towards the children is very “hands off”, and that his attitude more generally towards the responsibilities of parenthood are similarly very limited. he is the quintessential “bachelor parent”, someone with a title of parent but minimal care and little responsibility. it is also the case and follows from what has been said already that the father barely fulfils his responsibilities regarding the maintenance of the children, (e) finally, in relation to these matters, i note that dr g commented that the alienation of y from the mother (and effectively also from x) constituted “psychological abuse” and would almost certainly lead to long-term adverse effects.   finally, in relation to these matters, i note that dr g commented that the alienation of y from the mother (and effectively also from x) constituted “psychological abuse” and would almost certainly lead to long-term adverse effects.
outline of principle: property ] section 79 demands a consideration, separately, of all of its requirements without conflation. provided a trial judge has done so, and the reasons demonstrate that this has been done, no error is demonstrated by a failure to follow a particular order in doing so. further, the breadth and depth of the consideration of the s.79(2) issue, and the extent of an adequate exposition of it in the reasons, will vary from case to case. in that respect, the plurality in bevan said, at [82], that the separate s.79(2) issue will, “...in many cases ... [be] ... effectively answered in the affirmative by the way the parties present their cases.” [20] each of those conclusions conforms entirely with what was said about those issues by the high court in stanford v stanford (2012) 247 clr 108. [21] first, it is “...not possible to chart [the] metes and bounds” of the relevant discretion. just as importantly, it was recognised specifically that the characteristics of individual marriage unions, in so far as they acquire, hold and deal with property, differ. in “many cases”, the union is underpinned by “...stated and unstated assumptions between the parties to a marriage that the arrangement of property interests, whatever they are, is sufficient for the purposes of the husband and wife during the continuance of their marriage” (stanford, at [41]). and, in “many cases”, (but, not all) the “...just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied...” by the fact of separation: “[i]t will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order ... because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife” (stanford at [42]).
“...what is ‘plainly wrong’ will vary in the eyes of different beholders” and also the fact that the “...functions and purposes of the court ... [involve] ... difficult and evaluative decisions...” such that “...any two decision-makers may, with complete integrity and upon the same material, often come to differing conclusions”. (cdj at [186(2)], per kirby j).  ] ... as we have already said, there is no requirement to attribute different percentages to different periods in the relationship. indeed the full court has cautioned against it: see dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, (2012) 50 fam lr 244, lovine & connor and anor [2012] famcafc 168, (2012) flc 93-515 and bolger & headon [2014] famcafc 27 where the full court said at [28], “[d]oing so ... is not consistent with a holistic assessment of the parties’ contributions which is what s.79(4) requires.” it is only if error can be demonstrated in the overall result that the appeal would succeed. [168] ... the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by s.79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.  ] any and all such contributions, whether or not they sound in, or are directly linked to, the property available for distribution, should be considered and assessed together with the nature, form and extent of all other contributions of all types contemplated otherwise by s 79(4). [19] that is true of assets or income generated within the relationship and it is equally true of assets or income coming from outside of the relationship (for example, as here, in the form of inheritances). in the same way, s 79(4) specifically requires the court to take into account contributions made to the welfare of the family (and substantively and “...not in any merely token way...”, see, mallett v mallett [1984] hca 21, (1984) 156 clr 605 at 636 per wilson j) notwithstanding that those contributions may not be, or cannot be seen to be, directly linked to the available property at trial, or any increase or decrease in the value of the property. [20] put another way, consistent with authority, the s 79 discretion involves as a necessary requirement that “... trial judges weigh and assess the contributions of all kinds and from all sources made by each of the parties throughout the period of their cohabitation and then translate such an assessment into a percentage of the overall property of the parties or provide for a transfer of property in specie in accordance with that assessment.” (in the marriage of aleksovski [1996] famcafc 111, (1996) 20 fam lr 894 at 903). in aleksovski, kay j outlined the well-known “gold bar” analogy and said “[w]hat is important is to somehow give a reasonable value to all of the elements that go to making up the entirety of the marriage relationship” (at 83,443). [21] those same principles can be expressed as saying that the requirements of the section are met by approaching the assessment of contributions holistically and by analysing the nature, form, characteristics and origin of the property currently comprising that to which s 79 applies, and, in turn, analysing the nature, form and extent of the contributions (of all types) contemplated by s 79. that task is also undertaken by reference to the nature and form of the particular marriage partnership manifested by the particular circumstances of this particular marriage. is it, for example, a relationship, as deane j put it in mallett at 640-641 “...where the parties have adopted the attitude that their marriage constituted a practical union of both lives and property...” or is it, for example, a union where parties lived very separate domestic and financial lives? [22] the analysis just referred to might, obviously enough, also involve an examination of when contributions were made and the use made of contributions. but that is quite different to attributing to, or searching for, a necessary causal connection between contributions and the available property as a requirement for a particular contribution having significance in the overall assessment of what is just and equitable.  ] we wish also to refer to the approach of the federal magistrate in attributing percentages to differing periods within the relationship, or types of contribution made. there is in our view little to be gained, and much to be said against, approaching the task of assessing contributions by attaching percentages to components of it. (the same, it might be said, applies to attributing a percentage to each of the relevant s 75(2) factors). [24] there can be little doubt that the classification of contributions by reference to terms such as “initial contributions”, “contributions during the relationship”, and “post-separation contributions”, can be helpful as a convenient means of giving coherent expression to the evidence in a s 79 case and to giving coherence to the nature, form and extent of the parties’ respective contributions. however, the task of assessing contributions is holistic and but part of a yet further holistic determination of what orders, if any, represent justice and equity in the particular circumstances of this particular relationship. so much is clear from the terms of s 79 itself and, in particular, s 79(2). the essential task is to assess the nature, form and extent of the contributions of all types made by each of the parties within the context of an analysis of their particular relationship. [25] doing so is also consistent with the demands of authority that the ultimate assessment of contributions should be made without “...giving over-zealous attention to the ascertainment of the parties’ contributions...” (norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513 at 524) and the well-established recognition in the authorities (acknowledged specifically by her honour in this case) that the process required of the court by s 79 is the exercise of a wide discretion, not the performance of a mathematical or accounting exercise. [26] the necessarily imprecise “wide discretion” inherent in what is required by the section is made no more precise or coherent by attributing percentage figures to arbitrary time frames or categorisations of contributions within the relationship. indeed, we consider that doing so is contrary to the holistic analysis required by the section and, in the usual course of events, should be avoided.
the consideration of the relevant matters referred to in s.75(2) of the act, pursuant to s.79(4), like the assessment of contributions, is holistic. also, like the assessment of contributions, it is not an accounting exercise.
the reference to "financial resources" in the context of s.75(2)(b) has long been correctly interpreted by the family court to refer to "a source of financial support which a party can reasonably expect will be available to him or her to supply a financial need or deficiency". the requirement that the financial resource be that "of" a party no doubt implies that the source of financial support be one on which the party is capable of drawing. it must involve something more than an expectation of benevolence on the part of another. but it goes too far to suggest that the party must control the source of financial support...
section 75(2)(o) plainly extends to any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account as showing that a party to the marriage is or is not able to pay spousal maintenance or is or is not able to support himself or herself. the paragraph has accordingly long been correctly interpreted by the family court as permitting consideration by a court of "all of the financial matters which are relevant to [a] particular case". nothing in the language or structure of s.75 prevents a fact or circumstance which falls within s.75(2)(o) being also a fact or circumstance which gives rise to a matter under another paragraph of s.75(2), including s.75(2)(b).
consideration and disposition: property
associate: dated: 19 october 2023
dated: 19 october 2023
[1] t 19 – 22 [2] t 23 – 28 [3] t 28 – 30 [4] t 30 – 34 [5] t 32 – 35 [6] t 35 – 37 [7] t 37 – 39 [8] t 39 – 40 [9] t 40 – 42 [10] t 42 – 43 [11] t 43 – 46 [12] t 46 – 49 [13] t 50 [14] t 50[15] t 52 – 54 [16] t 54 [17] t 55 – 56 [18] t 57 – 59 [19] t 59 – 62 [20] t 63 – 67 [21] t 67 – 70 [22] t 70 – 76 [23] t 76 – 80 [24] t 81[25] t 81 – 84 [26] t 85[27] t 86 – 87 [28] t 87 - 89[29] t 89 – 90 [30] t 90 – 93 [31] t 93 – 94 [32] t 95[33] t 100 – 104 [34] t 104 – 105 [35] t 105 – 106 [36] t 107 [37] t 107 – 109 [38] t 109 – 113 [39] t 113 – 115 [40] t 115 – 120 [41] t 120 - 127[42] t 127 – 129 [43] simply for ease of reference, especially given the applicant’s somewhat limited comprehension of english, i will not here revert to the usual description of parties as “husband and wife”, and will simply keep the references to “father and mother”.[44] t 129 – 132 [45] t 132 – 136 [46] t 136 – 142 [47] t 142 – 144 [48] t 144 – 147 [49] t 149 – 153 [50] t 153 – 158 [51] t 158 – 161[52] t 161 – 164 [53] t 165 – 166 [54] t 167 – 173 [55] t 173 – 178 [56] t 178 – 190 [57] t 190 – 192 [58] t 193 – 196 [59] t 197 – t 199[60] t 199 – 208 [61] t 212 – 215 [62] t 223 – 227 [63] t 228 – 231 [64] t 232[65] t 232[66] t 232 – 234 [67] t 235[68] t 235 – 236 [69] t 236[70] t 236 – 237 [71] t 240[72] t 240 – 242 [73] t 242 – 243 [74] t 243 – 244 [75] t 244 – 245 [76] t 245 [77] t 246 – 247 [78] t 247 – 249 [79] t 249 – 251 [80] t 251 – 252 [81] t 252 – 254 [82] t 254 – 257 [83] t 258 – 259 [84] t 259 – 262 [85] t 263 – 265 [86] t 265 – 267 [87] t 268 – 271 [88] t 271 – 273 [89] t 273 – 274 [90] t 274 – 275 [91] t 275 – 276 [92] 276 – 279 [93] t 279 – 281 [94] t 281 – 283 [95] t 284 - 285[96] t 284 – 286[97] t 286 – 287 [98] t 287[99] t 287 – 290 [100] t 290[101] t 290 [102] t 290 – 291 [103] t 291[104] t 291 – 292 [105] t 292[106] t 293[107] tb 3 – 4 [108] tb 4[109] tb 4 – 5 [110] tb 5 – 6 [111] tb 6 – 7 [112] tb 7 [113] tb 7 – 8 [114] tb 8[115] tb 8[116] tb 8 – 9 [117] tb 9 – 10 [118] tb 10 – 11 [119] tb 11 [120] tb 12 [121] tb 12 – 14 [122] tb 14 – 15 [123] tb 15 – 17 [124] tb 17 – 18 [125] tb 18 – 20 [126] tb 20 – 21 [127] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238.[128] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.228 [204] & [205]. of course, the comments by both kirby & hayne jj were in a legislative context different to that which operates today. accepting that qualification, respectfully, their honour’s comments remain important.[129] fox v percy (2003) 214 clr 118 at pp.125-126 [23]. see also the extensive discussion by mchugh j in the same case at [65] – [93].[130] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[131] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. more recently still, a further full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[132] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[133] bondelmonte v bondelmonte [2017] hca 8; (2017) 259 clr 662 at [34] – [35] and [43]. of course, in considering a child’s views, the court should also be mindful of potential consequences if orders are made that are contrary to any expressed views of a child or children. [134] in the marriage of r [2002] famca 383; (2002) 169 flr 243; 29 fam lr 230.[135] among other places, see the full court decision in partington v cade (no.2) [2009] famcafc 230; (2009) 42 fam lr 401 at [48] and [56].[136] in the marriage of kress (1976) 13 alr 309.[137] chapman v chapman [2014] famcafc 91; (2015) 51 fam lr 176.[138] ajo v gro (2005) 33 fam lr 439.[139] fields v smith [2015] famcafc 57; (2015) flc 93-638; (2016) 53 fam lr 1.[140] dickons v dickons [2012] famcafc 154; (2014) 50 fam lr 244.[141] hall v hall [2016] hca 23; (2016) 257 clr 490.