last updated: 5 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
chai & hsu [2023] fedcfamc2f 1376
orders
the court orders that:  firstly, to pay the selling agents costs, (b) secondly, to discharge the mortgages against the following properties, in order of priority: (i) d street, suburb e (the suburb e property), (ii) f street, suburb g (suburb g property) (iii) h street, suburb j (suburb j property) (c) thirdly, to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the suburb c property, (d) fourthly, to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the properties enumerated in order 1(b) hereof in order of priority, (e) the balance then remaining, if any, be divided equally between the parties as part property settlement.   secondly, to discharge the mortgages against the following properties, in order of priority: (i) d street, suburb e (the suburb e property), (ii) f street, suburb g (suburb g property) (iii) h street, suburb j (suburb j property) (c) thirdly, to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the suburb c property, (d) fourthly, to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the properties enumerated in order 1(b) hereof in order of priority, (e) the balance then remaining, if any, be divided equally between the parties as part property settlement.   d street, suburb e (the suburb e property), (ii) f street, suburb g (suburb g property) (iii) h street, suburb j (suburb j property)  ) f street, suburb g (suburb g property) (iii) h street, suburb j (suburb j property)  i) h street, suburb j (suburb j property)   thirdly, to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the suburb c property, (d) fourthly, to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the properties enumerated in order 1(b) hereof in order of priority, (e) the balance then remaining, if any, be divided equally between the parties as part property settlement.   fourthly, to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the properties enumerated in order 1(b) hereof in order of priority, (e) the balance then remaining, if any, be divided equally between the parties as part property settlement.   the balance then remaining, if any, be divided equally between the parties as part property settlement.   firstly, to pay the selling agent’s costs and commissions of the sale (b) secondly, to discharge the mortgage against the suburb l property, (c) thirdly, to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the suburb l property, (d) fourthly, the balance, if any, be divided equally between the parties as part property settlement.   secondly, to discharge the mortgage against the suburb l property, (c) thirdly, to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the suburb l property, (d) fourthly, the balance, if any, be divided equally between the parties as part property settlement.   thirdly, to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the suburb l property, (d) fourthly, the balance, if any, be divided equally between the parties as part property settlement.   fourthly, the balance, if any, be divided equally between the parties as part property settlement.   the suburb l property, (b) the suburb g property, (c) the suburb j property, (d) the suburb e property, and (e) the property situate at p street, town q.   the suburb g property, (c) the suburb j property, (d) the suburb e property, and (e) the property situate at p street, town q.   the suburb j property, (d) the suburb e property, and (e) the property situate at p street, town q.   the suburb e property, and (e) the property situate at p street, town q.   the property situate at p street, town q.   subject to the parties compliance with orders 1 and 2 hereof, the parties do all such acts and sign all such documents to appoint mr s as mediator, with such mediation to be conducted on or before 16 december 2023, with the costs of the mediation to be borne at the joint expense of the parties.
reasons for judgment
judge j young:
introduction
background and property pool
description
ownership
agreed value
mortgage over property
assets
1
h street, suburb j
husband
$490,000
$317,000
2
f street, suburb g
wife
$1,150,000
$540,000
3
k street, suburb l
$700,000
$610,000
4
d street, suburb e
joint names
$2,600,000
$680,000
5
p street, town q
r pty ltd as trustee for the t family trust
$570,000
unencumbered
6
b street, suburb c
$1,600,000
orders sought
a. firstly to pay the selling agents costs, secondly to repay the [u bank] in respect of loans secured by mortgage against he following properties in order of priority:
i. [d street, suburb e], ii. [f street, suburb g, [h street, suburb j] thirdly to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the [b street, suburb c] property, fourthly to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings owing in relation to the properties enumerated in order 2(b) hereof in order of priority, the balance then remaining, if any be divided equally as between the parties. the wife shall sell the property situate at [k street, suburb l] on terms and conditions nominated by her providing that she authorise the selling agent to provide the husband with any information as to the sale as reasonably requested by him.
3. the proceeds of sale of the [suburb l] property shall be applied as follows:
a. firstly to pay the selling agent’s costs and commissions of the sale secondly to repay the [u bank] monies owed to it secured by the mortgage against the [suburb l] property, thirdly to pay any outstanding rates and any other outgoings secured against the [suburb l] property), fourthly the balance, if any, be divided equally between the parties as part property settlement.
4. order 3 of the orders made 27 september 2023 be discharged. [m company] of [n street, suburb o] be appointed the single expert valuers and the parties do all acts and things necessary to obtain their valuation reports at equal shared expense of the following properties as soon as practicable:
a. the [suburb c] property b. the [suburb l] property c. the [suburb g] property d. the [suburb j] property e. the [suburb e] property f. the property situate at [town q]
6. all outstanding interim applications otherwise be dismissed. 7. the parties’ costs of today be reserved.
a) the wife providing the husband with three (“3”) real estate agents to conduct the sale and the husband nominating one (“1”), with the reserve price to be determined by the valuations in order 3 herein,
b) upon sale the proceeds be applied:
i. firstly to the costs and commissions of the selling agent, ii. secondly, to discharge the mortgage in favour of [u bank], any net proceeds thereafter be divided equally between the parties as part-property settlement. the parties do all acts and things necessary to sell forwith by public auction, the property situate at [suburb g] and for these purposes: the wife providing the husband with three (“3”) real estate agents to conduct the sale and the husband nominating one (“1”), with the reserve price to be determined by the valuations in order 3 herein,
d) upon sale the proceeds be applied:
i. firstly to the costs and commissions of the selling agent, ii. secondly, to discharge the mortgage in favour of [u bank], any net proceeds thereafter be divided equally between the parties as part-property settlement. the wife’s application to sell the property situate at [suburb c] and the husband’s application to sell [suburb g] property be adjourned to ______in division ___ on ___ and for these purposes: the wife shall file an application in a case and any supporting affidavits by 4:00 pm thursday 26 october 2023, the husband shall file a response to the application and any supporting affidavits by 4:00 pm 30 october 2023, each of the parties file a case outline 2 days prior to the interim defended hearing date, order 3 of the orders made 27 september 2023 be varied to substitute the name of the single expert valuer from [v pty ltd] of level [w street, suburb z] to [m company].
5. the parties’ costs of today be reserved.
issues in dispute
material relied on  initiating application filed 7 august 2023, (2) affidavit of the wife filed 13 october 2023, (3) financial statement of the wife filed 7 august 2023, and (4) outline of case filed 18 october 2023.   affidavit of the wife filed 13 october 2023, (3) financial statement of the wife filed 7 august 2023, and (4) outline of case filed 18 october 2023.   financial statement of the wife filed 7 august 2023, and (4) outline of case filed 18 october 2023.   outline of case filed 18 october 2023.   response filed 26 september 2023, (2) affidavit of husband filed 11 october 2023, (3) financial statement of husband filed 26 september 2023. (4) outline of case filed 20 october 2023,   affidavit of husband filed 11 october 2023, (3) financial statement of husband filed 26 september 2023. (4) outline of case filed 20 october 2023,   financial statement of husband filed 26 september 2023. (4) outline of case filed 20 october 2023,   outline of case filed 20 october 2023,
sale of the parties’ properties
sale of the suburb l property
given the mutual agreement of the parties regarding the sale of [suburb l], in accordance with paragraph 5 of the order dated 27 september 2023, the property can be sold. since the property is solely registered under your client’s name and your client has already initiated contact with [aa company], we strongly recommend that your client promptly engage with [aa company] to coordinate the auction campaign. please copy our client in any future correspondence with [aa company].
sale of the suburb g property
sale of the suburb c property
legal principles
in relation to the first stage, in our view, when considering whether to exercise the power under s 79 and 80(1)(h) of the act to make an interim property order the “overarching consideration” is the interests of justice. it is not necessary to establish compelling circumstances. all that is required is that in the circumstances it is appropriate to exercise the power. in exercising the wide and unfettered discretion conferred by the power to make such an order, regard should be had to the fact that the usual order pursuant to s 79 is a once and for all order made after a final hearing.
in relation to the second matter, as the jurisdiction under s 79 of the act is being exercised the provision of that section must be considered and applied but with limitations given that it is not the final hearing. there is also no requirement of compelling circumstances in relation to the substantive step.
it seems likely to the court that...the applicant...will be likely to receive by way of property settlement a sum sufficient to cover the advance, that would seem to be sufficient to enable the order sought to be made.
the interim order must be capable of variation or reversal without resort to s 79a of the act or appeal.   whether the power under ss 79 and 80(1)(h) of the act should be exercised, (b) if so, then an assessment of the factors contained in s 79 of the act is to occur, and (c) an assessment as to whether any interim amount in this matter is able to be ‘clawed back’ at a final hearing stage.   if so, then an assessment of the factors contained in s 79 of the act is to occur, and (c) an assessment as to whether any interim amount in this matter is able to be ‘clawed back’ at a final hearing stage.   an assessment as to whether any interim amount in this matter is able to be ‘clawed back’ at a final hearing stage.
consideration  the parties cannot meet the mortgage repayments and other liabilities associated with the properties, (2) the mortgage liabilities are significant in isolation and are even more so given the asserted incomes of the parties, (3) the moratorium on the cessation of mortgage repayments ceases in late 2023 and there is therefore some significant urgency to effecting sale of some property to alleviate the parties’ financial hardship. further, even if u bank agreed to extend the moratorium on mortgage repayments for a further period, whilst this might provide immediate financial relief, it ultimately only continues to increase the parties’ liabilities and further diminish the property pool which will be available for distribution at final hearing, (4) the husband’s proposal is time consuming and will result in an increased risk of u bank foreclosing. this in turn carries the risk of a reduction in the prices able to be obtained for the properties if they are sold by way of mortgagee auctions, thereby diminishing rather than preserving the property pool, (5) the sale of the suburb c property is well progressed and there is advice that the offer is strong, (6) the husband has previously agreed to both the sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property and in the manner in which the wife now seeks the court order, (7) the husband asserts that the value of the suburb c property exceeds the offer but would not agree to the expediated valuation of that property. indeed, the base for the husband’s opposition to the wife’s proposal seems to shift and on the material currently before the court may, perhaps, be seen to be driven by factors other than a desire to maximise and preserve the property pool, (8) the husband’s proposal will result in the retention of the suburb c property, the suburb e property and the suburb j property. the town q property will also be retained (noting that there is no suggestion by either party that the town q property be sold and also noting that this property is unencumbered). however, under the husband’s proposal the suburb e property and the suburb j property will remain encumbered, with the parties having little (if any) capacity to meet the ongoing mortgage and other liabilities associated with those properties. indeed, counsel for the husband conceded at the hearing that this is the effect of the husband’s proposal, (9) the suburb c property is unencumbered and therefore under the wife’s proposal the entire net proceeds of the sale will be available to be applied to the parties liabilities. under the wife’s proposal, on the material currently before the court, it appears that sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property would likely allow the mortgages on the suburb e property, the suburb g property and the suburb j property to be discharged and for those properties to be retained by the parties unencumbered. it is of note that the suburb e property is the most valuable real property asset in the pool and is retained unencumbered under the wife’s proposal. further, the wife and children reside at the suburb e property, which is the former matrimonial home, and the husband resides at the suburb j property. the town q property is to be retained and is also unencumbered. accordingly, under the wife’s proposal all the properties to be retained by the parties would likely be unencumbered. this is of considerable significance given the parties’ asserted limited incomes and therefore limited capacity to service any mortgage. additionally, as the suburb g property is leased, it would also provide rental income for the use of the parties, i consider the wife’s proposal to best preserve the parties assets and property pool.   the mortgage liabilities are significant in isolation and are even more so given the asserted incomes of the parties, (3) the moratorium on the cessation of mortgage repayments ceases in late 2023 and there is therefore some significant urgency to effecting sale of some property to alleviate the parties’ financial hardship. further, even if u bank agreed to extend the moratorium on mortgage repayments for a further period, whilst this might provide immediate financial relief, it ultimately only continues to increase the parties’ liabilities and further diminish the property pool which will be available for distribution at final hearing, (4) the husband’s proposal is time consuming and will result in an increased risk of u bank foreclosing. this in turn carries the risk of a reduction in the prices able to be obtained for the properties if they are sold by way of mortgagee auctions, thereby diminishing rather than preserving the property pool, (5) the sale of the suburb c property is well progressed and there is advice that the offer is strong, (6) the husband has previously agreed to both the sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property and in the manner in which the wife now seeks the court order, (7) the husband asserts that the value of the suburb c property exceeds the offer but would not agree to the expediated valuation of that property. indeed, the base for the husband’s opposition to the wife’s proposal seems to shift and on the material currently before the court may, perhaps, be seen to be driven by factors other than a desire to maximise and preserve the property pool, (8) the husband’s proposal will result in the retention of the suburb c property, the suburb e property and the suburb j property. the town q property will also be retained (noting that there is no suggestion by either party that the town q property be sold and also noting that this property is unencumbered). however, under the husband’s proposal the suburb e property and the suburb j property will remain encumbered, with the parties having little (if any) capacity to meet the ongoing mortgage and other liabilities associated with those properties. indeed, counsel for the husband conceded at the hearing that this is the effect of the husband’s proposal, (9) the suburb c property is unencumbered and therefore under the wife’s proposal the entire net proceeds of the sale will be available to be applied to the parties liabilities. under the wife’s proposal, on the material currently before the court, it appears that sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property would likely allow the mortgages on the suburb e property, the suburb g property and the suburb j property to be discharged and for those properties to be retained by the parties unencumbered. it is of note that the suburb e property is the most valuable real property asset in the pool and is retained unencumbered under the wife’s proposal. further, the wife and children reside at the suburb e property, which is the former matrimonial home, and the husband resides at the suburb j property. the town q property is to be retained and is also unencumbered. accordingly, under the wife’s proposal all the properties to be retained by the parties would likely be unencumbered. this is of considerable significance given the parties’ asserted limited incomes and therefore limited capacity to service any mortgage. additionally, as the suburb g property is leased, it would also provide rental income for the use of the parties, i consider the wife’s proposal to best preserve the parties assets and property pool.   the moratorium on the cessation of mortgage repayments ceases in late 2023 and there is therefore some significant urgency to effecting sale of some property to alleviate the parties’ financial hardship. further, even if u bank agreed to extend the moratorium on mortgage repayments for a further period, whilst this might provide immediate financial relief, it ultimately only continues to increase the parties’ liabilities and further diminish the property pool which will be available for distribution at final hearing, (4) the husband’s proposal is time consuming and will result in an increased risk of u bank foreclosing. this in turn carries the risk of a reduction in the prices able to be obtained for the properties if they are sold by way of mortgagee auctions, thereby diminishing rather than preserving the property pool, (5) the sale of the suburb c property is well progressed and there is advice that the offer is strong, (6) the husband has previously agreed to both the sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property and in the manner in which the wife now seeks the court order, (7) the husband asserts that the value of the suburb c property exceeds the offer but would not agree to the expediated valuation of that property. indeed, the base for the husband’s opposition to the wife’s proposal seems to shift and on the material currently before the court may, perhaps, be seen to be driven by factors other than a desire to maximise and preserve the property pool, (8) the husband’s proposal will result in the retention of the suburb c property, the suburb e property and the suburb j property. the town q property will also be retained (noting that there is no suggestion by either party that the town q property be sold and also noting that this property is unencumbered). however, under the husband’s proposal the suburb e property and the suburb j property will remain encumbered, with the parties having little (if any) capacity to meet the ongoing mortgage and other liabilities associated with those properties. indeed, counsel for the husband conceded at the hearing that this is the effect of the husband’s proposal, (9) the suburb c property is unencumbered and therefore under the wife’s proposal the entire net proceeds of the sale will be available to be applied to the parties liabilities. under the wife’s proposal, on the material currently before the court, it appears that sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property would likely allow the mortgages on the suburb e property, the suburb g property and the suburb j property to be discharged and for those properties to be retained by the parties unencumbered. it is of note that the suburb e property is the most valuable real property asset in the pool and is retained unencumbered under the wife’s proposal. further, the wife and children reside at the suburb e property, which is the former matrimonial home, and the husband resides at the suburb j property. the town q property is to be retained and is also unencumbered. accordingly, under the wife’s proposal all the properties to be retained by the parties would likely be unencumbered. this is of considerable significance given the parties’ asserted limited incomes and therefore limited capacity to service any mortgage. additionally, as the suburb g property is leased, it would also provide rental income for the use of the parties, i consider the wife’s proposal to best preserve the parties assets and property pool.   the husband’s proposal is time consuming and will result in an increased risk of u bank foreclosing. this in turn carries the risk of a reduction in the prices able to be obtained for the properties if they are sold by way of mortgagee auctions, thereby diminishing rather than preserving the property pool, (5) the sale of the suburb c property is well progressed and there is advice that the offer is strong, (6) the husband has previously agreed to both the sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property and in the manner in which the wife now seeks the court order, (7) the husband asserts that the value of the suburb c property exceeds the offer but would not agree to the expediated valuation of that property. indeed, the base for the husband’s opposition to the wife’s proposal seems to shift and on the material currently before the court may, perhaps, be seen to be driven by factors other than a desire to maximise and preserve the property pool, (8) the husband’s proposal will result in the retention of the suburb c property, the suburb e property and the suburb j property. the town q property will also be retained (noting that there is no suggestion by either party that the town q property be sold and also noting that this property is unencumbered). however, under the husband’s proposal the suburb e property and the suburb j property will remain encumbered, with the parties having little (if any) capacity to meet the ongoing mortgage and other liabilities associated with those properties. indeed, counsel for the husband conceded at the hearing that this is the effect of the husband’s proposal, (9) the suburb c property is unencumbered and therefore under the wife’s proposal the entire net proceeds of the sale will be available to be applied to the parties liabilities. under the wife’s proposal, on the material currently before the court, it appears that sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property would likely allow the mortgages on the suburb e property, the suburb g property and the suburb j property to be discharged and for those properties to be retained by the parties unencumbered. it is of note that the suburb e property is the most valuable real property asset in the pool and is retained unencumbered under the wife’s proposal. further, the wife and children reside at the suburb e property, which is the former matrimonial home, and the husband resides at the suburb j property. the town q property is to be retained and is also unencumbered. accordingly, under the wife’s proposal all the properties to be retained by the parties would likely be unencumbered. this is of considerable significance given the parties’ asserted limited incomes and therefore limited capacity to service any mortgage. additionally, as the suburb g property is leased, it would also provide rental income for the use of the parties, i consider the wife’s proposal to best preserve the parties assets and property pool.   the sale of the suburb c property is well progressed and there is advice that the offer is strong, (6) the husband has previously agreed to both the sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property and in the manner in which the wife now seeks the court order, (7) the husband asserts that the value of the suburb c property exceeds the offer but would not agree to the expediated valuation of that property. indeed, the base for the husband’s opposition to the wife’s proposal seems to shift and on the material currently before the court may, perhaps, be seen to be driven by factors other than a desire to maximise and preserve the property pool, (8) the husband’s proposal will result in the retention of the suburb c property, the suburb e property and the suburb j property. the town q property will also be retained (noting that there is no suggestion by either party that the town q property be sold and also noting that this property is unencumbered). however, under the husband’s proposal the suburb e property and the suburb j property will remain encumbered, with the parties having little (if any) capacity to meet the ongoing mortgage and other liabilities associated with those properties. indeed, counsel for the husband conceded at the hearing that this is the effect of the husband’s proposal, (9) the suburb c property is unencumbered and therefore under the wife’s proposal the entire net proceeds of the sale will be available to be applied to the parties liabilities. under the wife’s proposal, on the material currently before the court, it appears that sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property would likely allow the mortgages on the suburb e property, the suburb g property and the suburb j property to be discharged and for those properties to be retained by the parties unencumbered. it is of note that the suburb e property is the most valuable real property asset in the pool and is retained unencumbered under the wife’s proposal. further, the wife and children reside at the suburb e property, which is the former matrimonial home, and the husband resides at the suburb j property. the town q property is to be retained and is also unencumbered. accordingly, under the wife’s proposal all the properties to be retained by the parties would likely be unencumbered. this is of considerable significance given the parties’ asserted limited incomes and therefore limited capacity to service any mortgage. additionally, as the suburb g property is leased, it would also provide rental income for the use of the parties, i consider the wife’s proposal to best preserve the parties assets and property pool.   the husband has previously agreed to both the sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property and in the manner in which the wife now seeks the court order, (7) the husband asserts that the value of the suburb c property exceeds the offer but would not agree to the expediated valuation of that property. indeed, the base for the husband’s opposition to the wife’s proposal seems to shift and on the material currently before the court may, perhaps, be seen to be driven by factors other than a desire to maximise and preserve the property pool, (8) the husband’s proposal will result in the retention of the suburb c property, the suburb e property and the suburb j property. the town q property will also be retained (noting that there is no suggestion by either party that the town q property be sold and also noting that this property is unencumbered). however, under the husband’s proposal the suburb e property and the suburb j property will remain encumbered, with the parties having little (if any) capacity to meet the ongoing mortgage and other liabilities associated with those properties. indeed, counsel for the husband conceded at the hearing that this is the effect of the husband’s proposal, (9) the suburb c property is unencumbered and therefore under the wife’s proposal the entire net proceeds of the sale will be available to be applied to the parties liabilities. under the wife’s proposal, on the material currently before the court, it appears that sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property would likely allow the mortgages on the suburb e property, the suburb g property and the suburb j property to be discharged and for those properties to be retained by the parties unencumbered. it is of note that the suburb e property is the most valuable real property asset in the pool and is retained unencumbered under the wife’s proposal. further, the wife and children reside at the suburb e property, which is the former matrimonial home, and the husband resides at the suburb j property. the town q property is to be retained and is also unencumbered. accordingly, under the wife’s proposal all the properties to be retained by the parties would likely be unencumbered. this is of considerable significance given the parties’ asserted limited incomes and therefore limited capacity to service any mortgage. additionally, as the suburb g property is leased, it would also provide rental income for the use of the parties, i consider the wife’s proposal to best preserve the parties assets and property pool.   the husband asserts that the value of the suburb c property exceeds the offer but would not agree to the expediated valuation of that property. indeed, the base for the husband’s opposition to the wife’s proposal seems to shift and on the material currently before the court may, perhaps, be seen to be driven by factors other than a desire to maximise and preserve the property pool, (8) the husband’s proposal will result in the retention of the suburb c property, the suburb e property and the suburb j property. the town q property will also be retained (noting that there is no suggestion by either party that the town q property be sold and also noting that this property is unencumbered). however, under the husband’s proposal the suburb e property and the suburb j property will remain encumbered, with the parties having little (if any) capacity to meet the ongoing mortgage and other liabilities associated with those properties. indeed, counsel for the husband conceded at the hearing that this is the effect of the husband’s proposal, (9) the suburb c property is unencumbered and therefore under the wife’s proposal the entire net proceeds of the sale will be available to be applied to the parties liabilities. under the wife’s proposal, on the material currently before the court, it appears that sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property would likely allow the mortgages on the suburb e property, the suburb g property and the suburb j property to be discharged and for those properties to be retained by the parties unencumbered. it is of note that the suburb e property is the most valuable real property asset in the pool and is retained unencumbered under the wife’s proposal. further, the wife and children reside at the suburb e property, which is the former matrimonial home, and the husband resides at the suburb j property. the town q property is to be retained and is also unencumbered. accordingly, under the wife’s proposal all the properties to be retained by the parties would likely be unencumbered. this is of considerable significance given the parties’ asserted limited incomes and therefore limited capacity to service any mortgage. additionally, as the suburb g property is leased, it would also provide rental income for the use of the parties, i consider the wife’s proposal to best preserve the parties assets and property pool.   the husband’s proposal will result in the retention of the suburb c property, the suburb e property and the suburb j property. the town q property will also be retained (noting that there is no suggestion by either party that the town q property be sold and also noting that this property is unencumbered). however, under the husband’s proposal the suburb e property and the suburb j property will remain encumbered, with the parties having little (if any) capacity to meet the ongoing mortgage and other liabilities associated with those properties. indeed, counsel for the husband conceded at the hearing that this is the effect of the husband’s proposal, (9) the suburb c property is unencumbered and therefore under the wife’s proposal the entire net proceeds of the sale will be available to be applied to the parties liabilities. under the wife’s proposal, on the material currently before the court, it appears that sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property would likely allow the mortgages on the suburb e property, the suburb g property and the suburb j property to be discharged and for those properties to be retained by the parties unencumbered. it is of note that the suburb e property is the most valuable real property asset in the pool and is retained unencumbered under the wife’s proposal. further, the wife and children reside at the suburb e property, which is the former matrimonial home, and the husband resides at the suburb j property. the town q property is to be retained and is also unencumbered. accordingly, under the wife’s proposal all the properties to be retained by the parties would likely be unencumbered. this is of considerable significance given the parties’ asserted limited incomes and therefore limited capacity to service any mortgage. additionally, as the suburb g property is leased, it would also provide rental income for the use of the parties, i consider the wife’s proposal to best preserve the parties assets and property pool.   the suburb c property is unencumbered and therefore under the wife’s proposal the entire net proceeds of the sale will be available to be applied to the parties liabilities. under the wife’s proposal, on the material currently before the court, it appears that sale of the suburb c property and the suburb l property would likely allow the mortgages on the suburb e property, the suburb g property and the suburb j property to be discharged and for those properties to be retained by the parties unencumbered. it is of note that the suburb e property is the most valuable real property asset in the pool and is retained unencumbered under the wife’s proposal. further, the wife and children reside at the suburb e property, which is the former matrimonial home, and the husband resides at the suburb j property. the town q property is to be retained and is also unencumbered. accordingly, under the wife’s proposal all the properties to be retained by the parties would likely be unencumbered. this is of considerable significance given the parties’ asserted limited incomes and therefore limited capacity to service any mortgage. additionally, as the suburb g property is leased, it would also provide rental income for the use of the parties, i consider the wife’s proposal to best preserve the parties assets and property pool.
i consider the wife’s proposal to best preserve the parties assets and property pool.
associate: dated: 26 october 2023
dated: 26 october 2023
[1] gabel & yardley [2008] famcafc 162.[2] strahan & strahan (interim property orders) [2011] famcafc 126; (2011) flc 93-466.[3] felice & felice (2011) famca 162 at [12].[4] ibid at [136].[5] gabel & yardley [2008] famcafc 162 at [72].