last updated: 29 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
keith & zemlinsky [2023] fedcfamc2f 1413
orders
upon the court noting:
the court orders that:  with each of the mother and the father in alternate weeks (on a “week about” basis) with changeover to take place at the conclusion of school each friday (or 3.30 pm if b does not attend school on friday), commencing on the first friday after the making of these orders, and (b) at such further or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   at such further or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   if b spends the first half of the school holidays with the father pursuant to the 2013 orders, he spend the first week of the following school term with the father from the conclusion of school on the first day of term until the first friday of term, and (b) if b spends the second half of the school holidays with the father pursuant to the 2013 orders, he spend the first week of the following school term with the mother, from the last day of the school holidays until the first friday of term.   if b spends the second half of the school holidays with the father pursuant to the 2013 orders, he spend the first week of the following school term with the mother, from the last day of the school holidays until the first friday of term.
obligations, consequences of contravention and assistance with orders
reasons for judgment
judge a. humphreys:
introduction
the issues  whether b’s care arrangements should be the subject of orders or if he should be permitted to live with and spend time with each of his parents in accordance with his wishes. this issue requires consideration of the weight to be given to b’s expressed views in the context of other relevant considerations, and (b) if orders are to be made: (i) the allocation of parental responsibility for b, and (ii) what time b should spend with each of his parents. in particular, is an equal shared care arrangement in b’s best interests or is the current arrangement to be preferred?   if orders are to be made: (i) the allocation of parental responsibility for b, and (ii) what time b should spend with each of his parents. in particular, is an equal shared care arrangement in b’s best interests or is the current arrangement to be preferred?   the allocation of parental responsibility for b, and (ii) what time b should spend with each of his parents. in particular, is an equal shared care arrangement in b’s best interests or is the current arrangement to be preferred?  ) what time b should spend with each of his parents. in particular, is an equal shared care arrangement in b’s best interests or is the current arrangement to be preferred?
background  b reported feeling worried, fatigued and frustrated by court involvement with his family. he stated he would be relieved when a decision was finally made regarding his care arrangements, (b) it is clear b has been exposed to enduring acrimony and conflict throughout his childhood and it seems this has occurred both inadvertently and at times directly in conversations his parents have had with him, (c) he experiences stress and worry caused by his care arrangements and his parents, (d) he speaks to how his behaviour changes when with one parent to the other, dependent on the home environment and each parents’ individual expectations of him, (e) he described his mother as argumentative and at times angering easily. due to his preference of avoiding this, he has been spending increased time alone when at her home. he is open to this changing and spending increased meaningful time with her, (f) he reported he enjoys spending time with his father, feels understood by him and they have a close and trusting relationship. they have common interests, and (g) b spoke fondly of both parents and wants to spend time with both of them, ideally on a week about arrangement. he explained this would result in less transitions back and forth between homes for him and also hopefully assist to mitigate the conflict between his parents.   it is clear b has been exposed to enduring acrimony and conflict throughout his childhood and it seems this has occurred both inadvertently and at times directly in conversations his parents have had with him, (c) he experiences stress and worry caused by his care arrangements and his parents, (d) he speaks to how his behaviour changes when with one parent to the other, dependent on the home environment and each parents’ individual expectations of him, (e) he described his mother as argumentative and at times angering easily. due to his preference of avoiding this, he has been spending increased time alone when at her home. he is open to this changing and spending increased meaningful time with her, (f) he reported he enjoys spending time with his father, feels understood by him and they have a close and trusting relationship. they have common interests, and (g) b spoke fondly of both parents and wants to spend time with both of them, ideally on a week about arrangement. he explained this would result in less transitions back and forth between homes for him and also hopefully assist to mitigate the conflict between his parents.   he experiences stress and worry caused by his care arrangements and his parents, (d) he speaks to how his behaviour changes when with one parent to the other, dependent on the home environment and each parents’ individual expectations of him, (e) he described his mother as argumentative and at times angering easily. due to his preference of avoiding this, he has been spending increased time alone when at her home. he is open to this changing and spending increased meaningful time with her, (f) he reported he enjoys spending time with his father, feels understood by him and they have a close and trusting relationship. they have common interests, and (g) b spoke fondly of both parents and wants to spend time with both of them, ideally on a week about arrangement. he explained this would result in less transitions back and forth between homes for him and also hopefully assist to mitigate the conflict between his parents.   he speaks to how his behaviour changes when with one parent to the other, dependent on the home environment and each parents’ individual expectations of him, (e) he described his mother as argumentative and at times angering easily. due to his preference of avoiding this, he has been spending increased time alone when at her home. he is open to this changing and spending increased meaningful time with her, (f) he reported he enjoys spending time with his father, feels understood by him and they have a close and trusting relationship. they have common interests, and (g) b spoke fondly of both parents and wants to spend time with both of them, ideally on a week about arrangement. he explained this would result in less transitions back and forth between homes for him and also hopefully assist to mitigate the conflict between his parents.   he described his mother as argumentative and at times angering easily. due to his preference of avoiding this, he has been spending increased time alone when at her home. he is open to this changing and spending increased meaningful time with her, (f) he reported he enjoys spending time with his father, feels understood by him and they have a close and trusting relationship. they have common interests, and (g) b spoke fondly of both parents and wants to spend time with both of them, ideally on a week about arrangement. he explained this would result in less transitions back and forth between homes for him and also hopefully assist to mitigate the conflict between his parents.   he reported he enjoys spending time with his father, feels understood by him and they have a close and trusting relationship. they have common interests, and (g) b spoke fondly of both parents and wants to spend time with both of them, ideally on a week about arrangement. he explained this would result in less transitions back and forth between homes for him and also hopefully assist to mitigate the conflict between his parents.   b spoke fondly of both parents and wants to spend time with both of them, ideally on a week about arrangement. he explained this would result in less transitions back and forth between homes for him and also hopefully assist to mitigate the conflict between his parents.
if there is no change to [b’s] care arrangements he will maintain a sense of primary residency in one household and this could provide an opportunity for [the mother] and [b] to re-establish spending more meaningful time together. however, [b] has clearly reported feeling frustrated and unsettled within this arrangement. should no changes be made [b] will likely feel unheard and as though his wishes are not being respected. this would increase the risk of [b] ‘voting with his feet’ and becoming increasingly defiant. if [b’s] care arrangements change to a week about arrangement [b’s] sense of primary residency and associated stability would be lost. it could also work to undermine [b’s] relationship with [the mother] and strain this relationship further. this arrangement also runs the risk of a week about arrangement commencing but possibly deteriorating to [b] spending less and less time with his mother. conversely, the benefit of this arrangement would be that it aligns with what [b] currently wants, and with [b] feeling heard and understood he is more likely to be open to following the order and could possibly provide him with a sense of peace as well as having increased access to [the father] who [b] identified as a trusting and understanding person. nevertheless, there are clear challenges and vulnerabilities with both of these possible outcomes. both of these pathways do potentially lead to the same outcome of an emerging resist-refuse dynamic in which [b] may cease spending time with [the mother] in favour of living with [the father] aligned with his current care preference.
father: i liked to know what mum said [b]: i can text you what she said she didn’t say much father ok all she said is that “your dad wants this to go on for longer in court so we’re going to trial” something like that father: wow, what lies [b]: yep father: she has caused all of this. she could have just agreed to what you want. but she won’t. [b]: yeah father: i want you to live with me. this has to stop. you can then see your mum when you want [b]: i want to too but i can’t go to queensland to live i’ve got stuff down here father: no we won’t be doing that. not until you finish school and only if you want to [b]: wait so you’re not gonna be going? father: i’m not leaving you [b]: thank you father: you have to understand how much stress this has put me through [b]: yes i know and i’m sorry for not helping you at times father: trying to protect you, to give you a better life [b]: i know father: have you thought about what to do? [b]: with what thing? father: where to live? will you come here to live? [b]: i will live with you when i finish school and everything father: why? why not now? [b]: because i just wanted half half i’ll still keep talking to my mum about it father: [thumbs down reaction to above message] omg, nothing will change. you don’t even have half and half. not to mention all the other issues. you are going to regret this for the rest of your life. i’m going. you need to grow up one of these days and confront your mum for who she really is. cya i love you [heart icon] [b]: i love you too father: oh, please delete all messages from me. i don’t trust mum [b]: yep
the parties’ current circumstances
b’s current circumstances
the hearing
documents relied upon
evidence  in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject‑matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
the father
the mother
child impact report
the child impact report provides preliminary expert advice about the needs and experiences of children, to support decision making through dispute resolution processes and/or interim hearings. any views expressed, or professional recommendations made, by the court child expert in a child impact report need to be considered within the limited nature and focus of this type of assessment.
the law
objects and principles  the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
best interests
primary considerations  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
the benefit to b of having a meaningful relationship with both parents
the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence   for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful.
... there were many times [the father] was violent to me, in various ways. for example, he was occasionally physically violent (including headbutting me), locked me out of our home when i was pregnant, was verbally abusive, controlling, and had an explosive temper that led him to damage some of my property.
additional considerations
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as their maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give those views
the nature of the children’s relationships with each of their parents and other significant persons in their lives  the mother’s parents have both passed away, but she deposed her brother lives close to her and they share a good relationship. when cross-examined, she gave evidence he is a person b can rely upon, including for example while she was attending court, and (b) the father gave evidence he facilitates b’s relationship with his paternal relatives, including his paternal grandparents and that b has as close relationship with his paternal grandfather. he gave evidence about road trips and holidays with b, including to queensland and new south wales, to spend time with relatives.   the father gave evidence he facilitates b’s relationship with his paternal relatives, including his paternal grandparents and that b has as close relationship with his paternal grandfather. he gave evidence about road trips and holidays with b, including to queensland and new south wales, to spend time with relatives.
the extent to which the children’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in long-term decision making in relation to the children, to spend time and to communicate with the children
the extent to which each of the children’s parents have fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain the children
the likely effect of a change in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect of a separation from a parent or other significant persons in their lives
this is in conflict with [b’s] best interests and would impact on his overall social development and sense of identity, more specifically providing him with a poor ‘blueprint’ in relation to how to manage relationships and how he can expect others to treat him moving into his adult life.
the practical difficulty and expense associated with the children spending time and communicating with a parent, and whether that difficulty substantially affects the children’s right to maintaining personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of the children’s parents to provide for their needs, including their emotional and intellectual needs / attitude to the children, and to the responsibility of parenthood demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
parents’ mental health
physical needs and safety
intellectual needs
medical needs
emotional needs
i will always encourage [b] to have a meaningful relationship with his mum and l have been encouraging [b] to develop a better relationship with his mum. which seems to be working according to an [b]. however, [the mother] needs to make an effort herself.
father: are you coming here next week? [b]: yeah father: [love heart reaction to the above message] when? [b]: after school wednesday father: really! [face with tear icon] [b]: i can’t talk right now father: i you coming here? [b]: no i’m already at home father: fark sake [b]: do you still wanna call? father: i can’t be bothered you make very little effort. why should i. [angry face icon] if you don’t want to come here anymore then don’t. i just need you to tell me. well?
capacity to communicate and co-parent
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and their parents, and any other characteristics of the children the court thinks relevant
any family violence involving the children or a member of their family, and if a family violence order applies or has applied, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
parental responsibility
b’s care arrangements
other orders
b’s school
b living in city l
child impact report to be provided to counsellors
conclusion
costs
associate: dated: 3 november 2023
dated: 3 november 2023
[1] keith & zemlinsky [2013] famca 742 (“keith & zemlinsky”) at [8].[2] keith & zimlinsky at [1]–[28].[3] at paragraphs [33] to [35].[4] keith & zemlinsky; keith & zemlinsky (no 2) [2013] famca 770.[5] keith & zemlinsky at [115].[6] keith & zemlinsky o 2.