last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
odawa & tarabi [2023] fedcfamc2f 1416
orders
the court orders that:
parenting orders
property orders  the mr tarabi do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be required to transfer to ms odawa, or as she directs, at the expense of ms odawa all of his right, title and interest in the real property situated at, and known as, b street, suburb c, in the state of victoria, and being the whole of the land comprised in title volume ... folio ... (“the property”) (b) the ms odawa pay, discharge and indemnify mr tarabi against all payments and liability pursuant to the registered mortgage number ... secured over the property (“the mortgage”) and all taxes including income taxes, capital gains tax and all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings of or with respect to the property of whatsoever nature and kind.   the ms odawa pay, discharge and indemnify mr tarabi against all payments and liability pursuant to the registered mortgage number ... secured over the property (“the mortgage”) and all taxes including income taxes, capital gains tax and all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings of or with respect to the property of whatsoever nature and kind.   first to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale, (b) secondly to discharge the mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the property, (c) thirdly, the proceeds of sale be divided in the following proportions of: (i) 15 per centum thereof to the mr tarabi or as he directs in writing, and (ii) 85 per centum thereof to ms odawa or as she directs in writing, and (iii) from ms odawa’s 85% part of the proceeds of sale there be paid to mr tarabi, in addition to his 15% part or share, he be paid the sum of $3,600.   secondly to discharge the mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the property, (c) thirdly, the proceeds of sale be divided in the following proportions of: (i) 15 per centum thereof to the mr tarabi or as he directs in writing, and (ii) 85 per centum thereof to ms odawa or as she directs in writing, and (iii) from ms odawa’s 85% part of the proceeds of sale there be paid to mr tarabi, in addition to his 15% part or share, he be paid the sum of $3,600.   thirdly, the proceeds of sale be divided in the following proportions of: (i) 15 per centum thereof to the mr tarabi or as he directs in writing, and (ii) 85 per centum thereof to ms odawa or as she directs in writing, and (iii) from ms odawa’s 85% part of the proceeds of sale there be paid to mr tarabi, in addition to his 15% part or share, he be paid the sum of $3,600.   15 per centum thereof to the mr tarabi or as he directs in writing, and (ii) 85 per centum thereof to ms odawa or as she directs in writing, and (iii) from ms odawa’s 85% part of the proceeds of sale there be paid to mr tarabi, in addition to his 15% part or share, he be paid the sum of $3,600.  ) 85 per centum thereof to ms odawa or as she directs in writing, and (iii) from ms odawa’s 85% part of the proceeds of sale there be paid to mr tarabi, in addition to his 15% part or share, he be paid the sum of $3,600.  i) from ms odawa’s 85% part of the proceeds of sale there be paid to mr tarabi, in addition to his 15% part or share, he be paid the sum of $3,600.   ms odawa have the sole right to occupy the real property and that during such right of occupation ms odawa pay all instalments pursuant to the mortgage and from the date of these orders pay all rates and taxes and like apportionable outgoings of the property as they fall due, (b) the parties hold their respective interests in the property upon trust pursuant to these orders, and (c) neither party encumber the real property without the consent in writing of the other party save to the extent necessary to comply with these orders.   the parties hold their respective interests in the property upon trust pursuant to these orders, and (c) neither party encumber the real property without the consent in writing of the other party save to the extent necessary to comply with these orders.   neither party encumber the real property without the consent in writing of the other party save to the extent necessary to comply with these orders.   each party (to these property alteration orders) be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders (the furniture, personal possessions, and like chattels in the property are deemed to be in the possession of the ms odawa. (b) each party retain any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned that party. (c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner/beneficiary named thereon/in. (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party retain any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned that party. (c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner/beneficiary named thereon/in. (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner/beneficiary named thereon/in. (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background
proceedings
the final hearing
documents relied upon
exhibits tendered
exhibit no:
description:
monday 30 may 2022
f1
response to initiating application
f2
affidavit from mr tarabi, part of f1 response
f3
financial statement of mr tarabi
f4
bundle of bank statements, starting with statements from bank 1
f5
bundle of bank statements commencing with bank 2 statement
icl1
minute of proposed orders
m1
mortgage statements. court book pages 423-425
m2
bank statements showing movement of money from ms odawa’s account to the mortgage account - page 425 of court book
icl2
leap record re: mid-2016 - page 1-2 of vic pol bundle
icl3
nsw police records re: 2010 - pages 14-15 of bundle
tuesday 31 may 2022
m3
child support statement for w
f6
mortgage statement
icl4
nsw police records re: 2012 - pages 11-12 of bundle
icl5
leap record re: court appearance 2020, page 6 of vic pol bundle
m4
fvio from 2016
m5
fvio from 2020
wednesday 1 june 2022
m6
bank 3 documents & title search – court book pages 274, 278-281
m7
finance application – court book 324-371
m8
account transactions – court book pages 424 & 415
m9
bank 3 home loan application documents – court book pages 422-425
icl6
4 december 2020 11f report
issues raised at final hearing  whether the parties were legally married, and if not whether i had no jurisdiction to make orders pursuant to part viii of the act to make orders for adjustment of property interests of parties to a marriage, and (2) if that was the case, whether the application could be brought pursuant to part viiiab of the act, particularly considering that the application was not issued within the standard application period.   if that was the case, whether the application could be brought pursuant to part viiiab of the act, particularly considering that the application was not issued within the standard application period.
his honour: [mr tarabi], the fact that you and [ms odawa] lived together although not legally married to one another but you cohabited within the meaning of the family law act section 4aa and that is that you were living in a de facto relationship as defined by the act. by reason of part viiab of the family law act which includes those sections 90sm and 90sf that was sent to you on monday night. that gives not identical but almost identical jurisdiction for me to deal with the property application whether you were married or not. so for practical purposes the fact of a de facto relationship is not identical to marriage. there are some small differences but it is, in substance, the same law that applies [with] the same principles of, firstly, that i have jurisdiction and, secondly, the manner in which i determine the case. and that is the preferred approach referred to in keskin, the full court authority to which i referred you. so i dismiss your application to stay the proceedings or have the proceedings dismissed without further hearing on the basis of a lack of jurisdiction because as a result ...the whole of part viiiab i do have jurisdiction, but your understanding of that is not unusual, [mr tarabi], so thank you for reminding me to rule on that.
44 institution of proceedings ... proceedings in relation to de facto relationships   subject to subsection (6), a party to a de facto relationship may apply for an order under section 90se, 90sg or 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, only if: (a) the application is made within the period (the standard application period) of: (i) 2 years after the end of the de facto relationship, or (ii) 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or (b) both parties to the de facto relationship consent to the application.   the application is made within the period (the standard application period) of: (i) 2 years after the end of the de facto relationship, or (ii) 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or (b) both parties to the de facto relationship consent to the application.   2 years after the end of the de facto relationship, or (ii) 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or  ) 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or   both parties to the de facto relationship consent to the application.  ) however, if proceedings are instituted by an application made with the consent of both of the parties to the de facto relationship, the court may dismiss the proceedings if it is satisfied that, because the consent was obtained by fraud, duress or unconscionable conduct, allowing the proceedings to continue would amount to a miscarriage of justice.   the court may grant the party leave to apply after the end of the standard application period if the court is satisfied that: (a) hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   in regards to delay: that ms odawa did not know about the two year time limit, that mr tarabi made several trips overseas in 2018 and lives in a different state, and so was difficult to contact, that ms odawa unsuccessfully tried to contact mr tarabi several times, and ms odawa made the application at the earliest date possible. (b) in regards to hardship, ms odawa had been making payments to the mortgage over five years and so there would be the loss of her prospective entitlement to the property alteration orders, and (c) in regards to prejudice to mr tarabi, ms odawa's counsel pointed to mr tarabi being able to gather banking evidence from that time and no evidence of being unable to proceed or having any hardship due to ms odawa's repayment of the mortgage.   in regards to hardship, ms odawa had been making payments to the mortgage over five years and so there would be the loss of her prospective entitlement to the property alteration orders, and (c) in regards to prejudice to mr tarabi, ms odawa's counsel pointed to mr tarabi being able to gather banking evidence from that time and no evidence of being unable to proceed or having any hardship due to ms odawa's repayment of the mortgage.   in regards to prejudice to mr tarabi, ms odawa's counsel pointed to mr tarabi being able to gather banking evidence from that time and no evidence of being unable to proceed or having any hardship due to ms odawa's repayment of the mortgage.   generally, ms odawa’s solicitors knew or should have known that they applied outside of the timeline, ms odawa’s solicitor is married to ms odawa’s cousin and so has an interest in the matter, ms odawa’s solicitor knows that mr tarabi is kind and more likely to agree or overlook little things like missed deadlines, mr tarabi is not a lawyer and does not have appropriate legal knowledge on these issues, (b) on the hardship point, the property was rented out in 2015 for around $840 per fortnight, which is more than ms odawa is paying in mortgage repayments ($700 per fortnight) and so is losing potential income which should not be taken as hardship, that ms odawa had been effectively renting the property from him for the past five years for less than the market rate, and that ms odawa has re-partnered and is not in financial difficulty shows that she has no general hardship.   on the hardship point, the property was rented out in 2015 for around $840 per fortnight, which is more than ms odawa is paying in mortgage repayments ($700 per fortnight) and so is losing potential income which should not be taken as hardship, that ms odawa had been effectively renting the property from him for the past five years for less than the market rate, and that ms odawa has re-partnered and is not in financial difficulty shows that she has no general hardship.
applicable law – general   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
reliability and credit of the parties ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... [citations omitted]
parenting
applicable law - parenting
major long‑term issues, in relation to a child, means issues about the care, welfare and development of the child of a long‑term nature and includes (but is not limited to) issues of that nature about: (a) the child’s education (both current and future), and (b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent. to avoid doubt, a decision by a parent of a child to form a relationship with a new partner is not, of itself, a major long‑term issue in relation to the child. however, the decision will involve a major long‑term issue if, for example, the relationship with the new partner involves the parent moving to another area and the move will make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with the other parent. ... 4ab definition of family violence etc.   the child’s education (both current and future), and (b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.
... 60ca: child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests
determining child's best interests (1) subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and  ) to spend time with the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child:  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child:  t relevant to this case) (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
... 60cf informing court of relevant family violence orders   if a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that party must inform the court of the family violence order. (2) if a person who is not a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that person may inform the court of the family violence order. (3) failure to inform the court of the family violence order does not affect the validity of any order made by the court.   if a person who is not a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that person may inform the court of the family violence order. (3) failure to inform the court of the family violence order does not affect the validity of any order made by the court.   failure to inform the court of the family violence order does not affect the validity of any order made by the court.
60cg court to consider risk of family violence   in considering what order to make, the court must, to the extent that it is possible to do so consistently with the child’s best interests being the paramount consideration, ensure that the order:   is consistent with any family violence order, and (b) does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence.   for the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), the court may include in the order any safeguards that it considers necessary for the safety of those affected by the order.
... 61da presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or (b) family violence. (3) when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or (b) family violence.   family violence.
... 65daa court to consider child spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each parent in certain circumstances
equal time (1) subject to subsection (6), if a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, the court must: (a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents. substantial and significant time (2) subject to subsection (6), if: (a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,
the court must: (c) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   for the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend substantial and significant time with a parent only if:  the time the child spends with the parent includes both: days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and (b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in: (i) the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in: (i) the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   subsection (3) does not limit the other matters to which a court can have regard in determining whether the time a child spends with a parent would be substantial and significant. reasonable practicality (5) in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have regard to: (a) how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant. consent orders (6) if: (a) the court is considering whether to make a parenting order with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, and (b) the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,   how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the court is considering whether to make a parenting order with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, and (b) the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,   the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,
the court may, but is not required to, consider the matters referred to in paragraphs (1)(a) to (c) or (if applicable) the matters referred to in paragraphs (2)(c) to (e).  to avoid doubt, subsection (6) does not affect the application of section 60ca in relation to a parenting order.
... 65dac effect of parenting order that provides for shared parental responsibility   this section applies if, under a parenting order: (a) 2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child. (2) the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons.   2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.   the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.
note: subject to any court orders, decisions about issues that are not major long‑term issues are made by the person with whom the child is spending time without a need to consult the other person (see section 65dae).  the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue. (4) to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision has been made jointly.   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.
some significant events
the 2010 violence
the 2012 violence
the 2016 violence
the 2020 violence
the two child inclusive conference reports
the family report
... she raised significant concerns regarding the physical, emotional and psychological safety of the children, should the court order them to spend time with [mr tarabi]. [mr tarabi] raised concerns that [ms odawa] has encouraged the children to reject him, being purposefully obstructive to him re-establishing a relationship with them. ... [ms odawa] reported a history of depression including suicidal ideation during the parties’ relationship. she advised that she took anti-depressant medication for a period of two years. [ms odawa] expressed that she is currently managing her mental health well, and having positive familial supports around her. she is not currently engaged in counselling, reporting in her view she does not require professional assistance. ... in addition to the psychological harm concerns, [ms odawa] reported that she worried the children would also be at risk of physical abuse if made to spend time with [mr tarabi]. she reported that although there was limited physical abuse historically perpetrated against the children, they witnessed [mr tarabi] “beating” her regularly. she added that of the four children it was only [y] who had been chastised by [mr tarabi], reporting he had assaulted her with an object when disobedient. ... [mr tarabi] was on time, and presented neatly for the interview. he reported that he is residing in sydney, in shared accommodation and not currently employed. [mr tarabi] expressed a desire to re-establish a relationship with the children, which had broken down following the parties’ separation. he advised that the reason he had not maintained these relationships was due to [ms odawa], who reportedly has been obstructive over the last six years. ... [mr tarabi] explained that he was born in [country d], and orphaned as a child. he then went to live in an orphanage in [country j], before moving when he was approximately 12 years old commencing soldier training and becoming a “child soldier”. following this, [mr tarabi] lived in a refugee camp, before being sponsored by a friend to enter australia. although acknowledging the hardship of this experience, he advised that it is this that has made him into the person he is today, and he would not change it for any alternate upbringing. he advised that this has made him into an empathetic and resilient adult, leading him to his previous work within the community. ... the parties provided disparate, any contradictory accounts of family violence that occurred, and whom was the primary aggressor of this during their relationship. should [mr tarabi]’s account be accepted, [ms odawa] has likely used various systems including legal avenues to discourage and obstruct the children’s relationship with [mr tarabi]. [ms odawa] however provided a compelling account of her experience of family violence throughout the relationship, which closely aligns to collateral information, and the children’s presentations during interview. considering all of this information, it is unlikely that [ms odawa]’s allegations of significant and high risk family violence perpetrated by [mr tarabi] are completely unfounded or fabricated. the types of abuse described by [ms odawa] during the interview fits a profile of potential high risk and significant harm. at current [ms odawa] reported that she has come to terms with her experiences, and with some support has been able to move past this impacting her. [ms odawa]’s presentation was calm when discussing this, and in some ways she was minimising of the overall impact it has had on her, and potentially the high level of risk she described to experience over an enduring period of time. supporting [ms odawa], and assisting her to process these experiences could best support her in the long term, and would act as a protective factor, likely stabilising her further and providing the children with a consistent and reliable primary care figure. it is possible that [ms odawa] would benefit from ongoing therapeutic support. the children’s presentations were indicative of a current safe and stable family home, in which they have a trusting and secure attachment with their mother. it is unknown to what extent they have been historically exposed to family violence, however if there is any veracity to the report of family violence, these experiences were likely traumatic. in order for the children to thrive, and move through their developmental stages to reach their potential, it is imperative that that this foundation of safety and stability is maintained. the children have clearly reported not wanting to re-establish any form of relationship with [mr tarabi]. they currently enjoy a safe and harmonious family unit in which they are well supported and report a strong sense of belonging. this, along with the extended period of time in which [mr tarabi] has been absent, as well as [mr tarabi] presenting without insight into the children’s experiences and therefore any awareness as what behaviours need to be modified it is unlikely that re-introducing [mr tarabi] to the children will be of benefit to them. recommendations based on the available information, and in absence of evidence to the contrary, it is respectfully recommended, 79. the children live with their mother, [ms odawa]. consideration be given to parental responsibility been granted to the primary parent with whom the children reside. no spend time or communication to occur between the children and their father [mr tarabi]. should any of the children seek re-establishing this relationship in the future, this should be done with careful consideration, and ideally with therapeutic input and direction. [ms odawa] could benefit from therapeutic support.
the parties’ parenting cases
summary of ms odawa’s parenting case
parental responsibility that the applicant has sole parental responsibility for the care, welfare and development of the children of the relationship... that the children live with the applicant. that the children communicate and spend time with the respondent as agreed between the applicant and the respondent. during the time the children spend time with the respondent, that the respondent solely be responsible for the children and shall not leave them unattended at any time and can only leave them in the care and control of a third party as agreed with the applicant. that in the event of illness or emergency, the party with whom the children are with, contact the other party forthwith to inform them. that the applicant has the sole responsibility for decisions about the schooling of the children and have the sole responsibility for liaising with schooling authorities, schoolteachers and receiving school reports. that the parties jointly pay education expenses for the children, including school fees, school clothes and any costs for extra curricula school activities of the children. that the parties maintain health insurance cover for the children and pay and satisfy any medical, dental or orthodontic expenses for the children which are not covered by such health insurance cover or by medicare. that while the applicant has the sole parental responsibility for the children, the applicant has liberty to remove the children from australia for a period to be advised to the respondent, and to that end, the necessity for the consent of the respondent to the issue of passports to the children is dispensed with. child support that the respondent be assessed by the child support agency for administrative assessment of child support pursuant to the child support (assessment) act 1989 for the support of the children. that any administrative assessment of child support made pursuant to order 10 above is backdated to december 2015, being the date, the parties separated.
ms morris: as to the spend time arrangements, i suppose it’s probably worthwhile clarifying that my client certainly does feel uneasy about him having contact, but she wouldn’t get in the way of a relationship, if that makes sense. if the court so finds that the children ought to be spending time with him, she would like for that time to be supervised, and also for consideration to be given to the fact that the children have expressed that they don’t want to see him. so certainly my client’s intention by having spend time arrangements to be according to the agreement between mother and father, that would have provided for the mother to ensure that any arrangements for spend time would be subject to their wishes or their mental health status at the time. certainly we would agree that, at this stage, the children have expressed that they don’t want to see him, and that it may well be quite a traumatic or distressing experience for them. so any spend time arrangements, should they recommence, ought to be done very slowly and progressively, and in line with their views. ... his honour: is your client saying that if things were to change in the sense that if there were regular letters, cards and presents, and the children were disposed to spend time with the father, and she felt it was safe at the time, she would promote that to some modest degree? ms morris: yes, that’s correct.
summary of mr tarabi’s parenting case
... child support of about $20,000 be remove since she is getting 25% from the property ... that the applicant must allow the respondent to see the kids that the applicant must not force the kids to call her current partner dad, because the kids were forced to call by the her and current partner to call him father and children were very upset according to the family members who later told people that i know who then told me the information. the child protection agency needs to get involve with family because children are in the house where people use drugs and alcohol in the present of the children.
... all i want is, i want to be in their lives, talk to them all the time, go back as i used to talk to them, and just reconnect and help the mother with the children.
summary of the icl’s case
4. that the father be permitted to send letters, gifts and cards to the children. the children may correspond in writing with the father and the mother shall facilitate such correspondence. pursuant to section 11 of the australian passports act 2005 (cth) and the court being satisfied that it is not practicable to obtain the consent of the father to enable the children to obtain an australian passport to travel outside of the commonwealth of australia ("australia"), that the children be permitted to apply for an australian passport to enable them to leave australia and furthermore the children be permitted to leave australia without the permission of the father. the applicant mother may, in substitution for the father, sign any document/s required to obtain australian passports for the children. the mother may take the children from australia to travel overseas for a holiday provided that she gives to the father at least 4 weeks prior written notice of the intended trip specifying the date and time of departure, the means of transport and all details pertaining thereto including details of the airline (or other carrier) with whom the children will be travelling, members of the travelling party in the case of family holidays, the intended destination and the intended date and time of return and subject to the trip. that the parties keep the other advised at all times of their current residential address, email addresses and mobile telephone numbers. each party is restrained from discussing the details of these orders, or any matters arising from these proceedings, with the children, save as to advise the children about the next occasion that the children are going communicate with the father. such other orders as this honourable court deems fit. [emphasis added]
why the icl’s orders sought were different to the mother’s.
application of the law - parenting
primary considerations
benefit of the children having a meaningful relationship with both parents
the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm.
additional considerations
any views expressed by the child
nature of relationship of with each of the child’s parents and other persons
extent each parent has taken or failed to participate in decisions or spend time
extent to which each fulfilled obligations to maintain the children
likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances
practical difficulty and expense
capacity to provide for the needs of the child
maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions)
attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood
the time will come when these kids will grow up and talk for themselves and understand the truth for themselves. it’s okay. if you are trying to block me from the children, it’s okay. but the problem is those children will be in trouble. they need their father there in their life. they need a parent – both parents in their lives.[2]
any family violence and any family violence order that applies
order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks relevant
but all i want is, i want to be in their lives, talk to them all the time, go back as i used to talk to them, and just reconnect and help the mother with the children[4].
is ms odawa a flight risk?
the icl’s order sought of “no time”
parental responsibility
section 65daa does not apply
conclusion - parenting
property
ms odawa’s property case
mr tarabi’s property case
... the applicant has to pay all her cost by herself because she decided to come to court without consulting with respondent on how to share the assets and liabilities
or in the alternate,
name
amount in aud
date
what for
mr k  00)
2015
assistance for a cousin and her family
ms l  00)
2014
travel assistance for ms odawa and mr tarabi’s sister
m  00)
2012
dowry and wedding payment
mr n  00)
o  00)
mr p  2000) (~au3000)  u3000)
2008
cultural payments for relationship
total  ,000)
the child support arrears
the applicable law
90sf matters to be taken into consideration in relation to maintenance ... (3) the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and  ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,
and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and  a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and ... (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and ... (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:  the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and
... (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and
... 90sm alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them – altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property...   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them – altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property...
... including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and  either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or ... to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.
...   the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,  ) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,
whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.
... 90sl declaration of interests in property (1) in proceedings between the parties to a de facto relationship:   after the breakdown of the de facto relationship, and (b) with respect to existing title or rights in respect of property, the court may declare the title or rights, if any, that a party has in respect of the property.   if a court makes a declaration under subsection (1), it may make consequential orders to give effect to the declaration, including orders as to sale or partition and interim or permanent orders as to possession.  tes omitted] ... 90ss general powers of the court general powers   the court, in exercising its powers under this division, may do any or all of the following: (a) order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,   order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,   order payment of a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic sum, (c) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a de facto relationship, (d) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (e) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order, (f) appoint or remove trustees, (g) order that payments be made direct to a party to the de facto relationship, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the de facto relationship, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order, (i) impose terms and conditions, (j) make an order by consent, (k) make any other order, or grant any other injunction, (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section) which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this division at any time before or after the making of a decree under another provision of this act.   order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a de facto relationship, (d) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (e) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (e) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payments be made direct to a party to the de facto relationship, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the de facto relationship, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make any other order, or grant any other injunction, (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section) which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this division at any time before or after the making of a decree under another provision of this act.   subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this division at any time before or after the making of a decree under another provision of this act.
stanford ] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife. no less importantly, the express implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship... and the assumption that any adjustment of those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4) (and/or section 90sm(3)).
the preferred approach ] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79. that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) (“the other factors”) including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case. (citations omitted and emphasis added)
application of the preferred approach
step one: identify the property and liabilities
jointly owned property
mr tarabi’s ($) value
ms odawa’s ($) value
1
the property
600,000
2
mortgage debt on the property  5,000)
3
water rates (from ms odawa’s outline of case)  ,362)
4
equity in the property
307,639
mr tarabi’s ‘keep’ (assets he retains)
5
real or personal assets
negligible
6
debts to various persons
not included
7
total mr tarabi’s ‘keep’
ms odawa’s ‘keep’ (other assets she retains)
8
motor vehicle 1 (ms odawa’s assertion not disputed)
24,000
9
household contents
15,000
10
total ms odawa’s keep:
39,000
11
total assets and liabilities
322,639
346,639
superannuation
mr tarabi’s super’n (mr tarabi’s value not disputed)
27,900
wife’s super’n (ms odawa’s position not disputed)
nil
total superannuation
mr tarabi ‘keep’ (assets he retains)
property purchased in country d
mr tarabi’s ‘keep’
motor vehicle 1 (ms odawa’s estimate not disputed)
some modest value
ms odawa’s interest in the business with her new partner
not valued or know but of some real value
12
13
331,639
14
mr tarabi’s super’n (mr tarabi’s estimate not disputed)
ms odawa’s super’n (ms odawa’s position not disputed)
step two: section 90sm(4)(a), (b) & (c) contributions ] if it is necessary to make the point again, and to highlight it for the purpose of this appeal, we add our endorsement to what has been made clear... that the words of s 79 (and/o section 90sm) do not provide endorsement for any category of contribution related to any class of property (for example, high wealth) being, by virtue of that category or class, more valuable or important that another. in each case the contributions made by the parties must be evaluated in the context of the facts particular to that case.  ] ... all contributions must be weighed collectively and so it is an error to segment or compartmentalise the various contributions and weigh one again the remainder. [36] that principle has a counterpart in the application factors prescribed in section 75(2) or section 90sm(3) of the act. any adjustment to the parties contribution-based- entitlements should be determined inclusively after considering all relevant factors, not by aggregating incremental adjustment in respect of each relevant factor. [citations omitted]
the length of the marriage can be seen to be of considerable importance in the assessment of contributions.
in our view, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it should be inferred in proceedings pursuant to the provisions of s 79 that moneys howsoever received by a party during the course of the parties' cohabitation, are used by that party for the benefit of the family unit. such moneys, in those circumstances, thus constitute a financial contribution by the party who received the moneys.[6]
ms morris: [mr tarabi], in 2015 just prior to you purchasing the house, you had quite a significant amount of money coming through in your income, sometimes $16,000 a fortnight. did you consider paying back those debts when you were bringing in that amount of money? ]mr tarabi]: no. because i was planning to buy a house as soon as i could. ms morris: over a period of, perhaps, six months you were bringing in that significant amount of money. that would have been, let’s say, 30,000 at least a month. but the deposit that was paid was only seemingly about $56,000. is that correct? [mr tarabi]: yes, that’s correct. yes. ms morris: so, effectively, we’ve got a significant amount of money left over that you could have put towards these outstanding debts. is that right? [mr tarabi]: yes. but i was – the money – i did not use the money. i was stupid at the time. i was using that money on my – you know, on my family and the – and my in-laws. i was not only using that money on me. i do shopping and i give them the money sometimes to pay for the movies and things like that. so, really, i thought i was part of the – part of the family because i don’t have any family member in australia with me except my kids and my in-laws. so i put myself as the child that is successful, maybe, at the time – i was thinking that i was going to be successful. so, therefore, it would have to be their son and call them my parents. but i don’t know where – i did not know, whatsoever, that things would go this way. but guess what? things happen, and we learn from them. so, yeah, i made a mistake for not using those money properly. that was stupid of me. ms morris: in your affidavit you’d said that you’d paid to the wife’s family roughly 35,000 at the start of the relationship in 2008 and 45,000 at the time of marriage as a form of dowry, is that correct? [mr tarabi]: yes. but that’s not relevant, because it’s not part of the thing – you know, not part of the thing that, you know, we’re claiming here. ms morris: okay. around the time of the wedding, which is in 2011, 2012, you claim that you had paid 45,000 as a dowry, but you’d also taken in loans? [mr tarabi]: yes. ms morris: at the time? [mr tarabi]: yes. ms morris: okay? [mr tarabi]: and, beside that, i have to give – you know, the in-laws, during the wedding, have to give the in-laws, when we talk, the traditional ..... talk. all the in-laws have to watch their mouth. the brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, aunties, uncles – and i paid 35,000 – i put the $35,000 into the envelopes then, boom, gone. ms morris: okay. i – with respect to your bank statements of 2020, i think you provided perhaps three different bank statements. actually, i withdraw that: sorry, your honour. sorry, can you confirm, [mr tarabi], when you became unemployed? [mr tarabi]: i became unemployed in – when was that? actually, as soon as i – you know, like, it was in 2016, something – something like 2016. or, you know, until, maybe, early, you know, like let’s say the first half of 2017. ms morris: okay. and so after you finished with [q company] around mid-2016, what did you – so you were unemployed after that period of time? [mr tarabi]: until, maybe, early – you know, like, let’s say the first half of 2017. ms morris: okay. and, so, after you finished with [q company] around mid-2016, what did you – so you were unemployed after that period of time? [mr tarabi]: i was working. ms morris: what were you doing? [mr tarabi]: i was working in a factory in [town r]. it’s a place – i don’t think you know – you’ve ever heard of it. ms morris: okay. and how long were you working there? [mr tarabi]: possibly around six months or so. something like six months or more than six months, yes. ms morris: okay. so that brings us to, maybe, the end of 2016 start of 2017? [mr tarabi]: yes. ms morris: and what did you do after that? [mr tarabi]: after that, did nothing. ms morris: so you’ve been unemployed since 2017? [mr tarabi]: yes. ... ms morris: [in march], there’s a cash deposit for $130. [march]– sorry, $450. april, $700. april, there’s quite a number of small deposits, so $50, $60, $100, $100 and $500. and that’s – so that’s it for the period of march and april. are you able to comment on these cash deposits and where they came from? [mr tarabi]: yes, there are a few things: (1) people – you know, like, people send – you know, like, we have this thing called [t]. people put money – you know, like, people bring the money in to me – you know, to me, they can put money into the account, then i will take the money to the – you know, to the person responsible for [t]. sometimes, people, you know, just support me. they say, “[mr tarabi],” you know, like, “things are hard for you.” they give me some money, put money into their – into the account to support me. so there are many activities. some people, you know, put money to the account so that i will take them to the people that send money to [country d], in [country d], in [country f], because we have these small companies of people that transfer money overseas. so what they – what these – what people do is, “[mr tarabi], i will put money into your account, and then this money go and send them – send – send them in for me.” so i do that. we have – in the community, we have some old – old women and old men, people who don’t know, you know, like, how things operate. they – they – they just send me. so i – and the fact that i was not working, i was free to move around, they just, you know, send me here and there and do activities for them. ms morris: okay. so some of the money, you say, was given to you by other people so that you could send it to [country d]? [mr tarabi]: send them on their behalf, yes. ms morris: okay? [mr tarabi]: and some people, they send – put the – put the money into account to just support me because they know that i’m struggling.
step three: section 90sf(3) factors
...in any event it is the real impact in money terms which is ultimately the critical issue.
on our adjusted figure for the value of the parties net assets ($1,503,863), adjustment of 10% in the wife’s favour results in an increase in her entitlement of $150,386, and a corresponding reduction in the husband’s entitlement, producing a differential movement between them of $300,772 ...  7] it is also important to recall what was said in phipson & phipson [2009] famcafc 28 when the full court was dealing with another appeal from the trial judge in the present proceedings:  ] it is always important to keep in mind that an adjustment of x% for s 75(2) factors leads to a disparity in the value of property received by the parties representing 2 x x%. it is that disparity, measured in “money terms”, that requires consideration in determining whether the result is just and equitable: see campbell v kuskey [1998] famca 10, (1998) flc 92-795 at 84,928.  8] the 10% adjustment his honour made on account of s 75(2) factors has led to a disparity in favour of the wife equivalent in value to 20% of the assets. in money terms this represents $187,733 out of a total asset pool of $938,665. apart from the issues associated with the care, accommodation and maintenance of the children, the s 75(2) factors largely balanced out (save that as a result of the assessment of contributions the wife would have more capital than the husband). the husband was going to have whatever responsibility remained for the care, accommodation and maintenance of j. both parties would have significant responsibility for the two younger children. it is true the wife will have the children with her about 20% more of the time than the husband, but this amounts to only a little more than 70 additional days a year. [109] in our view an assessment leading to a disparity of $187,733 in the capital/superannuation to be received by each party was outside the reasonable ambit of the trial judge’s broad discretion, even taking into account the matters found by his honour relating to the non-payment of child support in the period after the husband gave up his employment. our conclusion is sufficient to enliven appellate intervention (house v the king (1936) 55 clr 499 and norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513). the appeal will therefore be allowed. ... [112] in our view, given that the children will be with him around 40% of the time, the husband’s accommodation needs for the children would not be significantly different to those of the wife. however, in light of the agreement in relation to child support, we accept that the wife will bear the greater proportion of the burden of maintaining the two younger children (at least for the time being). the husband, on the other hand, will have whatever responsibility remains for accommodating and maintaining j. the other s 75(2) factors, in our view, are evenly balanced, save for the fact that as a result of the assessment of contributions the wife will have 4% (or $37,546) more of the assets/superannuation than the husband. [113] taking these matters into account, and the failure of the husband to pay child support after giving up his employment, we consider there should be a 4% adjustment for s 75(2) factors, creating a disparity of 8% between the parties – or in money terms an amount of $75,093.  9] in our view, s 79(4)(e) requires those matters to be taken into account in arriving at orders that are just and equitable as between the parties. in arriving at an appropriate assessment for those factors, a dollar value of it should be uppermost in our minds [79] and, of course, the ultimate disparity in entitlements which it might produce. that dollar value is, in turn, dependent upon the value of the interests in property of the parties.
age and state of health
income, property, financial resources and capacity for employment
care of children under 18 years
commitment of each of the parties to support themselves or a child
responsibilities of either party to support any other person
pension or benefit
reasonable standard of living
would maintenance assist education or training
effect on creditors
effect of a party contributing to the earning capacity and property of the other
duration of marriage and the extent any earning capacity has been affected
protect parties’ role as a parent
whether party cohabiting with another person
child support to be provided
any fact or circumstance required to take into account
conclusion as to section 90sf(3) factors
step four: just and equitable and conclusion
conclusion - property
associate: dated: 3 november 2023
dated: 3 november 2023
[1] counsel for the icl specifically relied upon [18] and [19] in the final hearing.[2] see tp-107.[3] see tp-108.[4] tp 243 i june 2022.[5] in assessing section 90sm(4) contributions, i also acknowledge and apply dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154 (‘dickons’) at [24], hurst & hurst [2018] famcafc 146; (2018) flc 93-851 (‘hurst’) at [23], lovine & connor and anor (2012) flc 93-515, [2012] famcafc 168 (‘lovine & connor’) at [40] to [42].[6] see parshen, 83665. [7] see at [58] and despite complaint the full court did not interfere with those findings.