last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
chatwin & chatwin [2023] fedcfamc2f 1442
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge myers:
whilst we all know about no fault divorce our client is in possession of your client's phone and has accessed all the material which has been deleted and stored on the hard drive. the material consists of many explicit photographs, text messages and can only be described as highly disturbing in the setting of what our client considered to be a loving marriage based upon mutual trust and respect.
literally hundreds of explicit text messages, emails and photographs passing between yourself and ([ms d]) over a protracted period of time.
lurid obscene and pornographic material that [ms chatwin] has had to confront.
in my opinion, there needs to be a significant display of contrition, remorse and repentance on your client's behalf if he is ever to win the trust of [ms chatwin] again.
words will not suffice, only actions of the self-sacrificial nature outlined herein. in the event, that in the fullness of time, the relationship can be re-established and the parties reunite then of course the property settlement will be rendered null and void. if reconciliation does not eventuate the property settlement will stand and will not be conditional upon there being counselling or a reconciliation.....if your client is prepared to explore the remote possibility of making up for his misdeeds and to agree to the course outlined herein please advise and i shall encourage [ms chatwin] to participate under the guidance of her counsellor.
there are numerous aspects of your letter which clearly breach your professional obligations. the letter certainly does nothing to assist the amicable and dignified resolution of the issues. in particular, your correspondence constitutes a breach of the following: the general principles of professional conduct and rule 13, 2 and 30 of the professional conduct and practice rules 2005, which require, inter alia, the avoidance of personal bias and/or opinion and the use of offensive and provocative language, section 12a of the family law act 1975 (cth), which requires practitioners to assist parties where a reconciliation may be possible, not create impediments, sections 2.1 and 2.2 of the best practice guidelines for lawyers doing family law work, which require the avoidance of inflammatory exchanges and the consideration of the effect of correspondence upon clients and other family members. your repeated further reference in your letter of 1 august 2013 and almost every prior item of correspondence to photographs and the like obtained by your client which are "in your possession" (and which on our instructions were circulated by your client to family members and our client's professional colleagues) also smacks of blackmail. our client offers your firm the opportunity to withdraw from acting for [ms chatwin]. if you refuse to do so, our client will give further consideration to a formal misconduct complaint.
...having transferred all the information contained thereon to her phone and thereby maintained a permanent record of the text message and photographs passing between your client and ([ms d]).
if your client is precious regarding any allegation made against him he ought to be more discreet in his choice of holiday locations.
2. purpose and effect of the rules
2.1 the purpose of these rules is to assist solicitors to act ethically and in accordance with the principles of professional conduct established by the common law and these rules. 2.2 in considering whether a solicitor has engaged in unsatisfactory conduct or professional misconduct, the rules apply in addition to the common law.
4. other fundamental ethical duties
4.1 a solicitor must also:
4.1.1 act in the best interests of a client in any matter in which the solicitor represents the client, 4.1.2 be honest and courteous in all dealings in the course of legal practice, 4.1.3 deliver legal services competently, diligently and promptly as reasonably possible, 4.1.4 avoid any compromise to their integrity and professional independence, and 4.1.5 comply with these rules and the law.  b] will be called to give evidence about a controversial matter, being the circumstances in which the financial agreement was negotiated and prepared. further, he may be questioned about the contents of the financial agreement and its drafting.
27. solicitor as material witness in client’s case
27.1 in a case in which it is known, or becomes apparent, that a solicitor will be required to give evidence material to the determination of contested issues before the court, the solicitor may not appear as advocate for the client in the hearing. 27.2 in a case in which it is known, or becomes apparent, that a solicitor will be required to give evidence material to the determination of contested issues before the court the solicitor, an associate of the solicitor or a law practice of which the solicitor is a member must not continue to act for the client if doing so would prejudice the administration of justice.
i do not accept that the mere circumstance that a solicitor will be a material witness, even on a controversial matter, of itself justifies restraining the solicitor from continuing to act....that line is crossed only when the solicitor has a personal stake in the outcome of the proceedings or in their conduct beyond the recovery of proper fees for acting, albeit that the relevant stake may not necessarily be financial, but involves the personal or reputational interest of the solicitor, as will be the case if his or her conduct and integrity come under attack and review in the proceedings. the presence of such circumstances will be a strong indication that the interests of justice – which in this field involve clients being represented by independent and objective lawyers unfettered by concerns about their own interests – require the lawyer to be restrained from continuing to act.  ] the correct test that should have been applied by the primary judge, in determining whether a legal practitioner should be restrained from acting on behalf of a party, is that which is adumbrated by the full court of the federal court of australia (besanko, lee and abraham jj) in porter v dyer (2022) 402 alr 659 who applied, with approval, the following statement of principle by griffiths j in mumbin v northern territory of australia (no 1) [2020] fca 475: the relevant principles which guide the exercise of the court’s separate discretion are broadly as follows: (a) the court has an inherent jurisdiction to ensure the due administration of justice, to protect the integrity of the judicial process and to restrain legal practitioners from acting in a particular case as part of its supervisory jurisdiction (see, for example, grimwade v meagher [1995] vicrp 28, [1995] 1 vr 446 at 452 per mandie j and dealer support services pty ltd v motor trades association of australia ltd [2014] fca 1065, 228 fcr 252 at [37] per beach j). (b) the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here).   the court has an inherent jurisdiction to ensure the due administration of justice, to protect the integrity of the judicial process and to restrain legal practitioners from acting in a particular case as part of its supervisory jurisdiction (see, for example, grimwade v meagher [1995] vicrp 28, [1995] 1 vr 446 at 452 per mandie j and dealer support services pty ltd v motor trades association of australia ltd [2014] fca 1065, 228 fcr 252 at [37] per beach j). (b) the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here).   the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here).
associate: dated: 9 november 2023
dated: 9 november 2023