last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
malkovich & malkovich [2023] fedcfamc2f 1448
orders
the court orders that:  the mother paying all of x’s school fees including but not limited to tuition, uniform, books, excursions and camps (“the school expenses”), save for any before school or after school care fees incurred when x is in the father’s care, and (b) the mother indemnifying the father in relation to the school expenses.   the mother indemnifying the father in relation to the school expenses.
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins
introduction
brief background
if i don’t hear back from you i’ll need to go ahead and enrol [x] for my days – either at [f early learning centre] or a new centre, and you can arrange daycare separately for your days.
it is evident that the parents collectively care deeply for [x] and are well-intentioned. the current impasse appears to be the result of a difference of opinion about state versus private schooling, at least for primary education, and the associated financial burden.
the evidence
the law  the wishes of the child, where appropriate, (2) any prior agreement in relation to schooling, (3) any change to the existing arrangements, (4) any anxiety which the child may experience as a result of changing peer groups, (5) the views of the parents about the aspect of change upon the child, (6) the travel time to school, (7) the costs of education, and (8) any particulate issue that may have a real impact upon the child and his immediate schooling and social environment.   any prior agreement in relation to schooling, (3) any change to the existing arrangements, (4) any anxiety which the child may experience as a result of changing peer groups, (5) the views of the parents about the aspect of change upon the child, (6) the travel time to school, (7) the costs of education, and (8) any particulate issue that may have a real impact upon the child and his immediate schooling and social environment.   any change to the existing arrangements, (4) any anxiety which the child may experience as a result of changing peer groups, (5) the views of the parents about the aspect of change upon the child, (6) the travel time to school, (7) the costs of education, and (8) any particulate issue that may have a real impact upon the child and his immediate schooling and social environment.   any anxiety which the child may experience as a result of changing peer groups, (5) the views of the parents about the aspect of change upon the child, (6) the travel time to school, (7) the costs of education, and (8) any particulate issue that may have a real impact upon the child and his immediate schooling and social environment.   the views of the parents about the aspect of change upon the child, (6) the travel time to school, (7) the costs of education, and (8) any particulate issue that may have a real impact upon the child and his immediate schooling and social environment.   the travel time to school, (7) the costs of education, and (8) any particulate issue that may have a real impact upon the child and his immediate schooling and social environment.   the costs of education, and (8) any particulate issue that may have a real impact upon the child and his immediate schooling and social environment.   any particulate issue that may have a real impact upon the child and his immediate schooling and social environment.
it is worth noting that there are no poor choices in terms of the options proposed by the parties, with each school seemingly rating quite highly in terms of academic achievement and their offerings.
controversy around each school
x’s views
prior agreement
convenience
community
attendance at a local school assists with fostering a child’s connections within their local community, including socially and through the facilitation of sporting and recreational pursuits. for [x], the local area also includes the opportunity to spend time with both the maternal and paternal extended family.
jewish heritage
the cost
another valid consideration is that of the parties’ financial capacity to support [x’s] attendance at a private school. where there is any doubt about such capacity, it is preferable to err on the side of caution as the destabilising effects of potentially having to change a child’s school once they are settled outweigh the benefits of the experience the private school may have to offer.
impact on x in the event of a change
conclusion
associate: dated: 10 november 2023
dated: 10 november 2023