last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
wiggins & wiggins [2023] fedcfamc2f 1462
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
evidence
background
that the father cause to be forwarded to the mother a sealed copy of this initiating application, his affidavit filed the same day as this application, and his notice of risk filed the same day as this application by way of email to the mother's solicitors, being rebecca bailey with culleton lawyers, by email to [email protected]. that until further order, [mr wiggins] born [...] 1945 and [ms wiggins] born [...] 1979, their servants and agents be and are hereby restrained by injunction, and irrespective of authenticated consent is contemplated in part vii of the family law act 1975, from removing or attempting to remove or causing or permitting the removal of the said child, [x] born [...] 2014 from the commonwealth of australia. it is requested that the australian federal police give effect to this order by placing the name of the said child [x] born [...] 2014 on the family law watch list enforced at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia and maintain the child's name on the watch list until such time as the court orders its removal. that the mother forthwith deliver to the court any passport in the name of or relating to the said child, [x] born [...] 2014, whether or not that passport is issued by the commonwealth of australia, [country b], or otherwise, and that the court thereafter hold any such passport until further order of this court.
issues before the court
the law
disposition  the applicant has demonstrated a reasonable basis for arguing for the substantive orders sought, (b) the applicant has demonstrated that absent an urgent listing the applicant will be prejudiced in relation to the substantive relief sought other than in ways common to other matters awaiting the court’s attention in the normal course, (c) the applicant has demonstrated that there has been no unreasonable or unexplained delay in approaching the court, and (d) a judicial officer is available to hear the substantive application.   the applicant has demonstrated that absent an urgent listing the applicant will be prejudiced in relation to the substantive relief sought other than in ways common to other matters awaiting the court’s attention in the normal course, (c) the applicant has demonstrated that there has been no unreasonable or unexplained delay in approaching the court, and (d) a judicial officer is available to hear the substantive application.   the applicant has demonstrated that there has been no unreasonable or unexplained delay in approaching the court, and (d) a judicial officer is available to hear the substantive application.   a judicial officer is available to hear the substantive application.  phasis added)
conclusion
associate: dated: 16 november 2023
dated: 16 november 2023