last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
miner & miner [2023] fedcfamc2f 1463
orders
the court orders that:  only one affidavit will be read for each witness, including the parties, (b) all affidavits are to be filed and served by no later than 4:00pm 10 days prior to the interim hearing 2:00pm on 21 november 2023, (c) an affidavit must be no longer than 10 pages in length and contain no more than 5 annexures, (d) affidavits are to comply with rule 2.14 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), (e) no party shall be entitled to rely on any affidavit material not filed and served in accordance with these directions without leave of the court.   all affidavits are to be filed and served by no later than 4:00pm 10 days prior to the interim hearing 2:00pm on 21 november 2023, (c) an affidavit must be no longer than 10 pages in length and contain no more than 5 annexures, (d) affidavits are to comply with rule 2.14 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), (e) no party shall be entitled to rely on any affidavit material not filed and served in accordance with these directions without leave of the court.   an affidavit must be no longer than 10 pages in length and contain no more than 5 annexures, (d) affidavits are to comply with rule 2.14 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), (e) no party shall be entitled to rely on any affidavit material not filed and served in accordance with these directions without leave of the court.   affidavits are to comply with rule 2.14 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), (e) no party shall be entitled to rely on any affidavit material not filed and served in accordance with these directions without leave of the court.   no party shall be entitled to rely on any affidavit material not filed and served in accordance with these directions without leave of the court.   a minute of the orders sought noting that the court has not granted leave to the parties to substantially amend the orders sought by them in their application in a proceeding or response to such application, (b) a chronology listing significant events, (c) a list of documents sought to be relied upon at the interim hearing, (d) a brief summary of argument, and (e) any relevant case law.   a chronology listing significant events, (c) a list of documents sought to be relied upon at the interim hearing, (d) a brief summary of argument, and (e) any relevant case law.   a list of documents sought to be relied upon at the interim hearing, (d) a brief summary of argument, and (e) any relevant case law.   a brief summary of argument, and (e) any relevant case law.   any relevant case law.   by no later than 48 hours prior the interim hearing the parties are to forward by email to the chambers of the senior judicial registrar with each party copied in, any proposed joint tender bundle sought to be relied upon and: (b) any documents contained within the tender bundle will not form part of the evidence until actually tendered at the hearing, (c) any proposed tender bundle must be both indexed and consecutively paginated, (d) such tender bundle is to be no more than 30 pages, and (e) tender bundles that do not comply with these directions will be rejected and be unable to be relied upon at the hearing without leave first being obtained.   any documents contained within the tender bundle will not form part of the evidence until actually tendered at the hearing, (c) any proposed tender bundle must be both indexed and consecutively paginated, (d) such tender bundle is to be no more than 30 pages, and (e) tender bundles that do not comply with these directions will be rejected and be unable to be relied upon at the hearing without leave first being obtained.   any proposed tender bundle must be both indexed and consecutively paginated, (d) such tender bundle is to be no more than 30 pages, and (e) tender bundles that do not comply with these directions will be rejected and be unable to be relied upon at the hearing without leave first being obtained.   such tender bundle is to be no more than 30 pages, and (e) tender bundles that do not comply with these directions will be rejected and be unable to be relied upon at the hearing without leave first being obtained.   tender bundles that do not comply with these directions will be rejected and be unable to be relied upon at the hearing without leave first being obtained.   a legal representative must not: (i) provide a copy of the restricted documents to their client in any form, (ii) permit their client to copy the restricted documents, or (iii) allow any other person to provide the restricted documents to the client.   provide a copy of the restricted documents to their client in any form, (ii) permit their client to copy the restricted documents, or (iii) allow any other person to provide the restricted documents to the client.  ) permit their client to copy the restricted documents, or (iii) allow any other person to provide the restricted documents to the client.  i) allow any other person to provide the restricted documents to the client.   the instructions to the legal representatives on record being withdrawn and/or their ceasing to act, (b) the finalisation of these proceedings whether by consent or determination by the court,   the finalisation of these proceedings whether by consent or determination by the court,
the legal representatives must forthwith return to the court with a letter addressed to the registrar and marked confidential, a copy of this order together with all and any copies of the documents obtained pursuant to the abovementioned paragraph.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction  x born in 2012 currently aged 11 years, and (b) y born in 2014 currently aged nine years (“the children”).   y born in 2014 currently aged nine years (“the children”).  he children”).
evidence
background
the law
disposition  the applicant has demonstrated a reasonable basis for arguing for the substantive orders sought, (b) the applicant has demonstrated that absent an urgent listing the applicant will be prejudiced in relation to the substantive relief sought other than in ways common to other matters awaiting the court’s attention in the normal course, (c) the applicant has demonstrated that there has been no unreasonable or unexplained delay in approaching the court, and (d) a judicial officer is available to hear the substantive application.   the applicant has demonstrated that absent an urgent listing the applicant will be prejudiced in relation to the substantive relief sought other than in ways common to other matters awaiting the court’s attention in the normal course, (c) the applicant has demonstrated that there has been no unreasonable or unexplained delay in approaching the court, and (d) a judicial officer is available to hear the substantive application.   the applicant has demonstrated that there has been no unreasonable or unexplained delay in approaching the court, and (d) a judicial officer is available to hear the substantive application.   a judicial officer is available to hear the substantive application.  phasis added)
associate: dated: 16 november 2023
dated: 16 november 2023