last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
carano & carano [2023] fedcfamc2f 1566
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment  if, in proceedings under this act: (a) a party (the examining party ) intends to cross-examine another party (the witness party ), and (b) there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and   a party (the examining party ) intends to cross-examine another party (the witness party ), and (b) there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and   there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and   any of the following are satisfied: (i) either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross-examination,   either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross-examination,  ) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross-examination,  i) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross-examination,  ) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross-examination,
then the requirements of subsection (2) apply to cross examination. (2) both of the following requirements apply to the cross-examination: (a) the examining party must not cross-examine the witness party personally, (b) the cross-examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party. (3) the court may make an order under subparagraph (1)(c)(iv):   the examining party must not cross-examine the witness party personally, (b) the cross-examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party.   the cross-examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party.   on its own initiative, or (b) on the application of:  the witness party, or (ii) the examining party, or (iii) if an independent children's lawyer has been appointed for a child in relation to the proceedings--that lawyer.  i) if an independent children's lawyer has been appointed for a child in relation to the proceedings--that lawyer.
... it must be acknowledged that section 102na is a draconian and drastic restriction upon the time honoured right of a party to cross-examine another party or witness giving evidence contrary to him. the section 102na scheme is, as discussed in the decisions cited, for the protection of victims of alleged family violence, and to prevent the re-traumatisation of the alleged victim by the cross-examination process when it is being carried out personally by the other party. hand in hand with that draconian restriction is the generous scheme when a party is prevented from cross-examining. parliament has set aside a separate bucket of money to be administered by state legal aid bodies for the purpose of ensuring the representation of the restricted party. in this way, the other party can be cross-examined, but not by the litigant in person but by a lawyer. this has the collateral benefit that, inevitably, the otherwise unrepresented party obtains the benefit of the legal advice of the lawyer that would be undertaking the cross-examination. further, certainly in victoria, the scheme being administered by victoria legal aid has imposed conditions upon that grant of aid such that the lawyer appointed under the scheme effectively has the responsibility of the conduct of the entire case, not just the cross-examination of the other party. that comes with real advantaged and disadvantages. a litigant in person has at first been excited about the prospect of having a lawyer appointed for them at public expense, only to be profoundly disappointed when the lawyer has provided legal advice that runs contrary to what the person wanted or expected to hear. ... if section 102na mandatorily applies there is no discretion: the parties cannot cross examine each other and the resources of the section 102na cross examination scheme are made available and not means tested...
associate: dated: 5 december 2023
dated: 5 december 2023