last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
marcos & serina [2023] fedcfamc2f 1474
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background  [the wife] and i each brought our own assets into the relationship, including our own homes. (b) during the relationship we did not blend our finances, hold any joint bank accounts, or acquire any joint assets ([the wife] herself deposes to this at paragraph 19 and again at paragraph 85 of her affidavit). we each applied our incomes towards our own assets. we kept our respective assets and finances separate from one another and made independent financial decisions regarding our respective assets, without recourse to the other, throughout our relationship. ...   during the relationship we did not blend our finances, hold any joint bank accounts, or acquire any joint assets ([the wife] herself deposes to this at paragraph 19 and again at paragraph 85 of her affidavit). we each applied our incomes towards our own assets. we kept our respective assets and finances separate from one another and made independent financial decisions regarding our respective assets, without recourse to the other, throughout our relationship. ...
the proceedings
final hearing
documents relied upon
exhibits tendered
witnesses
applicable law
standard of proof   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
reliability and credit of the parties ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... [citations omitted]
the applicable law of property alteration
4aa de facto relationships meaning of de facto relationship (1) a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if: (a) the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.
...
working out if persons have a relationship as a couple (2) those circumstances may include any or all of the following: (a) the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   no particular finding in relation to any circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have a de facto relationship. (4) a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case.   a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case.
... 90sf matters to be taken into consideration in relation to maintenance ... (3) the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and  ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:   subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,
and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and  a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and ... (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, ...   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, ...
... 90sm alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them – altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property...   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them – altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property...
... including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and  either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or ... to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.  the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,  ) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,
whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, ...   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, ...   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, ...   the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, ...  phasis added]
stanford & 90sm(3): ...must not make an order...unless...satisfied...just and equitable
... because the power to make a property settlement order is not to be exercised in an unprincipled fashion, whether it is “just and equitable” to make the order is not to be answered by assuming that the parties’ rights to or interests in marital property are or should be different from those that then exist. all the more is that so when it is recognised that s 79 of the act must be applied keeping in mind that “[c]ommunity of ownership arising from marriage has no place in the common law”. questions between husband and wife about the ownership of property that may be then, or may have been in the past, enjoyed in common are to be “decided according to the same scheme of legal titles and equitable principles as govern the rights of any two persons who are not spouses”. the question presented by s 79 is whether those rights and interests should be altered. third, whether making a property settlement order is “just and equitable” is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them or has the right to an interest in marital property which is fixed by reference to the various matters (including financial and other contributions) set out in s 79(4). the power to make a property settlement order must be exercised “in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down”. to conclude that making an order is “just and equitable” only because of and by reference to various matters in s 79(4), without a separate consideration of s 79(2), would be to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the act. ... the fundamental propositions that have been identified require that a court have a principled reason for interfering with the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties to the marriage and whatever may have been their stated or unstated assumptions and agreements about property interests during the continuance of the marriage. in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship.[7] it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife. no less importantly, the express implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship... and the assumption that any adjustment of those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4).[8] in many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife. no less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. that is, any express or implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing arrangements of marital property interests were sufficient or appropriate during the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the ending of the marital relationship. and the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4). [citations omitted and emphasis added]
... we do not consider it helpful, and indeed it is misleading, to describe this separate enquiry as a “threshold” issue. we say this for two reasons. first, as was emphasised in stanford, the initial enquiry is to determine the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties. secondly, although s 79(2) is cast in the negative and amounts to a prohibition against making any order unless it is just and equitable to do so, the corollary is that if the court does make an order, such order itself must be just and equitable: woollams & woollams [2004] fcwa 32, (2004) flc 93-195 per thackray j at [53] and teal v teal [2010] famcafc 120 per finn, boland and dawe jj at [70]. the just and equitable requirement is therefore not a threshold issue, but rather one permeating the entire process. it will be seen from this discussion that while the s 79(2) and s 79(4) issues must not be conflated, they are intertwined because the text of the act links them. this was recognised in ferguson & ferguson where strauss j said that s 79(2) “is directed to both the questions whether an order should be made at all, and what the order should be, if one is made” (supra at 77,615). this understanding of the interplay between ss 79(2) and 79(4) accords with the analysis of martin bartfeld qc in his paper entitled “stanford and stanford — lots of questions — very few answers”. in that paper, which we drew to the attention of counsel, mr bartfeld opined that: ... there is scope for taking into account the factors under s 79(4) in the exercise of the [s 79(2)] discretion. this can be accomplished, it is submitted, by treating the contribution factors and the factors under s 75(2) as having two simultaneous characteristics, a discretionary characteristic, which is used to identify those matters which are relevant to enliven the exercise of the discretion. thus the fact that a party has made substantial contributions, over a long period of time, which are not reflected in their asset holdings but which are reflected in the other party’s assets may found a basis for finding that it is just and equitable for an order to be made, and an evaluative characteristic, which is used to measure the weight or to quantify the effect of a particular contribution. the problem of conflation can easily be overcome by clearly identifying the use to which a factor is being put. in our view, it will be less likely that the separate issues arising under s 79(2) and s 79(4) will be conflated if judges refrain from evaluating contributions and other relevant factors in percentage or monetary terms until they have first determined that it would be just and equitable to make an order. ultimately, however, appellate error will not be demonstrated if it is possible to ascertain, either by reference to an express finding or by necessary inference, that the trial judge has given separate consideration to the two issues.
the husband’s property case
aspects of the husband’s evidence
mr glezakos: yes, your honour. [the husband], moving on from the dollars and cents, the reality is that [the wife] did undertake the majority of the household tasks for the entire time that you were living together, isn’t it? the husband: not really. no. mr glezakos: she cooked and cleaned, she was primarily responsible for all those things? the husband: cooking, yes. cleaning we did together, and i paid for a lot of takeaways and restaurants i paid most for. that’s obvious in the bank statements. mr glezakos: yes. so you went out a bit - - -? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: - - - but when there was cooking at home it was mostly [the wife]? the husband: sorry. i missed that. mr glezakos: when there was cooking at home it was mostly [the wife]? the husband: all [the wife].
mr glezakos: well,...you come here to the court and say i don’t know what she did with her money, but you’ve had the statements so you could have looked at them? the husband: well, i didn’t. mr glezakos: okay? the husband: i was not interested in [the wife]’s money. ... mr glezakos: thank you, your honour. so [the husband], you’ve heard me rattle off some figures, but do you accept off the back of that that in the period of time when works were being done to [suburb e], my client was earning in the order of $80,000 per year, do you accept that? the husband: well, i’ve heard it from you. yes. it’s the first time i’ve heard it, but i’ve never asked [the wife] about what she earnt. mr glezakos: all right. well, no. but again, i’m taking you to your affidavit? the husband: yes. well, i understand, i agree. ... mr glezakos: all right? because you say she couldn’t have had the money to do it. the other issue, [the husband], is this. you accept, do you not, that [the wife] sold her [suburb b] apartment for $589,000? the husband: correct. mr glezakos: do you accept that? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: and she had the mortgage of $320,000 to pay? the husband: i didn’t know that. mr glezakos: all right? the husband: at the time i didn’t know that. mr glezakos: at the time you didn’t know that, but you’ve heard that before, have you? the husband: well, only in this – the affidavits that have come through. i didn’t know, it wasn’t my business. mr glezakos: well, hang on. you’ve heard it? when did you hear that she had a mortgage of [$320,000] that needed to be paid? the husband: well, it was in one of the affidavits, i think, but i didn’t know at the time. mr glezakos: all right? the husband: it wasn’t my business. mr glezakos: well – but – all right. but if i put to you now that she had therefore about $269,000 plus or minus expenses that she received from the sale of [suburb b], does that sound right? the husband: i believe you.
mr glezakos: okay. well, her income that was declared to the tax office was in the order of about $80,000 before covid, wasn’t it, per annum? the husband: i don’t – i don’t know. mr glezakos: well, your counsel put that very proposition to my client yesterday based off her tax returns, didn’t he? the husband: i believe so, and if that’s what the tax return said: yes, fine. i didn’t see her tax returns while we were living together. mr glezakos: okay. i’m not saying that you did, [the husband]. i’m simply saying that you heard it put to my client that she was earning in the order of [$80,000]. it varied - - -? the husband: yes.
mr glezakos: okay. and even though you say in your affidavit, and you do it in a couple of places, but it’s at first – well, certainly, you say it at paragraph 15(e) of your affidavit that my client moving into your commercial property was a temporary arrangement. the truth is that she stayed there for four years, didn’t she? the husband: yes, three years. mr glezakos: three years? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: so from 2012/13 to 2017? the husband: three years. mr glezakos: right. and she bought a house within six months of moving in with you, that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: yes, that – that sounds about right, yes. mr glezakos: yes. and a fair bit of money was spent on that. we will come to that. but whilst we might appreciate you wouldn’t have kicked her out and left her homeless, why didn’t you ask her to leave? if it was a temporary arrangement, why didn’t you ask her to leave after she bought her house? the husband: you just nailed it. the first comment, i didn’t want to throw her out. mr glezakos: no, but after she bought her house, she had somewhere to go. why didn’t you ask her to leave? the husband: it was unliveable. mr glezakos: so at what stage did it become liveable, do you say? the husband: probably just before we moved in. ... mr glezakos: one, you didn’t want her to move out, did you? the husband: no. mr glezakos: two, you were happily in a relationship? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: three, you intended to continue living together, didn’t you? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: four, you spoke about your future together, didn’t you? the husband: not really, no. mr glezakos: well, “not really”, is that a yes or is that a no? the husband: no. mr glezakos: you never spoke about your future together? the husband: no. mr glezakos: well, i put to you that you did, and that you spoke about buying a house together? the husband: she spoke about buying a [commercial property], i didn’t. mr glezakos: she spoke about buying a [commercial property] in the future? the husband: correct. mr glezakos: and did you ever say to her, “no, don’t want to own property with you. don’t want to have anything to do with it”? the husband: i said no. mr glezakos: no to a particular property, or “no, i don’t want to own property with you”? the husband: no to a particular property. mr glezakos: right. so you looked at a property together? the husband: no, she did. mr glezakos: she did and she brought it to you, and you said, “i don’t want that property”? the husband: yes. correct. mr glezakos: but i take it from your answer earlier that you never said to her, “i don’t ever want to own property with you”? the husband: i did not – i didn’t say that. ... mr glezakos: so when you say in your affidavit that it was a temporary arrangement, why don’t you say, “initially, it was supposed to be something short-term, but it turned into something more”? the husband: well, that’s how it looks. mr glezakos: but that’s not what you say, is it?---that’s what it looked in the first place, but it wasn’t at – after we were living together. mr glezakos: and then you double-down on that and you say, “well, i actually went and lived with her because she was just repaying the favour.” that’s not right, is it? you went and lived with her because you sold your place and you were in a relationship and you wanted to live together, that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: i had nowhere to go. mr glezakos: you had nowhere to go, and you had somebody that you were in a committed relationship with who you wanted to live with, that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: correct. mr glezakos: yes. because by that stage when you sold the – your place, your [commercial property], you had plenty of money. you could have gone and lived anywhere you wanted to. you could have rented, couldn’t you? the husband: yes, i could have. mr glezakos: yes, but you didn’t want to because you wanted to live with my client? the husband: she offered. mr glezakos: but you took up the offer? the husband: correct.
the wife’s property case
aspects of the wife’s evidence
the cash payments
mr mellas: now, in your trial affidavit you say, in paragraph 89 – your honour, that’s page 68 of the court book:
over the course of our relationship, [the husband] paid for some of the renovations to the [suburb e] property, including installation of the kitchen. ... and he made some direct financial contributions in cash to contractors.
do you agree with that?
the wife: no, i don’t agree with that, because i know nothing about it. mr mellas: right. well, why did you – well, you said it in your affidavit, did you not? the wife: cash? mr mellas: yes? the wife: well, that’s, sort of, in dispute really. ... the wife: well, he doesn’t have any receipts.
his honour: all right. can you just read that paragraph 89 to yourself, please, and tell mr mellas when you’ve finished reading it? the wife: okay. well, i don’t know exactly how much the financial contributions were to the contractors. ... the wife: going on what [the husband] has told me, that’s what he said to me, but i don’t know the amount of cash. ... the wife: ... no receipts were ever shown to me on what [the husband] gave contractors, he only verbally told me he did. so i can say yes, he gave contractors money, but i have no idea of the amount, unless there’s receipts produced.
significant & common ground events
relationship before the de facto relationship
wife’s assets at start of the de facto relationship
start of de facto relationship
the wife purchases her next home early on in de facto relationship
the wife’s new property renovations start
the husband retires, sells the commercial property & buys another dwelling
the degree of financial separateness of the parties
some relevant disputes
what the husband contributed to the suburb e renovations
mr glezakos: what did you want to clarify in relation to paragraph 17, it relates to the works at [suburb e]? the wife: i wanted to clarify that the amount of money that was an approximate amount of [$110,000] actually includes the amount that i also have estimated and was documented that [the husband] put into the [suburb e] property, so it’s a collective amount of [$110,000], including his. ... the wife: ... i’m saying that the two amounts actually, well, they amount to [$110,000], inclusive of [the husband]’s contribution.
mr mellas: yes. okay. and at the time, you said that you contributed approximately [$110,000] towards the renovations. do you recall making that comment? the wife: yes. i adjusted that comment to include [the husband’s] contribution. mr mellas: and today you’ve said no, no, it wasn’t [$110,000] that you contributed, but in total there was [$110,000], including [the husband]’s contribution of [$31,371], is that right? the wife: yes, that’s referring to my bank statements and going through what was put into my account regarding things that were purchased for the house. yes. mr mellas: when you saw your trial affidavit – well, sorry, when you saw your reply affidavit on 17 february 2022, how did you calculate the figure that you contributed of 110 that you said at the time you contributed? the wife: how did i calculate it, sorry? ... his honour: how did you calculate the [$110,000]? the wife: well, i just, basically, went through, in my mind, things that were purchased, floorboards, appliances and so forth, and made a calculated educated guess as to how much these things cost. i did everything as cheaply as i could. mr mellas: and you did that in your mind, you say? ... the wife: yes. well, i don’t have receipts. they were destroyed in two separate floods where we had our mutual things stored in [suburb l]. mr mellas: so when you swore your reply affidavit in february 2022, that was just an estimate, was it? ... mr mellas: ... was the [$110,000] that, you say, you contributed an estimate? the wife: yes, it’s an estimate, because i actually married up the money that [the husband] had transferred into my accounts, and then i went through, in my mind, because that’s the only recollection can have, because receipts were destroyed, and looked around my house at what had been done. i did a lot of the work myself, including painting, pulling out floors and so forth, so a lot of it, i didn’t use any labour for. i did it myself. mr mellas: okay. yet today, a few weeks later after you’ve sworn that affidavit, you come to court and you say, “well, no, i got that wrong, it’s closer to [$80,000] that i contributed”? the wife: that’s correct. mr mellas: and you didn’t have the benefit of receipts or anything else to come to that figure of [$80,000], did you? the wife: no, but i live in the house, so i can look around and i can look at things and remember where i bought them. mr mellas: right. well, you said that you turned your mind, or you worked all that out in your mind back in february when you [swore] your reply affidavit, did you not? the wife: probably not as thoroughly.
mr mellas: why did you say that? the wife: why did i say it? because it was an estimate, because i really didn’t have any receipts to rely on. mr mellas: and then - - -? the wife: and going over my – going over the contributions that were put into my bank account, it was a more accurate figure that i came up with. mr mellas: and does that more accurate figure include what you said before, some of the cash payments made to the various contractors? the wife: yes. mr mellas: how did you work that out? you said you didn’t know what those figures were? the wife: well, i don’t know what those figures were. i was never told. mr mellas: you see, again, you initially say that [the husband] contributed 50,000, and then you change it to a precise amount of 31,371. again, are you making figures up to suit your case as you go? the wife: no. ... mr mellas: okay. and, well, and you don’t know exactly how much cash was paid to the contractors? the wife: no.
were the shared residences intended to be temporary
15. ... (e) [the wife] purchased the [suburb e] property in [mid-]2013, approximately five months after moving temporarily into my [commercial property]. rather than moving into the [suburb e] property, [the wife] decided to commence renovating the [suburb e] property, and continued living with me at [the commercial property] while those renovations were being undertaken. again, this was intended to be a temporary arrangement pending the completion of those renovations, however, the renovations ended up taking over three years to complete....   [the wife] purchased the [suburb e] property in [mid-]2013, approximately five months after moving temporarily into my [commercial property]. rather than moving into the [suburb e] property, [the wife] decided to commence renovating the [suburb e] property, and continued living with me at [the commercial property] while those renovations were being undertaken. again, this was intended to be a temporary arrangement pending the completion of those renovations, however, the renovations ended up taking over three years to complete....
10. as to paragraph 15 i say that: we typically spent at least 3 nights per week together until i moved into [the husband’s] property in [suburb d] [the commercial property] on a permanent basis. [emphasis in original]
15. ... (h) in [early] 2017, i sold [the commercial property] and purchased myself a new home at ... [suburb f] (the [suburb f] property) which i purchased in my sole name. [the wife] did not make any contribution towards the purchase of the [suburb f] property. the [suburb f] property was not habitable at the time and required significant renovations. (i) as i had accommodated [the wife] at [the commercial property] while she was completing renovations on her [suburb e] property, [the wife] agreed that she would "return the favour" and allowed me to move in with her at the [suburb e] property in [early] 2017 so i could renovate the [suburb f] property. my intention was to move into the [suburb f] property once the renovations were complete and live there on my own.   in [early] 2017, i sold [the commercial property] and purchased myself a new home at ... [suburb f] (the [suburb f] property) which i purchased in my sole name. [the wife] did not make any contribution towards the purchase of the [suburb f] property. the [suburb f] property was not habitable at the time and required significant renovations. (i) as i had accommodated [the wife] at [the commercial property] while she was completing renovations on her [suburb e] property, [the wife] agreed that she would "return the favour" and allowed me to move in with her at the [suburb e] property in [early] 2017 so i could renovate the [suburb f] property. my intention was to move into the [suburb f] property once the renovations were complete and live there on my own.   as i had accommodated [the wife] at [the commercial property] while she was completing renovations on her [suburb e] property, [the wife] agreed that she would "return the favour" and allowed me to move in with her at the [suburb e] property in [early] 2017 so i could renovate the [suburb f] property. my intention was to move into the [suburb f] property once the renovations were complete and live there on my own.
... (k) [the wife] and i lived together at the [suburb e] property until we separated in january 2020. the [suburb f] property was under renovation during that time.   [the wife] and i lived together at the [suburb e] property until we separated in january 2020. the [suburb f] property was under renovation during that time.
10. ... as to subparagraphs 15 (g) to (l) inclusive, i say that when the renovations to the [suburb e] property were almost completed in [early] 2017, [the husband] and i both moved into the property as we had been living together since late 2012 and were in a loving and committed relationship. [the husband] and i moved into the renovated [suburb e] property at the same time. there was no discussion about “returning favours” as [the husband] alleges.  phasis in original]
mr mellas: right. you purchased the [suburb e] property in [mid-]2013? the wife: correct. mr mellas: so you would have been looking for a property before that, would you not? the wife: prior to [mid-2013]? mr mellas: yes? the wife: yes, i think i cruised the papers and so forth. i didn’t actually drive around and - - - mr mellas: no, you were looking, well, looking at the papers and looking for a property for most of 2013, were you not? the wife: well, i, yes, i was. 20 mr mellas: yes, so when you say that you started looking in mid-2013, that’s not correct, is it? the wife: well, if i purchase it – no, it was probably earlier than that. i’m sorry. i’ve made a mistake there. mr mellas: yes. so at least from – well, [the husband] says that from [late] 2012, when you sold [suburb b], you started actively looking for another property. what do you say about that? the wife: no, i disagree. mr mellas: right. so you say, some time in 2013 you started actively looking for another property? the wife: yes. it’s a long time ago. yes. mr mellas: yes, because [the husband]’s position is you sold [suburb b], [suburb b] settled, [late] 2012, and you asked [the husband] whether you could move in with him until you found another property[22]? the wife: yes. mr mellas: okay. so you move into [the commercial property] ...? the wife: yes. mr mellas: right. take your belongings with you? the wife: correct. mr mellas: and both of you live in that property until some time in 2017, that’s right, isn’t it? the wife: that’s correct. mr mellas: you purchase ... [suburb e] in the middle of 2013? the wife: yes. mr mellas: yes. and then you tell [the husband] that you want to renovate the new property? the wife: yes. mr mellas: and ask to continue to live at [the commercial property] until that’s done, do you agree with that? the wife: accepted i would be living there, yes. -
the non-disclosure allegations
his honour: well, hang on. hang on. do you remember preparing the table or not? the husband: no. ... mr glezakos: you’ve said your finances were kept separate. my client didn’t have day-to-day oversight of what you were doing with your accounts, that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: correct. ... mr glezakos: okay. [the husband], you went through your records very, very carefully to ensure that you could explain where all the money went, didn’t you? the husband: these withdrawals, i don’t even know where they went. they were cash withdrawals i paid to tradesman. i didn’t make a thing of it – a list of it. mr glezakos: but you’ve used your best endeavours in the course of these proceedings to go back and reconcile it, is that right? the husband: no. ... mr glezakos: [the husband], the question i asked you earlier was in relation to atm withdrawals. now, the statements that you’ve provided show some significant atm withdrawals, thousands of dollars on some days. do you recall seeing that in your own bank statements? the husband: i don’t look at them, but i don’t doubt it. ... ... mr glezakos: yes. and there was a fair bit of correspondence between the solicitors trying to nail down exactly what the shares were, that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: possibly. ... mr glezakos: all right. and so that led to a big issue because my client had seen some documents that she was sure showed that there was some shares and she kept asking about it and you kept denying it, do you understand that to be the case? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: all right. and i think your answer earlier was, well, you do own some shares, but you own them through the super fund? the husband: correct. mr glezakos: all right. so her concern that you might own some shares wasn’t exactly without some foundation, was it? the husband: it was probably a guess, but yes. mr glezakos: well, it was educated guess based on what she knew about your finances, that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: all right. so do you understand and accept that a blanket denial that you owned any shares was, perhaps, unhelpful in the circumstances, do you accept that? the husband: i didn’t know myself until i inquired. mr glezakos: well, [the husband], you get regular statements from – i think it’s [m company] who manage the fund, don’t you? the husband: yes, but i don’t understand them. mr glezakos: okay. but do you understand that they set out a share register owned on your behalf? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: all right. so they say the super fund owns all these shares on behalf of [the husband], that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: correct. ... mr glezakos: so rather than deflecting and simply saying i don’t own any shares, wouldn’t it have been useful to, perhaps, say, well, i don’t own any shares, but this is the statement from the super fund and that’s where they all are? the husband: yes. my mistake. ... the husband: i didn’t read her bank statements. ... mr glezakos: so [the husband], by the time that the proceedings were issued in october 2020 my client had provided a significant amount of disclosure in relation to her financial circumstances, hadn’t she? the husband: i believe so, yes. mr glezakos: all right. and she continued throughout these proceedings to provide documents, that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: i don’t know. they were a bit slow at times, like i was. mr glezakos: well, you’ve gone to print in relation to what you say is about the lack of disclosure. are you satisfied you received everything that you asked for? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: all right. and you had received that by the time of swearing your affidavit on 27 january this year, that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: i don’t know. mr glezakos: okay. because what i’m going to do, [the husband], is contrast your disclosure because, as we’ve heard, some of the documents that you refer to in your affidavit were not received until this week, and i’m putting to you, [the husband], that you were, in fact, exceptionally tardy in relation to providing documents, that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: i didn’t think so. mr glezakos: okay? the husband: bank statements were a little bit slow at times because i had to rely on someone else to do them for me. his honour: why was that, [the husband]? the husband: because i’m not very good at computer. when i first had to do the bank statements i went to the bank to get some bank statements and i went back a couple of days later to pick them up and i got a – a ream and a half of bank statements and i couldn’t do that again. so i had to find someone who could – pdf is a word that i had never heard before, but once they started doing that, well, then the statements started coming through.
are the advances to the husband’s family assets?
mr glezakos: and those payments totalling $455,000, they were loans, weren’t they? the husband: they were loans, the two 200,000s were loans to my brother. mr glezakos: the payment of $45,000 to [mr n], in total, they were loans as well, weren’t they? the husband: may i explain the [$45,000]? mr glezakos: well – no. i’m asking you if they were loans? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: all right. so those loans – when people lend money they expect it to be repaid, that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: correct. mr glezakos: so what steps have you taken to recover those loans? the husband: phone calls after phone calls. as i said, can i explain the [$45,000]? his honour: if mr mellas wants you to – to asks you questions about it he will. mr glezakos: why shouldn’t those be taken into account – no. i will rephrase that. i withdraw that, your honour. given that they’re loans, that’s money that you’re entitled to from each of your brothers, isn’t it? the husband: one would hope. yes. mr glezakos: all right? the husband: one went into liquidation. mr glezakos: well, your brother didn’t go into bankruptcy, his business went into liquidation, that’s right, isn’t it: [mr o]? the husband: correct. mr glezakos: yes. neither of them are bankrupt? the husband: yes, they are. mr glezakos: who is bankrupt? the husband: [mr o]. mr glezakos: when did [mr o] become bankrupt? the husband: i don’t know the exact date. you’ve got the details of that. mr glezakos: no. you’re making that assertion. i put to you, [the husband], that nowhere in your affidavits and nowhere in any of the documents that you have provided do you say, “my brother is bankrupt”. you say his business went into liquidation. he’s not a bankrupt, is he? the husband: yes. he’s got nothing. mr glezakos: so i put to you that it’s nowhere in any of your material or anything that you have disclosed or discovered. you wouldn’t disagree with that, would you? the husband: towards the end we – we checked up on the – how his business went down and it’s in – i don’t know. google or something that it came up that he - - - mr glezakos: no. hang on. hang on, [the husband]. his business went into liquidation, yes? the husband: correct. mr glezakos: all right. and you’ve said in your material that his business went into liquidation? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: you don’t say in your material that he is a bankrupt? the husband: i didn’t know there was any difference to be quite honest. mr glezakos: well, i’m putting to you that he’s not a bankrupt, and if he was, you would have put that in your material? the husband: he has gone bankrupt. mr glezakos: and that you’re entitled to the repayment of $455,000, that’s right, isn’t it? that’s right, isn’t it, [the husband]? you’re entitled to that to be repaid to you? the husband: i was hoping for it. yes. mr glezakos: that’s not an answer to my question, [the husband]. you’re entitled to it, aren’t you? the husband: entitled to it, yes. mr glezakos: thank you. and you could, if you wanted to after this is all said and done, issue proceedings to recover those money? the husband: i’ve already tried, it’s not happening. mr glezakos: you’ve tried to issue proceedings to recover the moneys, have you? the husband: not issue proceedings, he’s my brother. mr glezakos: all right. okay. but you’re entitled to, you could if you wanted to? the husband: that’s what you’re saying. mr glezakos: yes. you have made the choice not to pursue it? the husband: under – yes. mr glezakos: all right. his honour: i think it has got to have in the circumstances as you know them you have chosen not to pursue it? the husband: correct.
the extent of the wife’s contribution or “help” with the commercial property
mr glezakos: and she assisted you in coordinating and ideas in relation to the design works for [the commercial property], that’s right, isn’t it? the husband: i think it was a mutual thing. i would have to say yes. mr glezakos: yes? the husband: it was a – we both had an input into that, but i paid for it. mr glezakos: yes. and likewise, in relation to [suburb f]. she helped you with coming up with ideas and designs for [suburb f]? the husband: not so much in [suburb f] because [suburb f] was all done after we split. we did have a designer in who designed the bathroom area, but any – i can’t remember his second name, but we didn’t end up using his design in the end. mr glezakos: but it’s not the case as you put in your affidavit that she didn’t help you at all with those things, is it? the husband: when we split, she didn’t even put her foot in the house. she probably - - - mr glezakos: hold on. i’m not talking about the period after you split, i’m talking about overall. it’s not true, as you say in your affidavit, that she had nothing to do with the design works, that’s not right, is it? the husband: no, it’s not right. minimum. we didn’t use anything. actually, can i rephrase – can i – i do remember. it was her idea to raise the roof in the back of the house which was very good. mr glezakos: well – and she helped you with designs for things like the windows? the husband: yes, she did. mr glezakos: yes. some floorplans? the husband: no. i don’t think - - - his honour: mr glezakos, could – hang on, mr – could you just help me a little bit on that topic, what “helped you” means? mr glezakos: yes, your honour. i’m going – i’m just calling up the specific reference in the material. his honour: yes. mr glezakos: so [the husband], my client helped you with designing the floorplan for the kitchen at [the commercial property]? the husband: fifty-fifty. mr glezakos: she selected fixtures and fittings? the husband: yes. she probably did, yes. mr glezakos: yes. she sourced second hand furniture and crockery to fit it out? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: in relation to [suburb f], she put you in touch with people who could assist with making custom windows for the house? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: she designed the floorplan? the husband: [mr p] had a lot to do with that mr glezakos: [mr p], the person she put you in touch with? the husband: yes. mr glezakos: yes. she communicated with [mr p] in relation to that design? the husband: i think she did, yes. mr glezakos: she assisted in relation to – certainly, the idea, i think, you conceded of raising the rear ceiling to make it appear more spacious? the husband: correct. mr glezakos: yes. she did research so that she could help you with designing the windows and doors to the property? the husband: i cannot remember that. unknown. mr glezakos: she chose the colour schemes for the kitchen, bedroom and bathroom, and the outside of the house? the husband: no. mr glezakos: and i put it to you that she planned the fence for the front of the house? the husband: which was the same as hers, and it hasn’t been done. mr glezakos: no. but she assisted getting the - - -? the husband: i – sorry. mr glezakos: she planned the fence to go to council to get approval? the husband: i wanted – i wanted – i wanted the same fence that she had at [q street]. mr glezakos: all right. and she arranged for [mr p] to do works in relation to the structural changes including organising the roller doors at the rear of the house? the husband: no. that’s all been done by the planner that i’ve had already draw the plans. mr glezakos: all right? the husband: which is [mr r]. ... mr glezakos: so [the husband], having made those appropriate concessions, why do you say at paragraph 45 of your trial affidavit, “[the wife] had no input in the building design of the [suburb f] property”, amongst other things? the husband: she would visit. mr glezakos: that’s not right, is it? the husband: she gave her opinion, and she was good at it. mr glezakos: [the husband], i’m putting to you that your statement that she had no input in the building and design of the [suburb f] property is simply incorrect? the husband: no physical input, yes. she did not put any physical input in. is that what you’re saying? mr glezakos: i’m telling you what you say in your affidavit. you don’t say about physical input, you say she had no input, that’s not true, is it? the husband: physical, that’s what i was referring to. mr glezakos: but that’s not what your affidavit says, is it? the husband: correct. mr glezakos: all right. because whether she physically put into the properties or not, the truth is that she did contribute to [the commercial property] and to [suburb f]? the husband: yes. you’re talking about conversations on the front lawn or something like that.
money spent on “lifestyle” not “dissipated”
mr mellas: yes, [$1022.49]. that’s that one. and [s store], the next transaction. there’s two transactions for [s store]. one for 803.48 and one for [$1150.47]. do you see those? the wife: yes, we both purchased clothes there, yes. mr mellas: yes. [t store], [$...]. is that the dog collar that he purchased? the wife: yes, [the husband] picked out a dog collar to our – well, the dog, our dog. mr mellas: that was the collar that you wanted for the dog, wasn’t it? the wife: i suggested it. mr mellas: right. ...[...]? the wife: yes, it wasn’t up to me to pay for it. mr mellas: no, no. well, because [the husband] is paying, isn’t he? the wife: yes, he did. mr mellas: that [us$...] for a dog collar? the wife: yes. mr mellas: yes. next transaction, [city u hotel], [us$...]? the wife: that would have been for food. mr mellas: just the two of you? the wife: yes, there was only the two of us. mr mellas: okay? the wife: you’re working in us dollars. so once it’s converted back to au, it’s incredibly – but you know what, we were here for a long, you know, a good time not a long time and we only had probably at least two weeks a year holiday. well, i did anyway.
identifying the existing property interests
property interests, superannuation and financial resources
description
ownership
applicant’s value
respondent’s value
assets
1
q street, suburb e
applicant
$1,300,000
2
anz account #...12
nominal
3
anz account #...42
4
anz account #...98
5
anz business account #...35 (ms marcos’ business)
6
anz business account #...55 (ms marcos’ business)
7
anz account #...50
8
household contents
excluded
9
motor vehicle 1
$46,000
10
v street, suburb f
respondent
$1,600,000
11
w pty ltd atf the serina family trust – (trust owns property at ...suburb d)
$2,180,000
12
anz account #...16
13
anz account #...62
14
anz account #...47
15
anz account #...64
16
17
loans owed by family members to respondent
$475,716
nil
18
unaccounted for proceeds of sale of suburb d
$1,103,798
19
motor vehicle 3
$50,000
20
motor vehicle 4
$45,000
assets subtotal
$6,800,514
$5,221,000
liabilities
21
amex credit card account #...04
$7,022
$3,245
22
anz frequent flyer account #...47
$10,697
$8,139 cr
23
personal loan from mr g
$157,913
nk
24
anz home loan account #...14 (for suburb e property)
$488,836
25
anz frequent flyer account #...39
$33,608
26
anz visa account #...80
27
anz overdraft facility account ending #...84
$19,482
liabilities subtotal
$717,558
$537,032
superannuation
name of fund
type of interest
member
28
super fund 1
accumulation  plicant]
$38,629
29
super fund 2
smsf  spondent]
$385,964
superannuation subtotal
$424,593
$424,493
total (assets – liabilities)
$6,082,956
$4,683,968
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation)
$6,507,549
$5,108,461
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation + financial resources + other)
$
wife’s existing assets & liabilities
the suburb e property (agreed) 1,300,000
suburb e property mortgage (488,836[26])
suburb e property equity
811,164
bank accounts
modest
46,000
credit card debts (not disputed)  ,719)
wife’s superannuation
38,629
total wife’s assets & liabilities
878,074
husband’s existing assets & liabilities
the suburb f property
1,600,000
the suburb d property (owned by a trust/trustee controlled by husband & treated by the parties as if his property))
2,180,000
50,000
45,000
husband’s home contents
husband’s bank accounts
credit card (not disputed)  ,608)
overdraft facility (not disputed)  ,482)
husband’s self-managed superannuation
385,968
total husband’s assets & liabilities
4,277,119
total assets & liabilities:
5,155,193
mr glezakos: they talked about buying a property together. he says, “i never really wanted to”, but he also concedes that he never told my client that. this is how they lived their lives. it was a committed relationship for a period of seven plus years. there was cohabitation for seven years, but the relationship was longer than that. they spent time with each other’s families, extended families, their children. they had children living with them, albeit adult children. the mere fact that [the husband], at the commencement of the relationship, had greater resources does not then mean that, seven years down the track, we just keep them all separate. there’s an inherent tension, i would submit, in the position that he takes, because on the one hand, he says, “we kept everything separate, stanford – no adjustment required. it’s not just and equitable to do anything”, but then says, “but if you are, look at all these things that i have provided.”
there was an intermingling of resources – not necessarily an intermingling of assets, but their resources – there was a mutual and combined enterprise for those seven years, your honour. as i say, not necessarily in respect of specific assets, but they intended to continue to live together.
... mr glezakos: there was no suggestion in that that he wanted anything but the relationship to continue. it was the intention of both parties throughout, up until the very end, that they combined their resources and stay happily together for an extended period of time – perhaps until their deaths, but there’s no evidence about that. his honour: sorry....is the evidence that they combined their resources, if resources includes assets? mr glezakos: i – i take no issue with the proposition that the parties’ primary assets – that is, the real estate and what was bought with that real estate, in terms of where it was flipped into another asset – were kept separate, save and except my client’s evidence to the degree that she assisted in relation to the development of the properties and likewise. because [the husband] again says that he put blood, sweat and tears into [suburb e] and [suburb b] as well as money. well, that’s not really separate. the title is separate, but he has made a non-financial contribution, he would no doubt say. well, my client says likewise, she made a non-financial contribution to the other properties, and it was greater than [the husband] gives her credit for. i don’t want to overstate that, your honour. there is no – there is no doubt that [mr serina] got a tidy profit from selling his [commercial property], and he is entitled to be proud of that. but that doesn’t mean it just gets kept separately, in my submission, in circumstances of this relationship. his honour: well,...don’t i have to go back to stanford and find a principled reason to find that an adjustment is just and equitable? mr glezakos: yes, your honour. ... mr glezakos: yes, your honour. and my learned friend [says] to that: [the husband] is retired and he is living off his capital. [the wife] has got a capacity to work. well, [the husband] conceded firstly that my client’s back is not what it once was, and that she works four days a week, and that is appropriate. he conceded that in his affidavit and in his evidence – which impacts her ability to earn an income. but the other issue is this - - - ... his honour: but – so that means – that means, mr glezakos, like a barrister, she only gets the money from the [work she performs] or deals with. mr glezakos: exactly right. she has got no employees. she doesn’t get a cut from the other parties for providing them services or anything like that. ... mr glezakos: and your honour, the other distinction between the parties’ financial circumstances – and [the husband] says his income is about [$80,000] in terms of rent for [suburb d] and moneys that he gets from super fund. accepting that part of that might be attributable to capital, he doesn’t have a mortgage. ... mr glezakos: but [the husband] lives in an unencumbered home. he has also got a [commercial property] that earns an income that is also unencumbered. my client has got a mortgage of about $480,000. so, that is a significant difference in relation to their financial security and their financial circumstances. it is a bit simplistic, in my submission, for the respondent to say, “we have got enough to get by on, look at the equity that she’s got” in circumstances where there’s a mortgage there that needs to be met on an ongoing basis. ...
conclusion to section 90sm(3) just and equitable analysis
the caveats
costs sought
associate: dated: 17 november 2023
dated: 17 november 2023
[1] although more accurately described as de facto husband or de facto wife, for convenience i will describe the parties as ‘husband’ and ‘wife’.[2] in affidavit the husband had asserted that this was not the start of their de facto relationship, that that had commenced later when the parties moved into the residence the wife subsequently purchased but this was not maintained at final hearing. in outline of case the husband was ambiguous about whether the cohabitation until 2017 constituted a de facto relationship under the act.[3] this is when the husband has asserted in affidavit that the de facto relationship commenced but did not pursue this point at hearing.[4] see the wife’s trial affidavit at [85]. [5] see the husband’s trial affidavit at [14]. [6] stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108; 293 alr 70; 47 fam lr 481; flc 93-518; [2012] hca 52 (‘stanford’)[7] or de facto relationship. [8] and/or section 90sm(3). [9] see keskin & keskin and anor [2019] famcafc 236; (2019) flc 93-932 (‘keskin’)[10] at [10].[11] “vintage” in the eyes of those interested in such things. [12] so asserted at [20(a)] of the husband’s trial affidavit, and at [13] of the wife’s reply affidavit she said, “[the husband also] had [another motor car]... i otherwise accept [the husband’s] assertion of our initial contributions save that i also owned an older [car] that i later sold for $30,000...”. the husband replied to the wife’s reply and at [22] of his reply affidavit “admitted” the assertions of the wife in her [20].[13] and the common ground position was not inconsistent with the incontrovertible evidence of the commercial property being later sold in 2017 for $7.5 million then encumbered with a mortgage of $1.852. [14] $4,700,000 plus $250,000 = $4,950,000. [15] tp 26. [16] i accept the husband’s evidence on that point.[17] see annexure 5 to wife’s trial affidavit and her evidence at [73]-[75]. [18] calculated as approx.. $7,000,000 less mortgage debt of $1,800,000, see settlement statement at annexure 5, bearing the date of printing (late 2020) not the date of settlement, early 2017. both parties refer to the balance received at settlement of commercial property sale in a cheque of approx. $3,500,000 but this was the balance to settle after the balance to settle the suburb f property had been paid and not including the deposit of $725,000 paid earlier.[19] see annexure 7, bank statements in name of the husband’s super fund annexed to the husband’s trial affidavit.[20] calculated by taking the total figure from the undisputed table of the husband’s trial affidavit at [26] but less the total of $284 from 2015 and the three sums that total $1,893 from early to mid-2016.[21] tp 25.[22] i am satisfied the wife understood the question she was answering was whether she asked the husband if she could move in until she found another property.[23] the husband’s table includes about $68,000 spent or paid in march 2020, hence not during the relationship but whether only $900,000 or $976,000 is not material and nothing turns on this.[24] at transcript page 7 (tp 7), “...it’s tolerably clear ... that those moneys were spent, but it’s not that they have been converted into an asset, so it’s not said that they should be added back. they will be a relevant factor...under 90sf(r)...”[25] conceded at item 24 of husband’s outline of case at page 7 of 24 and updated in the running.[26] not disputed.[27] as in stanford.