last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
grossmann & myles [2023] fedcfamc2f 1492
orders
the court orders that:  actively seeks the mother’s input in respect of any major long-term decisions in relation to the children prior to making any major long-term decisions in accordance with order 3, and (b) keeps the mother informed of all major long-term decisions made for the children.   keeps the mother informed of all major long-term decisions made for the children.   the father shall advise the mother by appclose of his proposal relating to the children, (b) if the mother wishes to comment on the father’s proposal (or if she has any proposal she wishes to make relating to the children on this issue) she shall, within seven (7) days after the date of the father’s appclose message, advise the father via appclose of her view, (c) upon receipt of any comment or proposal by the mother, the father shall give consideration to the mother’s views, (d) after the father has considered the mother’s comments, he shall make a decision and advise the mother in writing (including via appclose) of the outcome forthwith after making that decision, and (e) if the mother does not respond by appclose as provided for in order 3(b), the father shall be entitled to presume that the mother does not wish to be involved and he may decide the issue.   if the mother wishes to comment on the father’s proposal (or if she has any proposal she wishes to make relating to the children on this issue) she shall, within seven (7) days after the date of the father’s appclose message, advise the father via appclose of her view, (c) upon receipt of any comment or proposal by the mother, the father shall give consideration to the mother’s views, (d) after the father has considered the mother’s comments, he shall make a decision and advise the mother in writing (including via appclose) of the outcome forthwith after making that decision, and (e) if the mother does not respond by appclose as provided for in order 3(b), the father shall be entitled to presume that the mother does not wish to be involved and he may decide the issue.   upon receipt of any comment or proposal by the mother, the father shall give consideration to the mother’s views, (d) after the father has considered the mother’s comments, he shall make a decision and advise the mother in writing (including via appclose) of the outcome forthwith after making that decision, and (e) if the mother does not respond by appclose as provided for in order 3(b), the father shall be entitled to presume that the mother does not wish to be involved and he may decide the issue.   after the father has considered the mother’s comments, he shall make a decision and advise the mother in writing (including via appclose) of the outcome forthwith after making that decision, and (e) if the mother does not respond by appclose as provided for in order 3(b), the father shall be entitled to presume that the mother does not wish to be involved and he may decide the issue.   if the mother does not respond by appclose as provided for in order 3(b), the father shall be entitled to presume that the mother does not wish to be involved and he may decide the issue.   in week one and each alternate week thereafter, each sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm, (b) in week two and each alternate week thereafter, from the conclusion of school on thursday (or 3.30pm if the children are not attending school on that day) until 6.00pm, (c) on each of the children’s birthdays, if the children are not otherwise spending time with the mother on those days: (i) if the children are attending school on that day, then from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and (ii) if the children are not attending school on that day, then from 10.00am until 2.00pm. (d) on mother’s day if the children are not otherwise spending time with the mother on that day from 10.30am until 1.30pm, (e) on christmas day: (i) in even numbered years, from 10.00am until 2.00pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (f) for easter: (i) in even numbered years, on easter monday from 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm. (g) at such further or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   in week two and each alternate week thereafter, from the conclusion of school on thursday (or 3.30pm if the children are not attending school on that day) until 6.00pm, (c) on each of the children’s birthdays, if the children are not otherwise spending time with the mother on those days: (i) if the children are attending school on that day, then from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and (ii) if the children are not attending school on that day, then from 10.00am until 2.00pm. (d) on mother’s day if the children are not otherwise spending time with the mother on that day from 10.30am until 1.30pm, (e) on christmas day: (i) in even numbered years, from 10.00am until 2.00pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (f) for easter: (i) in even numbered years, on easter monday from 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm. (g) at such further or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on each of the children’s birthdays, if the children are not otherwise spending time with the mother on those days: (i) if the children are attending school on that day, then from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and (ii) if the children are not attending school on that day, then from 10.00am until 2.00pm. (d) on mother’s day if the children are not otherwise spending time with the mother on that day from 10.30am until 1.30pm, (e) on christmas day: (i) in even numbered years, from 10.00am until 2.00pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (f) for easter: (i) in even numbered years, on easter monday from 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm. (g) at such further or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   if the children are attending school on that day, then from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and (ii) if the children are not attending school on that day, then from 10.00am until 2.00pm.  ) if the children are not attending school on that day, then from 10.00am until 2.00pm.   on mother’s day if the children are not otherwise spending time with the mother on that day from 10.30am until 1.30pm, (e) on christmas day: (i) in even numbered years, from 10.00am until 2.00pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (f) for easter: (i) in even numbered years, on easter monday from 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm. (g) at such further or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on christmas day: (i) in even numbered years, from 10.00am until 2.00pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (f) for easter: (i) in even numbered years, on easter monday from 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm. (g) at such further or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   in even numbered years, from 10.00am until 2.00pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm.  ) in odd numbered years, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm.   for easter: (i) in even numbered years, on easter monday from 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm. (g) at such further or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   in even numbered years, on easter monday from 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in odd numbered years, on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm.  ) in odd numbered years, on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm.   at such further or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   for father’s day, (b) for christmas: (i) in odd numbered years on 25 december from 10.00am until 2.00pm, (ii) in even numbered years on 25 december from 2.00pm until 6.00pm, (c) for easter: (i) in odd numbered years on easter monday form 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in even numbered years on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm.   for christmas: (i) in odd numbered years on 25 december from 10.00am until 2.00pm, (ii) in even numbered years on 25 december from 2.00pm until 6.00pm, (c) for easter: (i) in odd numbered years on easter monday form 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in even numbered years on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm.   in odd numbered years on 25 december from 10.00am until 2.00pm, (ii) in even numbered years on 25 december from 2.00pm until 6.00pm,  ) in even numbered years on 25 december from 2.00pm until 6.00pm,   for easter: (i) in odd numbered years on easter monday form 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in even numbered years on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm.   in odd numbered years on easter monday form 10.30am until 1.30pm, and (ii) in even numbered years on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm.  ) in even numbered years on easter sunday from 10.30am until 1.30pm.   removing the children from school except as otherwise provided for in these orders, and (b) attending the children’s extra-curricular activities, including but not limited to the sports training and associated events.   attending the children’s extra-curricular activities, including but not limited to the sports training and associated events.   the parents’ contact telephone numbers and email addresses and notify each other at least 48 hours prior to any change, or as soon as practicable, and (b) all serious illnesses and/or injuries suffered by the children or either or them and/or all medical emergencies relating to the children or either of them, together with the names of and contact details for the medical and/or dental practitioners treating the children.   all serious illnesses and/or injuries suffered by the children or either or them and/or all medical emergencies relating to the children or either of them, together with the names of and contact details for the medical and/or dental practitioners treating the children.   abusing. insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party in the presence of the children or either of them and/or allowing anyone else to do so, (b) discussing these proceedings to or in the presence of the children or either of them and/or allowing anyone else to do so, and (c) exposing the children or either of them to parental conflict.   discussing these proceedings to or in the presence of the children or either of them and/or allowing anyone else to do so, and (c) exposing the children or either of them to parental conflict.   exposing the children or either of them to parental conflict.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
the trial process and evidentiary issues
evidence relied upon  amended application filed 10 july 2023, (b) trial affidavit of mr grossmann filed 10 july 2023, (c) outline of case filed 31 july 2023, (d) affidavit of dr e, the father’s psychiatric assessor filed 9 may 2022, (e) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 19 february 2021, (f) child impact report prepared by family consultant ms f filed 11 may 2022, (g) family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 31 january 2023, (h) updated family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 17 may 2023, and (i) closing written submissions filed 1 september 2023.   trial affidavit of mr grossmann filed 10 july 2023, (c) outline of case filed 31 july 2023, (d) affidavit of dr e, the father’s psychiatric assessor filed 9 may 2022, (e) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 19 february 2021, (f) child impact report prepared by family consultant ms f filed 11 may 2022, (g) family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 31 january 2023, (h) updated family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 17 may 2023, and (i) closing written submissions filed 1 september 2023.   outline of case filed 31 july 2023, (d) affidavit of dr e, the father’s psychiatric assessor filed 9 may 2022, (e) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 19 february 2021, (f) child impact report prepared by family consultant ms f filed 11 may 2022, (g) family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 31 january 2023, (h) updated family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 17 may 2023, and (i) closing written submissions filed 1 september 2023.   affidavit of dr e, the father’s psychiatric assessor filed 9 may 2022, (e) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 19 february 2021, (f) child impact report prepared by family consultant ms f filed 11 may 2022, (g) family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 31 january 2023, (h) updated family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 17 may 2023, and (i) closing written submissions filed 1 september 2023.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 19 february 2021, (f) child impact report prepared by family consultant ms f filed 11 may 2022, (g) family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 31 january 2023, (h) updated family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 17 may 2023, and (i) closing written submissions filed 1 september 2023.   child impact report prepared by family consultant ms f filed 11 may 2022, (g) family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 31 january 2023, (h) updated family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 17 may 2023, and (i) closing written submissions filed 1 september 2023.   family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 31 january 2023, (h) updated family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 17 may 2023, and (i) closing written submissions filed 1 september 2023.   updated family report prepared by family consultant ms g filed 17 may 2023, and (i) closing written submissions filed 1 september 2023.   closing written submissions filed 1 september 2023.   further amended response filed 28 february 2023, (b) trial affidavit of ms myles filed 17 july 2023, (c) outline of case filed 31 july 2023, (d) affidavit of the maternal grandmother, ms h filed 28 february 2023, (e) affidavit of the mother’s sister, ms j filed 28 february 2023, (f) affidavit of dr e, the mother’s psychiatric assessor filed 11 may 2022, and (g) closing written submissions filed 4 september 2023.   trial affidavit of ms myles filed 17 july 2023, (c) outline of case filed 31 july 2023, (d) affidavit of the maternal grandmother, ms h filed 28 february 2023, (e) affidavit of the mother’s sister, ms j filed 28 february 2023, (f) affidavit of dr e, the mother’s psychiatric assessor filed 11 may 2022, and (g) closing written submissions filed 4 september 2023.   outline of case filed 31 july 2023, (d) affidavit of the maternal grandmother, ms h filed 28 february 2023, (e) affidavit of the mother’s sister, ms j filed 28 february 2023, (f) affidavit of dr e, the mother’s psychiatric assessor filed 11 may 2022, and (g) closing written submissions filed 4 september 2023.   affidavit of the maternal grandmother, ms h filed 28 february 2023, (e) affidavit of the mother’s sister, ms j filed 28 february 2023, (f) affidavit of dr e, the mother’s psychiatric assessor filed 11 may 2022, and (g) closing written submissions filed 4 september 2023.   affidavit of the mother’s sister, ms j filed 28 february 2023, (f) affidavit of dr e, the mother’s psychiatric assessor filed 11 may 2022, and (g) closing written submissions filed 4 september 2023.   affidavit of dr e, the mother’s psychiatric assessor filed 11 may 2022, and (g) closing written submissions filed 4 september 2023.   closing written submissions filed 4 september 2023.   outline of case filed 01 august 2023, (b) affidavit of mr k filed 28 july 2023, and (c) closing written submissions filed 24 august 2023.   affidavit of mr k filed 28 july 2023, and (c) closing written submissions filed 24 august 2023.   closing written submissions filed 24 august 2023.
issues in dispute  the extent to which the father has engaged in family violence against the mother and the children, (2) whether or not the mother has engaged in family violence, (3) whether or not the mother’s mental health impacts on her parenting capacity and poses a risk to the children, (4) whether or not the father should exercise sole parental responsibility or whether the parties should exercise equal shared parental responsibility, (5) whether or not the mother’s time needs to be supervised or have someone in substantial attendance, (6) the suitability of the maternal grandmother and the mother’s sister ms l as suitable supervisors, and (7) whether or not the mother’s time can progress to unsupervised time.   whether or not the mother has engaged in family violence, (3) whether or not the mother’s mental health impacts on her parenting capacity and poses a risk to the children, (4) whether or not the father should exercise sole parental responsibility or whether the parties should exercise equal shared parental responsibility, (5) whether or not the mother’s time needs to be supervised or have someone in substantial attendance, (6) the suitability of the maternal grandmother and the mother’s sister ms l as suitable supervisors, and (7) whether or not the mother’s time can progress to unsupervised time.   whether or not the mother’s mental health impacts on her parenting capacity and poses a risk to the children, (4) whether or not the father should exercise sole parental responsibility or whether the parties should exercise equal shared parental responsibility, (5) whether or not the mother’s time needs to be supervised or have someone in substantial attendance, (6) the suitability of the maternal grandmother and the mother’s sister ms l as suitable supervisors, and (7) whether or not the mother’s time can progress to unsupervised time.   whether or not the father should exercise sole parental responsibility or whether the parties should exercise equal shared parental responsibility, (5) whether or not the mother’s time needs to be supervised or have someone in substantial attendance, (6) the suitability of the maternal grandmother and the mother’s sister ms l as suitable supervisors, and (7) whether or not the mother’s time can progress to unsupervised time.   whether or not the mother’s time needs to be supervised or have someone in substantial attendance, (6) the suitability of the maternal grandmother and the mother’s sister ms l as suitable supervisors, and (7) whether or not the mother’s time can progress to unsupervised time.   the suitability of the maternal grandmother and the mother’s sister ms l as suitable supervisors, and (7) whether or not the mother’s time can progress to unsupervised time.   whether or not the mother’s time can progress to unsupervised time.
relevant history of proceedings
legal principles
culture
parental responsibility
family violence
the mother’s childhood trauma
during the relationship
intervention orders
dffh care plan
incidents post separation
threats to kill  late] 2020, the father threatened that he would one day kill me in the presence of the children.
allegation of physical abuse by the father
allegations of sexual abuse by the father and the removal of children to queensland
the mother’s criminal record
x’s allegations of abuse
the father’s mental health
dr e’s assessment of the father
the mother’s mental health
the mother’s hospitalisation in 2013
the mother’s hospitalisation in late 2020
incident in mid-2021
the mother’s self-harm attempt
dr e’s psychiatric assessment of the mother
dr u’s report
the mother’s family and supervised time
professional supervision
the mother’s facebook posts, texts and demands for public apologies
crying happy tears 13 days kept apart as our punishment but... we still strong. i'll be sharing full disclosure of my journey through mental health, family violence, my beautiful brave babies sexually abused by their father and an unjust family law court/child protection system to help other heal, grow, speak up and know most importantly you are not alone. one day very soon my beautiful brave babies will be granted justice and live a family violence free life together plus everything we deserve and more!
i only ever speak the honest truth for my children and because i learned my lessons the hard way. i am an example for the children, never to put up with abuse and i will not be a responsible adult failing my children ever again.
i have very much left the door open for when the children become adults and decide to take their own action of justice and compensation in the courts themselves should either [x] or [y] feel totally necessary on their own accord... justice and compensation in the courts.
i prepared and stood for us yet again my son, my baby girl and all other children/parents that may go through the last clip of this video. the other parties pull the legally weighted mental health card in order for that place to enable my babies and i continue being abused until [early] 2023. are you okay day? mental health awareness weeks, say no to family violence. the irony! just like my daughters birthday this meant no time with my son on his birthday too? up to another 3 months wait to see my babies? my babies and i perpetrators enabled to continue abusing us? my mind, body, soul couldn’t fathom the idea of enduring anymore of the impacts of abuse. in a split second decision i tried to release myself from the pain and suffering. my spirit fought the next 4 days in icu. the power of love made the ultimate stand through gratefully my physical life was spared expecting a full recovery. while i am still processing i do not take my physical life being spared lightly. my stand for us my babies now runs deeper, wider, farther. thank you to my family, friends and community for the supportive visits, prayers, messages, phone calls, offers of lending a hand to share the load. and so the stand for [x], [y] and i to finally be legally given the right to live a family violence free life together ensuring no other child nor parent endures such horrific circumstances continues... love always, mama.
impact of the mother’s beliefs on the children
the mother’s breaches of orders and injunctions
experts
child impact report of 11 may 2022
there may be an intersectionality with respect to [ms myles’] mental health and account of family violence. should her account of family violence be found accurate, her experiences as a victim survivor may exacerbate any mental health difficulties. conversely, should her account be considered inaccurate, her mental health may be a contributing factor to her perception of family violence.
young children are often able to manage traversing between their parents’ households during conflict and tolerate the inherent periods of separation from each parent. this task becomes more difficult however, when children are exposed and cognisant of their parents’ conflict. as the pressure of their parents’ conflict becomes increasingly burdensome, children often seek to escape this dynamic by making a choice to align with one parent, and displaying resistance towards spending any time with the other parent. unaddressed, the trajectory of such a dynamic is a refusal to spend any time with the other parent.
family reports
first report – 31 january 2023
any level of family violence driven expressions of anger or frustration from him may have been a trigger to [ms myles] given her childhood history. the diagnosis by [dr e] of [ms myles] having [a mental illness] would complicate her dynamic with [mr grossmann].   myles] has reported that she attends ongoing psychological support. her diagnosis by [dr e] would likely require ongoing treatment over a significant period of time for her to be able to learn how to deal with triggers and emotional distress without self- medicating with [illicit substances]. it is unknown whether [ms myles] is currently prescribed medication, but she was reported during her hospitalisation to be strongly against medication and to prefer lifestyle methods to manage her mental health. there were also indicators that [ms myles] became less open about her mental health while hospitalised and there are concerns, she may not be particularly open in a legal setting if she thought it would negatively impact the possibilities of the children being with her unsupervised. the impact on the children if they lived with [ms myles] and if she were to continue to self- medicate with [illicit substances] and consequently suffer psychoses would be of them periodically needing to be placed in the care of either [mr grossmann] or the extended maternal family while [ms myles] is treated. it is not unknown for children to live with a parent who has recurring psychoses, but the experience for the children can be very unsettling and destabilising at the least and there can be more serious psychological impacts such as affective disorders if the children are exposed to the psychoses for any length of time.
second report – 17 may 2023
violence is a parenting choice, when it is systematic, for the purpose of control such as in family violence. sometimes there is retaliatory violence from the person who has been the subject of the ongoing systematic family violence, but that is usually in defence or out of complete loss of coping reserves, rather than being an instigation and is not motivated to systematically control other people. a violent act is often misidentified by professionals to mean that the person is the instigator of violence rather than the victim within the overall context. [ms myles]’ description of her distress was indicative of a build-up of the effects of perceived abuse and gaslighting to which she may have sometimes strongly retaliated.
injunctions sought by the icl and the father e court orders that the respondent must not] go to or remain within 200 metres of [d street, suburb c], vic or any other place where a protected person lives, works or attends school/childcare.
conclusion  her beliefs that the father sexually abused y in the presence of x, (b) her belief that she wholly believes what the children say however when y raised the fact the mother has pulled her ears she denies it, (c) her mental health has been weaponised against her, (d) her taking the children to queensland in breach of orders, (e) her turning up at y’s day care in breach of orders, (f) her belief that inappropriate comments have been made to her by judicial officers, (g) attending her sister’s home to confront her without waiting for her mother, (h) her belief that the father caused the bruises on x’s back, and (i) the public posts and demands for public apologies.   her belief that she wholly believes what the children say however when y raised the fact the mother has pulled her ears she denies it, (c) her mental health has been weaponised against her, (d) her taking the children to queensland in breach of orders, (e) her turning up at y’s day care in breach of orders, (f) her belief that inappropriate comments have been made to her by judicial officers, (g) attending her sister’s home to confront her without waiting for her mother, (h) her belief that the father caused the bruises on x’s back, and (i) the public posts and demands for public apologies.   her mental health has been weaponised against her, (d) her taking the children to queensland in breach of orders, (e) her turning up at y’s day care in breach of orders, (f) her belief that inappropriate comments have been made to her by judicial officers, (g) attending her sister’s home to confront her without waiting for her mother, (h) her belief that the father caused the bruises on x’s back, and (i) the public posts and demands for public apologies.   her taking the children to queensland in breach of orders, (e) her turning up at y’s day care in breach of orders, (f) her belief that inappropriate comments have been made to her by judicial officers, (g) attending her sister’s home to confront her without waiting for her mother, (h) her belief that the father caused the bruises on x’s back, and (i) the public posts and demands for public apologies.   her turning up at y’s day care in breach of orders, (f) her belief that inappropriate comments have been made to her by judicial officers, (g) attending her sister’s home to confront her without waiting for her mother, (h) her belief that the father caused the bruises on x’s back, and (i) the public posts and demands for public apologies.   her belief that inappropriate comments have been made to her by judicial officers, (g) attending her sister’s home to confront her without waiting for her mother, (h) her belief that the father caused the bruises on x’s back, and (i) the public posts and demands for public apologies.   attending her sister’s home to confront her without waiting for her mother, (h) her belief that the father caused the bruises on x’s back, and (i) the public posts and demands for public apologies.   her belief that the father caused the bruises on x’s back, and (i) the public posts and demands for public apologies.   the public posts and demands for public apologies.
associate: dated: 22 november 2023
dated: 22 november 2023