last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kent & kent [2023] fedcfamc2f 1509
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
parenting
parental responsibility   from the making of these orders, and continuing until the conclusion of 12 weeks thereafter: (i) each wednesday from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm to the commencement of school or 9.00 am on thursday, and (ii) in week 2 of every fortnightly period from after school friday or 3.00pm until 7.00 pm on saturday, (b) from the conclusion of the 12 week period in order 3(a) herein and continuing until the conclusion of 12 weeks thereafter: (i) in week 1 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on wednesday to the commencement of school or 9.00 am on thursday, and (ii) in week 2 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on friday until 7.00 pm on sunday, (c) from the conclusion of the 12 week period in order 3(b) herein and continuing thereafter: (i) during school term times as follows: in week 1 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on wednesday to the commencement of school or 9.00 am on thursday, in week 2 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on friday until the commencement of school or 9.00 am on monday.   each wednesday from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm to the commencement of school or 9.00 am on thursday, and (ii) in week 2 of every fortnightly period from after school friday or 3.00pm until 7.00 pm on saturday,  ) in week 2 of every fortnightly period from after school friday or 3.00pm until 7.00 pm on saturday,   from the conclusion of the 12 week period in order 3(a) herein and continuing until the conclusion of 12 weeks thereafter: (i) in week 1 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on wednesday to the commencement of school or 9.00 am on thursday, and (ii) in week 2 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on friday until 7.00 pm on sunday, (c) from the conclusion of the 12 week period in order 3(b) herein and continuing thereafter: (i) during school term times as follows: in week 1 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on wednesday to the commencement of school or 9.00 am on thursday, in week 2 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on friday until the commencement of school or 9.00 am on monday.   in week 1 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on wednesday to the commencement of school or 9.00 am on thursday, and (ii) in week 2 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on friday until 7.00 pm on sunday,  ) in week 2 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on friday until 7.00 pm on sunday,   from the conclusion of the 12 week period in order 3(b) herein and continuing thereafter: (i) during school term times as follows: in week 1 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on wednesday to the commencement of school or 9.00 am on thursday, in week 2 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on friday until the commencement of school or 9.00 am on monday.   during school term times as follows: in week 1 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on wednesday to the commencement of school or 9.00 am on thursday, in week 2 of every fortnightly period from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on friday until the commencement of school or 9.00 am on monday.
school holidays  with the mother in week 1 in odd numbered years and in week 2 in even numbered years, and (b) with the father in week 1 in even numbered years and in week 2 in odd numbered years.   with the father in week 1 in even numbered years and in week 2 in odd numbered years.   with the mother in weeks 2, 4 and 6, (b) with the father in weeks 1, 3 and 5.   with the father in weeks 1, 3 and 5.   with the mother for the first half of the term 4 school holiday period commencing in even numbered years and the second half of the term 4 school holiday period commencing in odd numbered years, (b) with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday period commencing in even numbered years and the first half of the term 4 school holiday period commencing in odd numbered years.   with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday period commencing in even numbered years and the first half of the term 4 school holiday period commencing in odd numbered years.
occasions and events of special significance
easter  from the conclusion of school on easter thursday until 7.00 pm on easter saturday in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the mother, (b) from 7.00 pm on easter saturday until 7.00 pm easter monday in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father, (c) from the conclusion of school on easter thursday until 7.00 pm on easter saturday in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter with the father, and (d) from 7.00 pm on easter saturday until 7.00 pm easter monday in 2025 and each year thereafter with the mother.   from 7.00 pm on easter saturday until 7.00 pm easter monday in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father, (c) from the conclusion of school on easter thursday until 7.00 pm on easter saturday in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter with the father, and (d) from 7.00 pm on easter saturday until 7.00 pm easter monday in 2025 and each year thereafter with the mother.   from the conclusion of school on easter thursday until 7.00 pm on easter saturday in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter with the father, and (d) from 7.00 pm on easter saturday until 7.00 pm easter monday in 2025 and each year thereafter with the mother.   from 7.00 pm on easter saturday until 7.00 pm easter monday in 2025 and each year thereafter with the mother.
christmas  in even numbered years: (i) with the father from 7.00 pm on christmas eve until 2.30 pm on christmas day, (ii) with the mother from 2.30 pm on christmas day until 7.00 pm on boxing day. (b) in odd numbered years commencing 2025: (i) with the mother from 7.00 pm on christmas eve until 2.30 pm on christmas day, (ii) with the father from 2.30 pm on christmas day until 7.00pm on boxing day.   with the father from 7.00 pm on christmas eve until 2.30 pm on christmas day, (ii) with the mother from 2.30 pm on christmas day until 7.00 pm on boxing day.  ) with the mother from 2.30 pm on christmas day until 7.00 pm on boxing day.   in odd numbered years commencing 2025: (i) with the mother from 7.00 pm on christmas eve until 2.30 pm on christmas day, (ii) with the father from 2.30 pm on christmas day until 7.00pm on boxing day.   with the mother from 7.00 pm on christmas eve until 2.30 pm on christmas day, (ii) with the father from 2.30 pm on christmas day until 7.00pm on boxing day.  ) with the father from 2.30 pm on christmas day until 7.00pm on boxing day.
children’s birthdays
father’s day and mother’s day
parents’ birthdays  the children will spend time with the mother on the occasion of the mother’s birthday: (i) from 3.00 pm until 9.00 pm if a school day, (ii) from 9.00 am to 7.00 pm if the mother’s birthday falls on a weekend.   from 3.00 pm until 9.00 pm if a school day, (ii) from 9.00 am to 7.00 pm if the mother’s birthday falls on a weekend.  ) from 9.00 am to 7.00 pm if the mother’s birthday falls on a weekend.
changeovers  on a school day, changeover shall occur by the parent whose time is to conclude delivering the children to school, (b) on a non-school day or in the case of a child not attending school for reasons of illness then the parent whose time is to conclude shall deliver the children to the residence of the parent whose time is to commence. (c) for the purposes of orders 16(a) and 16(b) herein, “parent” includes the parent or their nominee. (d) where a parent intends to effect changeover for the purposes of order 16(b) herein through their nominee the parent shall notify the other parent in writing of the nominee not less than 1 hour prior to the changeover.   on a non-school day or in the case of a child not attending school for reasons of illness then the parent whose time is to conclude shall deliver the children to the residence of the parent whose time is to commence. (c) for the purposes of orders 16(a) and 16(b) herein, “parent” includes the parent or their nominee. (d) where a parent intends to effect changeover for the purposes of order 16(b) herein through their nominee the parent shall notify the other parent in writing of the nominee not less than 1 hour prior to the changeover.   for the purposes of orders 16(a) and 16(b) herein, “parent” includes the parent or their nominee. (d) where a parent intends to effect changeover for the purposes of order 16(b) herein through their nominee the parent shall notify the other parent in writing of the nominee not less than 1 hour prior to the changeover.   where a parent intends to effect changeover for the purposes of order 16(b) herein through their nominee the parent shall notify the other parent in writing of the nominee not less than 1 hour prior to the changeover.
communication
ancillary
travel   the travel occurs during their time with the children pursuant to these orders, (b) written notice of the intended travel is provided to the other parent no less than 28 days prior to the intended travel, (c) a detailed travel itinerary is provided to the other parent no less than 7 days prior to the intended travel including: (i) flight or ship outbound and inbound details including flight or ship number, departure and arrival times and dates, (ii) accommodation details, (iii) confirmation of travel insurance certificates for the travelling parent and the children for the duration of the travel.   written notice of the intended travel is provided to the other parent no less than 28 days prior to the intended travel, (c) a detailed travel itinerary is provided to the other parent no less than 7 days prior to the intended travel including: (i) flight or ship outbound and inbound details including flight or ship number, departure and arrival times and dates, (ii) accommodation details, (iii) confirmation of travel insurance certificates for the travelling parent and the children for the duration of the travel.   a detailed travel itinerary is provided to the other parent no less than 7 days prior to the intended travel including: (i) flight or ship outbound and inbound details including flight or ship number, departure and arrival times and dates, (ii) accommodation details, (iii) confirmation of travel insurance certificates for the travelling parent and the children for the duration of the travel.   flight or ship outbound and inbound details including flight or ship number, departure and arrival times and dates, (ii) accommodation details, (iii) confirmation of travel insurance certificates for the travelling parent and the children for the duration of the travel.  ) accommodation details, (iii) confirmation of travel insurance certificates for the travelling parent and the children for the duration of the travel.  i) confirmation of travel insurance certificates for the travelling parent and the children for the duration of the travel.
passports  hold all passports issued to the children in safe keeping, (b) provide to the father a photocopy of the details of each passport including any updated details as the passports reissue.   provide to the father a photocopy of the details of each passport including any updated details as the passports reissue.
medical treatment   attend with the children at any health appointment which occurs during the time the children are in their care, (b) have access to copies any correspondence, report or other communication from a treating health practitioner which would normally be provided to a responsible parent of a minor.   have access to copies any correspondence, report or other communication from a treating health practitioner which would normally be provided to a responsible parent of a minor.
non-denigration and restraints
independent children’s lawyer
property  her cash in bank, (b) her superannuation entitlements, (c) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property which are in her possession or control, and (d) all other property of whatsoever kind or nature presently in her possession or control.   her superannuation entitlements, (c) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property which are in her possession or control, and (d) all other property of whatsoever kind or nature presently in her possession or control.   any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property which are in her possession or control, and (d) all other property of whatsoever kind or nature presently in her possession or control.   all other property of whatsoever kind or nature presently in her possession or control.   his cash in bank, (b) his motor vehicle, (c) his interest in c company, (d) his superannuation entitlements.   his motor vehicle, (c) his interest in c company, (d) his superannuation entitlements.   his interest in c company, (d) his superannuation entitlements.   his superannuation entitlements.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
material relied upon (both parenting and property)  her further amended initiating application filed 12 october 2023, (b) her affidavit filed 22 september 2023, (c) her affidavit filed 13 october 2023, (d) affidavit of ms aa, maternal grandmother, filed 22 september 2023, (e) affidavit of mr e, maternal grandfather, filed 3 november 2023, (f) her financial statement filed 6 september 2023, (g) her parenting questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (h) her financial questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (i) her amended notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 1 february 2022, (j) her tender bundles, (k) her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   her affidavit filed 22 september 2023, (c) her affidavit filed 13 october 2023, (d) affidavit of ms aa, maternal grandmother, filed 22 september 2023, (e) affidavit of mr e, maternal grandfather, filed 3 november 2023, (f) her financial statement filed 6 september 2023, (g) her parenting questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (h) her financial questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (i) her amended notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 1 february 2022, (j) her tender bundles, (k) her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   her affidavit filed 13 october 2023, (d) affidavit of ms aa, maternal grandmother, filed 22 september 2023, (e) affidavit of mr e, maternal grandfather, filed 3 november 2023, (f) her financial statement filed 6 september 2023, (g) her parenting questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (h) her financial questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (i) her amended notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 1 february 2022, (j) her tender bundles, (k) her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   affidavit of ms aa, maternal grandmother, filed 22 september 2023, (e) affidavit of mr e, maternal grandfather, filed 3 november 2023, (f) her financial statement filed 6 september 2023, (g) her parenting questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (h) her financial questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (i) her amended notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 1 february 2022, (j) her tender bundles, (k) her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   affidavit of mr e, maternal grandfather, filed 3 november 2023, (f) her financial statement filed 6 september 2023, (g) her parenting questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (h) her financial questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (i) her amended notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 1 february 2022, (j) her tender bundles, (k) her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   her financial statement filed 6 september 2023, (g) her parenting questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (h) her financial questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (i) her amended notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 1 february 2022, (j) her tender bundles, (k) her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   her parenting questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (h) her financial questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (i) her amended notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 1 february 2022, (j) her tender bundles, (k) her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   her financial questionnaire filed 8 december 2021, (i) her amended notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 1 february 2022, (j) her tender bundles, (k) her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   her amended notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 1 february 2022, (j) her tender bundles, (k) her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   her tender bundles, (k) her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   her case outline filed 3 november 2023.   his amended response to initiating application filed 12 may 2023, (b) his financial statement filed 11 september 2023, (c) his affidavit filed 22 september 2023, (d) his affidavit filed 25 october 2023, (e) affidavit of ms f filed 22 september 2023, (f) affidavit of ms g filed 22 september 2023, (g) affidavit of mr h filed 26 september 2023, (h) his case outline filed 1 november 2023.   his financial statement filed 11 september 2023, (c) his affidavit filed 22 september 2023, (d) his affidavit filed 25 october 2023, (e) affidavit of ms f filed 22 september 2023, (f) affidavit of ms g filed 22 september 2023, (g) affidavit of mr h filed 26 september 2023, (h) his case outline filed 1 november 2023.   his affidavit filed 22 september 2023, (d) his affidavit filed 25 october 2023, (e) affidavit of ms f filed 22 september 2023, (f) affidavit of ms g filed 22 september 2023, (g) affidavit of mr h filed 26 september 2023, (h) his case outline filed 1 november 2023.   his affidavit filed 25 october 2023, (e) affidavit of ms f filed 22 september 2023, (f) affidavit of ms g filed 22 september 2023, (g) affidavit of mr h filed 26 september 2023, (h) his case outline filed 1 november 2023.   affidavit of ms f filed 22 september 2023, (f) affidavit of ms g filed 22 september 2023, (g) affidavit of mr h filed 26 september 2023, (h) his case outline filed 1 november 2023.   affidavit of ms g filed 22 september 2023, (g) affidavit of mr h filed 26 september 2023, (h) his case outline filed 1 november 2023.   affidavit of mr h filed 26 september 2023, (h) his case outline filed 1 november 2023.   his case outline filed 1 november 2023.   the wife’s further amended initiating application filed 12 october 2023, (b) the husband’s amended response to initiating application filed 12 may 2023, (c) affidavit of dr k, single expert, dated 15 december 2022, (d) child impact report by ms j, court child expert, dated 20 april 2022, (e) report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (f) her case outline filed 5 november 2023.   the husband’s amended response to initiating application filed 12 may 2023, (c) affidavit of dr k, single expert, dated 15 december 2022, (d) child impact report by ms j, court child expert, dated 20 april 2022, (e) report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (f) her case outline filed 5 november 2023.   affidavit of dr k, single expert, dated 15 december 2022, (d) child impact report by ms j, court child expert, dated 20 april 2022, (e) report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (f) her case outline filed 5 november 2023.   child impact report by ms j, court child expert, dated 20 april 2022, (e) report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (f) her case outline filed 5 november 2023.   report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (f) her case outline filed 5 november 2023.   her case outline filed 5 november 2023.   exhibit a: minute of final orders proposed by the father (amended 9 november 2023), (b) exhibit b: annexures to mother’s affidavit filed 22 september 2023, (c) exhibit c: joint balance sheet (amended 9 november 2023), (d) exhibit d: bundle of documents from l psychology, (e) exhibit e: bundle of documents from n psychology, (f) exhibit f: bundle of documents from p psychology, mother’s psychologist, (g) exhibit g: record from o group, (h) exhibit h: bundle of documents from q day care, (i) exhibit i: bank statement, (j) exhibit j: correspondence, (k) exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit b: annexures to mother’s affidavit filed 22 september 2023, (c) exhibit c: joint balance sheet (amended 9 november 2023), (d) exhibit d: bundle of documents from l psychology, (e) exhibit e: bundle of documents from n psychology, (f) exhibit f: bundle of documents from p psychology, mother’s psychologist, (g) exhibit g: record from o group, (h) exhibit h: bundle of documents from q day care, (i) exhibit i: bank statement, (j) exhibit j: correspondence, (k) exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit c: joint balance sheet (amended 9 november 2023), (d) exhibit d: bundle of documents from l psychology, (e) exhibit e: bundle of documents from n psychology, (f) exhibit f: bundle of documents from p psychology, mother’s psychologist, (g) exhibit g: record from o group, (h) exhibit h: bundle of documents from q day care, (i) exhibit i: bank statement, (j) exhibit j: correspondence, (k) exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit d: bundle of documents from l psychology, (e) exhibit e: bundle of documents from n psychology, (f) exhibit f: bundle of documents from p psychology, mother’s psychologist, (g) exhibit g: record from o group, (h) exhibit h: bundle of documents from q day care, (i) exhibit i: bank statement, (j) exhibit j: correspondence, (k) exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit e: bundle of documents from n psychology, (f) exhibit f: bundle of documents from p psychology, mother’s psychologist, (g) exhibit g: record from o group, (h) exhibit h: bundle of documents from q day care, (i) exhibit i: bank statement, (j) exhibit j: correspondence, (k) exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit f: bundle of documents from p psychology, mother’s psychologist, (g) exhibit g: record from o group, (h) exhibit h: bundle of documents from q day care, (i) exhibit i: bank statement, (j) exhibit j: correspondence, (k) exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit g: record from o group, (h) exhibit h: bundle of documents from q day care, (i) exhibit i: bank statement, (j) exhibit j: correspondence, (k) exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit h: bundle of documents from q day care, (i) exhibit i: bank statement, (j) exhibit j: correspondence, (k) exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit i: bank statement, (j) exhibit j: correspondence, (k) exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit j: correspondence, (k) exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit k: two pages produced from r school, (l) exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit l: three pages from the child z’s allergist, (m) exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit m: 3 x cctv footage from mcdonalds (contained on usb drive), (n) exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit n: 3 x police interview footage (contained on usb drive), (o) exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit o: mother’s video exhibits to affidavit filed 13 october 2023 (contained on usb drive), (p) exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit p: amended minute of orders proposed by the icl, (q) exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit q: one page report of dr m dated 7 december 2022, (r) exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit r: unsigned binding child support agreement, (s) exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.   exhibit s: child impact report dated 20 april 2022.
parenting proposals
evidence
evidence of the wife
evidence of ms aa
evidence of mr e
evidence of the husband
child impact report of ms j, family consultant, dated 20 april 2022
... each of the parents identified that the children have positive relationships with [ms kent], with [ms kent] also describing the children’s relationships with her as “respectful”. [mr kent] indicated that [x] in particular is “very close” with [ms kent] whereas he ([mr kent]) is closer with [y] and [z]. the parents provided differing accounts of the children’s relationships with [mr kent], with [ms kent] describing their relationships as “turbulent” and indicating that the children’s experiences of [mr kent] are dependent on [mr kent]’s mood. [mr kent] identified that the children have “great” relationships with him, reporting that the children enjoy physical affection from him and, while he is “not a huge disciplinarian”, the children listen to him. while [mr kent] stated that he has “never really asked” the children about their views regarding parenting arrangements, he expressed a belief that the children “want to come and stay” and “want me to be in their life”. ... [ms kent] acknowledged that the children have asked to extend the time they spent with [mr kent] but indicated a belief that this is due to influence by [mr kent]. she expressed a belief that the children are not coping very well currently.... [x] (aged 8 years [at the time of interview]) identified that he is currently spending time with [mr kent] “about two days” per week due to it being school holidays but typically sees him on saturday or sunday. he identified [sports events] with each of his parents as the only positive aspect of the current arrangements and reported that a negative aspect is [y]’s behaviour.... ... [x] identified no significant concerns or worries regarding either parent. [x] indicated awareness that his parents do not have a positive parenting relationship but provided limited information regarding how he came to form this view, other than that “mum does tell us some stuff”. he also reported that [y] has said that “mum hates dad” but stated that this is not true and that [ms kent] “just dislikes his behaviour”, he indicated that he has not witnessed such behaviour. ... [x] clearly expressed a preference to not spend overnight time with [mr kent]. he became teary when discussing the possibility of overnight time and reported that he is scared of the dark due to monsters, he identified that he has two comfort items ([cc & dd]) and light through the window in his bedroom assists him to feel safe. [y] (aged 7 years [at the time of interview]) identified that she finds her brothers annoying at times and reported that [z] pinches her while they are in the car. she indicated that [ms kent] assists her to regulate her “anger” when at home (e.g. by telling her to play outside) and [y] described feeling “frustrated” at times if her siblings accidentally or intentionally hurt her. [y] identified that she sees [mr kent] approximately three times per week and described the current arrangements as “not really good”. she stated that she does not want to spend time with [mr kent] at times because he “doesn’t tell the truth that much” and “needs to see a doctor about that”. [y] provided a number of examples in which she believes [mr kent] is lying following [ms kent] telling her about a situation beyond her lived experience and then [mr kent] denying the incident occurred when she ([y]) asks him about it. [y] identified that she feels confused when given conflicting information but that she believes [ms kent] over [mr kent]’s account. she also indicated that she feels a sense of responsibility to confront [mr kent] over incidents disclosed to her by [ms kent]. [y] also described being exposed to a number of verbal altercations between her parents in which her parents have verbally abused each other, her account was suggestive that she felt a sense of responsibility to intervene in these situations, including instructing her parents to separate and not speak to each other. [y] stated that she felt “frustrated and sad and confused” during incidents of conflict and concerned that her parents would hurt each other. [y] otherwise identified positive attributes regarding each parent and identified that [mr kent] “normally makes me happy a little bit”, indicating that she enjoys activities she does with him. [y] stated that she currently spends too much time with [mr kent], providing an account of seeing him five days per week, and suggested that she spend time with him approximately three times per week. she expressed a preference to spend no overnight time with [mr kent] because she and her siblings would “miss mum a lot” but identified that she had told [mr kent] she would want to spend overnight time with him “because i didn’t want to make him sad”. [z] (then aged 5 years) presented as shy and provided vague and contradictory information regarding childcare. ... [he had] limited capacity to engage.
dr m, psychologist
i have seen the parties electronically only. i have spoken with [mr kent] on three occasions and [ms kent] on two occasions. the last scheduled session with the mother has needed to be rescheduled. the parties each present with the high level of mistrust and antipathy towards the other. they seem to have limited capacity to engage with each other in a co-parenting capacity. they appear to have a strong need to be critical of the other for their behaviour prior to and since the separation. the issues that arise between the parties seem to become a reason for them to vent their acrimony and they appear to find it difficult to reach a resolution without creating a lot more complexity around issues than seems necessary. this was exemplified in the manner in which they dealt with changeover venue change. each of them also feels that the other exercises surveillance when it comes to the children and uses opportunities to discredit the other or make suggestions that the children are at risk. both parties indicate that they love the children and feel concerned for the impact of the conflict on the children. however, they perceive the other as being the instigator and make allegations that the other involves the children in inappropriate conversations that belong in the adult domain. they seem to be locked in a tug-o-war over the arrangements for their children. [mr kent] is seeking to increase his time with the children and to be an involved parent and he perceives [ms kent] and her family as thwarting that. [ms kent] perceives [mr kent] [sic] to be a satisfactory father when he is stable. however, she considers him to have limited relationship with the children while they were married and engaged with them to a minimal degree.
psychiatric report of dr k  kent] said that [in early] 2021, he asked for the mother’s parents to attend “to witness me confronting her about repeatedly contacting this other man. i admit i raised my voice and i regret doing that. the children were in the house, and they heard it all. i told her i didn’t believe her denials and i wanted her to explain why she was doing this. i think her mother and father knew that we were having issues and her parents seem to know that she had been communicating with another man, and they sided with her. her mother moved to hit me, and [ms kent] intervened and asked her mother to leave. the children saw all of this commotion and then they were taken to their grandparents to stay the night.” [mr kent] said that during the argument, “i kept seeking an explanation from her, and her father would keep reassuring me that they were only friends, and i said that i would go and contact him, so i left the house to go for a drive. i called and asked him to leave my wife alone.” ... in relation to current contact with the children, [mr kent] said that he was seeing the children on alternate weekend days, and on monday evenings. he said that he had to pick up [z] from a neutral location “because i'm not allowed to go to her house.” he said that he would drop [x] off at [sports], then make dinner, and then return the children to the mother by 6.30pm. in relation to his desired contact with the children, [mr kent] said that he was seeking for equal time and shared responsibility, although said that “i need to consider what the children need.” he acknowledged that “they have been with [ms kent] for 20 months and they have not stayed with me overnight at all at that time. i would need to take their feelings into consideration and will have to take things slowly. [z] asks to stay with me most times and [y] would ask to stay, but now realises that she has to go to mum's. [x] never says much.” in relation to his beliefs about what the children needed, [mr kent] said “they need stability, lots of love, and i think that they need their father to be in their life to co-parent and to be a role model.” he expressed an opinion that the children were “very confused about what was going on, and i understand that it’s upsetting for them and i can see the sadness in their faces when i drive off.” he expressed an opinion that “i think they understand it by thinking that their mum and dad had an argument and they're not happy.” ... in relation to the future, [mr kent] said that “i would like to think that i would be able to communicate with [ms kent] about the kids. i have seen the family therapist three times now and the court has asked [dr m] to help us with co-parenting. i believe that [ms kent] is not engaging with the process, and it seems to be dragging on. i want to communicate with [ms kent], but i get the feeling that she is being very negative, and i'm trying my hardest to do everything that i can to move forward. i'm enrolled in a program with the [ee centre] that aims to help parents who are separated with working on parenting issues. the main issue for me is to understand how to better help the kids, but i can’t remember the name of the course. i know that the icl recommended it to my lawyer, and my lawyer said it could be good, so i agreed because if it helps the children, it’s only a good thing.” in relation to [mr kent]’s concerns about the children’s environment, [mr kent] said that “... i’m [sic] not said anything about the proceedings to the kids, but they are always mentioning things to me about family court and i don't know if she is involving them, but they may be just overhearing things.” [mr kent] said that “the kids come to me, and they aren't happy. i just want to co-parent and i believe that i’m not being given an opportunity to co-parent.” [mr kent] said that the mother “accuses me of being threatening and i’ve tried to accommodate by moving pickup and drop-off venues..”
... the children confirmed the current contact arrangements, whereby they saw their father for 3.5 hours on a monday, and a full weekend day, each week. [x] said that “i’m fine spending time with dad.” [y] said, “i’m not fine going to places that i don’t want to go, although i’m fine with going with dad if i don’t have friends or other things on.” [z] was reluctant to express his thoughts, and asked [x] to speak on his behalf. [x] said that “ [z] really like watching tv with dad and playing [games].” ... when asked whether the children thought that they should have more time with their father, [x] said that “i like the amount of time that we have him, and i don't know why i don’t want more time.” [y] said that “i want to see him less because i want to spend more time with mum, and i like that with mum i get to see our friends more often. with dad, he doesn't have any fun ideas about what to do every week.” [x] interjected and said that “even if dad does have fun ideas, [y] won’t want to do them anyway.” [z] did not offer an opinion. when asked about whether they were fearful of their father, [y] said that “he raises his voice at me a lot when i start to punch [z] and [x] because i get annoyed at them a lot. he’ll also scream at me if i get annoyed, and he normally says ‘stop it,’ or ‘no,’ to me in a loud voice.” [x] and [z] did not offer a response. when asked if their father had hit them, [y] paused for a moment and then said “no.” when asked if there was a reason for the pause, she replied in the negative. [x] said that “one day he pulled me down the stairs,” to which [y] interjected and insisted that “that never happened.” [x] explained himself further and said that “dad pulling me down the stairs was an accident.” [y] insisted that “dad has never hit us on purpose.” [x] interrupted [y] and said that “one-time [y] threw a knife at me, and he got upset so he took us home to mum.” [y] said “dad asked why i did it, and i don’t remember what i said, but he then took us home. yes, obviously i was trying to hurt [x].” both [y] and [x] then said that “we’ve stopped throwing things at each other now.” both [x] and [y] later clarified that “dad would smack us on the bum when mum and dad were together, but never since then. it would only happen when either of us got into a fight.” in relation to their mother, [y] said that “mum is really nice because she doesn't grab us by the arm or take us outside when she is grumpy, and she doesn't do the things that dad does.” [x] agreed and said that “we do more with her than we do with dad. i enjoy spending time with mum more and she has things planned out, like seeing friends, going out, and other stuff like that.” [z] spoke independently for the first time at this point and said that “i think that dad is really nice to me and i think mum is nice and sometimes she isn’t. i just don't want to talk about it.” ... [y] was seen alone. she said that “i don't really remember mum or dad or anybody else saying anything about an affair, but i do remember once at nan and pop’s place he kept ringing the doorbell and i asked him to go home and relax and he didn’t.” [y] said that “i let mum and dad talk about it, but i worry about mum’s safety. she's never said anything, but she has just said that i want to protect you, even though dad has never hurt me or hurt mum, but if i worry that something like that might happen, i will make her leave.” the boys were seen together. both [x] and [z] acknowledged that “yes we disagree with [y] about mum and dad.” [x] said that “i don’t know why she keeps saying bad stuff about dad. mum used to hit us before they split up too, and she still hits [z] when he doesn't know what she wants. most of the time, she just takes the ipad away from us.” [z] said that “mum told us that we be seeing dad today and she didn’t say anything else.” at the conclusion of the interview of the children, they were asked to nominate three wishes in relation to their circumstances. [z]’s three wishes were “to have a hundred dollars, to be the boss, and to have a pet dog.” [y]’s three wishes were “to have a pet dog, that we could have a new dad because i hate dad, and that i can be in charge of [x].” [x] said that his wishes were “that we will never have a dog, that this had never happened with mum and dad. i don’t have a third wish.” when asked to clarify the reasons for her dislike of her father, [y] said that “i hate dad because he screams at us. if he didn’t scream at us, then i might want to spend more time with him.” [x] agreed and said “dad does scream a lot when we aren’t listening.”
... [ms kent] said that although she initially would have said the relationship soured towards the end, upon reflection, “after leaving, i realised the relationship started to sour after [x] was born.” [ms kent] said that “[mr kent] told to me that he resented [x] being born because i was taken away from him. there were no issues when i was on maternity leave because i was around, but after [x] was born, he became very controlling of the relationship and started questioning me about what i was spending my money on. i would have to ensure that all the money we had was accounted for, and that the house would need to be always clean, and neatly presented. there were lots of expectations about what a mother should be that came from [mr kent].” ... [ms kent] said that in [late] 2020, “i invited [mr kent] to come to a social gathering with other [colleagues], and when he attended, he just didn’t seem to be itself and didn't talk. he didn’t say anything to me, and didn’t speak to me on the way home. after that, he just blew up and accused me of having an affair with this friend, and i flat out denied it and said that simply there just good friends.” [ms kent] said that “it was only after that i learned that he had been checking on my phone messages.” [ms kent] expressed a view that this behaviour was unusual and said that “i told him that he had problems and asked him to see a psychologist. he said that he would and eventually told me that he was seeing a lady who he then said wasn’t helping and stopped.” [ms kent] said that the intervening months were characterised by tension in the household and that “we kept fighting and he kept saying that i was having an affair. every evening, he'd check on my phone to see if i was messaging or calling my colleague, and this would happen every night.” [ms kent] said that over [the next month], the tension was evidently affecting the children that “the kids were getting angry, especially [y], because she could see us arguing all the time. it just snowballed from there, and [a few months later], he called my parents over but didn’t say why. when i heard that he’d done this, i thought something terrible had happened to the kids.” she said that upon arriving at their house, “i was so relieved that the kids were there and were safe, but then the argument kept going, i asked the kids to go with my mum. he told us that he would go to confront my colleague, and i was concerned that he would do something violent. he called [mr v] and threatened to hurt him, and i lodged a police report about that.” [ms kent] said that “i didn't leave the relationship that night because i was scared of what he might do, so i planned to leave a few days later. i have seen him physically hurt the older kids, and i didn’t want that to blow up.” [ms kent] gave examples of "if [x] got an answer wrong with his homework, he would be hit or have his earlobe pulled, and one night around [early] 2021, [x] and [y] were fighting and [mr kent] just went off. [x] was clinging onto the stairs for dear life, and [y] was trying to hold him back, and he was just screaming blue murder and yelling ‘i can’t take it anymore,’ about the kids yelling.” [ms kent] recalled that she had told her mother about “feeling like i needed to leave, but i was just too scared of what might happen if i did.” [ms kent] said that she had lived with her family ever since because she was unable to afford to live independently and did not feel safe in doing so. ... [ms kent] said that she was seeking for contact arrangements to remain unchanged, with the current level of contact being one evening and one weekend a week to remain. she said, “i think the kids don’t want things to change, and the two older kids have told me that when he is asked, they have lied to him because they don’t want to see him.” she acknowledged that “ [z] would probably want more time because he hasn’t seen him as much, but even he will say that dad is ‘rude’ for not listening to him. the other two seem to be okay when [mr kent] is happy, but most of the time he isn’t.” ... in relation to the children's needs, [ms kent] said that she was most concerned about [y] and said that “she is the one with the most obvious difficulties because she is very expressive, speaks her mind, and demands the truth. she knows a lot more than she should, and we have always had issues with her behaviour she has been very physical with the boys for a long time, but that has improved a bit since we moved in with my parents. [x] is a bit of a concern because he isn’t very resilient, very quiet and tends to keep to himself. academically he is very intelligent and he is a natural leader but very quiet.” in relation to [z], [ms kent] reported that “he seems to have some speech difficulties and occasional anger outbursts, but he otherwise is tracking along okay.” in relation to her own mental health, [ms kent] said that “most of my difficulties are stress-related.” she currently saw a psychologist and said that “i often vent about what is going on with [mr kent] and i, to help with reducing differences and hoping to improve the happiness of our family. i have never been told that i have any diagnosable issues.” in relation to recent psychiatric symptoms, [ms kent] reported that her mood was “frustrated and stressed. i try to push that aside for the kids, but sometimes i feel like i can't keep up with the demands of being a single mum. if i increase my contact with my psychologist that does help, and i use the techniques like slow breathing, grounding strategies and muscle relaxation which seemed to help reduce my stress. she also helped with advice on how to engage with the kids.” she denied persistent periods of depression or low mood. she reported adequate sleep. she denied difficulties with appetite or energy. she denied any thoughts of suicide or self-harm. in relation to future plans, [ms kent] said that “the kids need routine, structure, stability and a happy loving home with safety.” she expressed an opinion that “i do not think [mr kent] is very stable, and even though he can be great when he is settled and calm, when he is not good and flying off the handle, i'm scared because i’m not sure what he can do, and i can’t be there to protect them. i know that he is still their father, he is meant to be a good role model and we're meant to be on the same page, however that is just not there and he is not providing the role modelling he should.” she expressed a view that “my main concern with [mr kent] is the lack of safety and supervision when he is on his own. recently when the kids had [sports] lessons, [mr kent] sent [z] into the [the lesson] without a teacher on his own, and he has left [x] unsupervised at [sports] lessons on at least 20 occasions. [z] told me that dad left him once after he fell out of a tree, and [mr kent] didn't tell me about that. [y]’s also said that she and [x] go out to the park on their own, and she has a phone that she can used to call him. she didn’t tell me, but she told [ms bb]. [z] is allowed to use [social media] unsupervised and has had nightmares about things that he’s seen.” [ms kent] said that her most significant concern was for [y], and said that “she told me that he has locked her in the bedroom of our old house after they were naughty. she is treated by him as though she is the female adult, and she is treated differently to the other two. she has also fallen off the bed, but her story didn't add up. [mr kent] never tells me anything, and i only ever hear things from the kids. [x] has told me that recently he has had some allergic reactions, and that [mr kent] has not been giving him [medication], and there is just no cohesion in the parenting approach.”  unsel] you’ve been told that both of the parents conceded under cross-examination that [suburb w] mcdonald’s isn’t an appropriate area for changeover to occur between the children and parents. can i ask you – with your understanding of what has occurred at [suburb w] mcdonald’s and given the fact that you understand that there are five changeovers a fortnight happening at that location between the mother and the father, what, in your opinion, is the effect of that on the children? [witness] so, look, i think that the children will have associated the location with conflict between the parents, and it is – it would be unsurprising that the account i was given of the children’s behaviour leading up to travelling to that location of being quiet and reserved and needed to be encouraged or, essentially, pushed into going – that would be entirely consistent with that – that sort of anticipation of a high-conflict situation at that location and the association with that location. [counsel] okay. so in relation to a recommendation that you would make in relation to changeover, i’m – is it the case that you would recommend against changeover occurring at that location? [witness] i would agree with that, yes. [counsel] and do you think that there would be any utility for the children in simply changing it to another public location? [witness] look, it’s possible that that would improve their anticipatory anxiety. i suspect that it probably wouldn’t because the primary issue seems to be the anticipation of conflict between the parents at whatever location it may be. so if it was another public location, i suspect that it would be the case that very quickly, they would come to associate that new location with a similar degree of conflict. .... [counsel] when i mean “without incident” – if there’s simply no communication or eye contact or facial expressions from the parents when the changeover is, in fact, occurring, what’s – is that just as bad as an overt incident? [witness] well, no – no verbal communication is what’s being described. there’s plenty of non-verbal communication occurring, the absence of eye contact, the silence, the not saying anything. that communicates to the children that the relationship between the two parents is still quite hostile, and i think that that could be – well, that’s likely to have a similar effect to a significant overt incident, yes.  unsel] but there doesn’t seem to be any issue in relation to the children going with the father from school. right. there has been no school reports that indicate that there’s any difficulty with the father picking up the children from school. and the father’s evidence in relation to his time with the children is positive. certainly, there’s an extensive series of concerns and complaints raised by the mother of what the children report to the mother after they’ve spent time with their father. but in circumstances where it is proposed by the mother that that extended eight-hour period continue, the question is where’s the differential between the father being capable of caring for the children for eight hours and caring for the children overnight? [witness] i don’t see there being a substantial difference between those two scenarios.  unsel] so i take it if the court were to contemplate an arrangement that included overnight time with the children as part of the midpoint between those two arrangements, what do you say about that? [witness] based on what i’ve heard today, i would not – i would not oppose that.  unsel] and can you identify in short terms for his honour what those negative effects for [y] could be? [witness] look, i think for [y], the issue that stood out for me was that she had become inappropriately parentified in that she – she felt the need to protect not only her mother but also her siblings from the effects of the conflict, and she’s – that is a considerable responsibility for any individual to have, and it is – you know, it’s certainly not an appropriate level of responsibility for a child to have to bear that – that sense of duty or that sense of need to protect the siblings. [counsel] and that would be particularly so, wouldn’t it, for a child who – like [y], who, we know, has some existing vulnerabilities in terms of her own anxious behaviours? [witness] yes. ... [counsel] and so from [y]’s perspective, with that parentified position that you have identified, changeovers for [y] where her parents are coming into contact with each other are really going to be harmful for her into the future, aren’t they? [witness] yes. [counsel] and it is likely, is it not, from what you know of the [early]’23 changeover, if his honour were to conclude that [y] was clearly putting herself in the middle to try and manage that situation, that that just simply cannot continue in her best interest. you agree with that? [witness] i would agree with that, yes.  unsel] in the event children receive a negative narrative from either parent about the other, in a high conflict parenting environment – and i should firstly check with you, you identified, did you not, that these children are in a high conflict parenting environment? [witness] i don’t think i explicitly identified it, but i would agree with that characterisation, yes. [counsel] well, you identified that parental conflict was actually one of the biggest risk for the children? [witness] yes. [counsel] and – well, sorry. their exposure to parental conflict – i should be more accurate – was one of the biggest risk for them? [witness] yes. [counsel] now, you would agree, would you not, that in those circumstances, if the children are either implicitly or explicitly receiving a negative view about their other parent, that that has the potential to impact the children’s relationship with both of their parents? [witness] yes. [counsel] and the impact of that relationship with both of their parents is often negative, isn’t it? [witness] yes. [counsel] do you agree that it can – that children in high conflict parenting arrangements often find it difficult to express to each parent their positive views of the other? [witness] yes, absolutely, yes. [counsel] they often – do you agree, in high conflict parenting arrangements, children end up supressing their positive feelings about the other parent when they’re in the other parent’s care? [witness] yes, absolutely, yes. [counsel] and it is really important, from the children’s perspective, is it not, that both of the parents are able to demonstrate a capacity to see how that might impact on firstly their children’s behaviour? [witness] yes. [counsel] and on views that the children might express and the impact that that might have on their views? [witness] yes. [counsel] and also, how it might affect the sibling relationship with each other? [witness[ yes, yes. [counsel] and in the circumstances that you are aware of for these children, it is particularly important, is it not, that the children are given a break, sooner rather than later, from the conflict that they are experiencing in their transitions, face to face between their parents? [witness] i would agree that is a preferred outcome, yes. [counsel] and i’m going to suggest to you that it’s as high – for these children – it is as high as being quite imperative for their psychological health? [witness] yes. [counsel] and you would expect, would you not, psychological detriment to the children’s health – that is their psychological health – if they are required to continue to participate in changeovers with their parents or their households – i should be more broader about that, given the maternal grandfather was present at the changeover – that you would expect there to be negative impacts on the children’s psychological health, if they continue to be exposed to changeovers in the way that are happening? [witness] yes. [counsel] and part of the damage, from a psychological perspective, for the children will be on their relationships with both of their parents? [witness] yes. .... [counsel] and do you consider that that risk is higher for [y], given her existing vulnerabilities? [witness] yes. [counsel] and you will have read – please correct me if i’m wrong – you will have read in her – in [y]’s psychological records, that she herself already experiences difficulties with her peers at school? [witness] yes, yes. [counsel] and that that seems to be a feature of her personality, even prior to separation? [witness] correct, yes. [counsel] and that for [y] to have – to manage those peer relationships with her existing vulnerabilities and the parental conflict at changeover, that that is likely to be really overwhelming for her? [witness] it is more likely than not, yes. [counsel] and it, do you accept, could be a primary contributor to the outbursts that are identified for [y] around changeover events? [witness] yes.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc considerations a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.   y is a particularly sensitive child and has been having psychological treatment since well before separation related to, inter alia, anxiety. y experiences significant anxiety with emotional dysregulation if her day-to-day routines are not predictable and if confronted with sudden proposed changes in routine. (b) the children have likely been exposed to conflict between the parties both prior to and post separation and have reacted emotionally adversely to such conflict. y has adopted, on a significant number of occasions, a protective role towards the mother with a view to shielding her from anticipated conflict with the father whilst being aware of the mother’s anxiety in respect to the children spending time with the father. consistent with that protective role, for example, it is likely that y sought to manage the conflict between the father and the maternal grandfather at suburb w mcdonalds in early 2023. (c) the court finds that changeovers between the parties involving the parties coming into contact with each other or near contact (for example, changeover at suburb w mcdonald’s) are likely experienced as particularly stressful for the children, in particular y. this stress is experienced by reason of, inter alia, the children anticipating possible conflict between the parties at changeover, and, at the changeover itself, the children observing hostility between the parties (that is, for example, the parties engaging in verbal disputation at changeover, or the mother declining to make eye contact with the father and not verbally engaging with him). (d) on balance, the children’s lived experience when spending time with the father post separation has been usually positive, and their statements to the contrary including criticisms of the father (in particular their statements to the mother in this regard) do not accurately reflect this lived experience.   the children have likely been exposed to conflict between the parties both prior to and post separation and have reacted emotionally adversely to such conflict. y has adopted, on a significant number of occasions, a protective role towards the mother with a view to shielding her from anticipated conflict with the father whilst being aware of the mother’s anxiety in respect to the children spending time with the father. consistent with that protective role, for example, it is likely that y sought to manage the conflict between the father and the maternal grandfather at suburb w mcdonalds in early 2023. (c) the court finds that changeovers between the parties involving the parties coming into contact with each other or near contact (for example, changeover at suburb w mcdonald’s) are likely experienced as particularly stressful for the children, in particular y. this stress is experienced by reason of, inter alia, the children anticipating possible conflict between the parties at changeover, and, at the changeover itself, the children observing hostility between the parties (that is, for example, the parties engaging in verbal disputation at changeover, or the mother declining to make eye contact with the father and not verbally engaging with him). (d) on balance, the children’s lived experience when spending time with the father post separation has been usually positive, and their statements to the contrary including criticisms of the father (in particular their statements to the mother in this regard) do not accurately reflect this lived experience.   the court finds that changeovers between the parties involving the parties coming into contact with each other or near contact (for example, changeover at suburb w mcdonald’s) are likely experienced as particularly stressful for the children, in particular y. this stress is experienced by reason of, inter alia, the children anticipating possible conflict between the parties at changeover, and, at the changeover itself, the children observing hostility between the parties (that is, for example, the parties engaging in verbal disputation at changeover, or the mother declining to make eye contact with the father and not verbally engaging with him). (d) on balance, the children’s lived experience when spending time with the father post separation has been usually positive, and their statements to the contrary including criticisms of the father (in particular their statements to the mother in this regard) do not accurately reflect this lived experience.   on balance, the children’s lived experience when spending time with the father post separation has been usually positive, and their statements to the contrary including criticisms of the father (in particular their statements to the mother in this regard) do not accurately reflect this lived experience.
the children’s positive observation session with the father during the psychiatric assessment by the single expert, dr k, is consistent with these views (and see paragraph 995–1007 of dr k’s report). the court also refers in this context to the oral evidence of dr k relating to there being inconsistencies between what had been communicated to the child y by the mother and what she said her experiences had been (and see dr k’s commentary in his written report at about line 715). the evidence of the family consultant ms j relating to y aligning herself with the mother in order to manage the confusion caused by the parents providing her conflicting accounts of incidents and issues beyond her lived experience is also consistent with these views.  b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence: a primary consideration  it is likely that there was significant verbal abuse and disputation, including yelling, between the parties during the latter stages of their relationship, in particular during the period when the relationship was breaking down, and to which the children were exposed. the court accepts that the father was highly agitated and raised his voice towards the maternal grandparents on about early 2021 (being shortly before final separation). it is likely that the father, on occasion during the latter stages of the parties’ relationship and post separation, has raised his voice with the children when he was upset, (b) an incident on the stairway in the former matrimonial home involving the father pulling the child x from the top of the stairs probably occurred but was probably not a deliberate act of physical violence by the father. the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father otherwise perpetrated excessive manhandling or physical chastisement upon the children during the parties’ relationship, (c) the father, at a time when he suspected the mother was having an affair with another man and towards the end of the parties’ relationship, unreasonably inspected messages sent to the mother on her phone and harassed the mother in relation to his suspicions. he probably also unreasonably requested the mother to desist from attending events or fraternising with this other man in the face of the mother’s denials of any affair. however, the court would view such unreasonable and controlling behaviour by the father as likely being situational in the context of the breakdown of the parties’ relationship and the father’s significant disappointment that this breakdown was occurring, (d) the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father repeatedly pressured the mother for sexual intercourse, or that the father would enter her shower against her wishes, (e) the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father perpetrated coercive and controlling family violence against the mother in relation to financial matters or in respect to the mother socialising outside of the family home. for example, the mother had some autonomy in relation to the parties’ joint bank account and in relation to her attendance at a gymnasium. (f) on the balance of probabilities, it is likely that both parties, post separation, have on occasion denigrated the other parent to one or more of the children. (g) in early 2023 at suburb w mcdonald’s, the father became agitated and at times quite upset in the presence of the children and the maternal grandfather in circumstances where the maternal grandfather had attended mcdonald’s to effect changeover on behalf of the mother (the father was dropping off the children at mcdonald’s). on the balance of probabilities, the court accepts that the father, on arriving at mcdonald’s, and observing that the maternal grandfather was there and not the mother, believed that he might be breaching previous interim parenting orders in not handing the children over to the mother. he was aware at this time of a procedure within this court known as contravention proceedings because he had instituted his own contravention proceedings against the mother in about early 2023. (the court acknowledges that whilst the interim parenting orders of 27 april 2022 do not expressly state that the mother must be present to effect changeovers on a sunday, thursday changeovers are required to be effected by the father returning two of the children to the mother).   an incident on the stairway in the former matrimonial home involving the father pulling the child x from the top of the stairs probably occurred but was probably not a deliberate act of physical violence by the father. the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father otherwise perpetrated excessive manhandling or physical chastisement upon the children during the parties’ relationship, (c) the father, at a time when he suspected the mother was having an affair with another man and towards the end of the parties’ relationship, unreasonably inspected messages sent to the mother on her phone and harassed the mother in relation to his suspicions. he probably also unreasonably requested the mother to desist from attending events or fraternising with this other man in the face of the mother’s denials of any affair. however, the court would view such unreasonable and controlling behaviour by the father as likely being situational in the context of the breakdown of the parties’ relationship and the father’s significant disappointment that this breakdown was occurring, (d) the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father repeatedly pressured the mother for sexual intercourse, or that the father would enter her shower against her wishes, (e) the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father perpetrated coercive and controlling family violence against the mother in relation to financial matters or in respect to the mother socialising outside of the family home. for example, the mother had some autonomy in relation to the parties’ joint bank account and in relation to her attendance at a gymnasium. (f) on the balance of probabilities, it is likely that both parties, post separation, have on occasion denigrated the other parent to one or more of the children. (g) in early 2023 at suburb w mcdonald’s, the father became agitated and at times quite upset in the presence of the children and the maternal grandfather in circumstances where the maternal grandfather had attended mcdonald’s to effect changeover on behalf of the mother (the father was dropping off the children at mcdonald’s). on the balance of probabilities, the court accepts that the father, on arriving at mcdonald’s, and observing that the maternal grandfather was there and not the mother, believed that he might be breaching previous interim parenting orders in not handing the children over to the mother. he was aware at this time of a procedure within this court known as contravention proceedings because he had instituted his own contravention proceedings against the mother in about early 2023. (the court acknowledges that whilst the interim parenting orders of 27 april 2022 do not expressly state that the mother must be present to effect changeovers on a sunday, thursday changeovers are required to be effected by the father returning two of the children to the mother).   the father, at a time when he suspected the mother was having an affair with another man and towards the end of the parties’ relationship, unreasonably inspected messages sent to the mother on her phone and harassed the mother in relation to his suspicions. he probably also unreasonably requested the mother to desist from attending events or fraternising with this other man in the face of the mother’s denials of any affair. however, the court would view such unreasonable and controlling behaviour by the father as likely being situational in the context of the breakdown of the parties’ relationship and the father’s significant disappointment that this breakdown was occurring, (d) the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father repeatedly pressured the mother for sexual intercourse, or that the father would enter her shower against her wishes, (e) the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father perpetrated coercive and controlling family violence against the mother in relation to financial matters or in respect to the mother socialising outside of the family home. for example, the mother had some autonomy in relation to the parties’ joint bank account and in relation to her attendance at a gymnasium. (f) on the balance of probabilities, it is likely that both parties, post separation, have on occasion denigrated the other parent to one or more of the children. (g) in early 2023 at suburb w mcdonald’s, the father became agitated and at times quite upset in the presence of the children and the maternal grandfather in circumstances where the maternal grandfather had attended mcdonald’s to effect changeover on behalf of the mother (the father was dropping off the children at mcdonald’s). on the balance of probabilities, the court accepts that the father, on arriving at mcdonald’s, and observing that the maternal grandfather was there and not the mother, believed that he might be breaching previous interim parenting orders in not handing the children over to the mother. he was aware at this time of a procedure within this court known as contravention proceedings because he had instituted his own contravention proceedings against the mother in about early 2023. (the court acknowledges that whilst the interim parenting orders of 27 april 2022 do not expressly state that the mother must be present to effect changeovers on a sunday, thursday changeovers are required to be effected by the father returning two of the children to the mother).   the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father repeatedly pressured the mother for sexual intercourse, or that the father would enter her shower against her wishes, (e) the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father perpetrated coercive and controlling family violence against the mother in relation to financial matters or in respect to the mother socialising outside of the family home. for example, the mother had some autonomy in relation to the parties’ joint bank account and in relation to her attendance at a gymnasium. (f) on the balance of probabilities, it is likely that both parties, post separation, have on occasion denigrated the other parent to one or more of the children. (g) in early 2023 at suburb w mcdonald’s, the father became agitated and at times quite upset in the presence of the children and the maternal grandfather in circumstances where the maternal grandfather had attended mcdonald’s to effect changeover on behalf of the mother (the father was dropping off the children at mcdonald’s). on the balance of probabilities, the court accepts that the father, on arriving at mcdonald’s, and observing that the maternal grandfather was there and not the mother, believed that he might be breaching previous interim parenting orders in not handing the children over to the mother. he was aware at this time of a procedure within this court known as contravention proceedings because he had instituted his own contravention proceedings against the mother in about early 2023. (the court acknowledges that whilst the interim parenting orders of 27 april 2022 do not expressly state that the mother must be present to effect changeovers on a sunday, thursday changeovers are required to be effected by the father returning two of the children to the mother).   the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the father perpetrated coercive and controlling family violence against the mother in relation to financial matters or in respect to the mother socialising outside of the family home. for example, the mother had some autonomy in relation to the parties’ joint bank account and in relation to her attendance at a gymnasium. (f) on the balance of probabilities, it is likely that both parties, post separation, have on occasion denigrated the other parent to one or more of the children. (g) in early 2023 at suburb w mcdonald’s, the father became agitated and at times quite upset in the presence of the children and the maternal grandfather in circumstances where the maternal grandfather had attended mcdonald’s to effect changeover on behalf of the mother (the father was dropping off the children at mcdonald’s). on the balance of probabilities, the court accepts that the father, on arriving at mcdonald’s, and observing that the maternal grandfather was there and not the mother, believed that he might be breaching previous interim parenting orders in not handing the children over to the mother. he was aware at this time of a procedure within this court known as contravention proceedings because he had instituted his own contravention proceedings against the mother in about early 2023. (the court acknowledges that whilst the interim parenting orders of 27 april 2022 do not expressly state that the mother must be present to effect changeovers on a sunday, thursday changeovers are required to be effected by the father returning two of the children to the mother).   on the balance of probabilities, it is likely that both parties, post separation, have on occasion denigrated the other parent to one or more of the children. (g) in early 2023 at suburb w mcdonald’s, the father became agitated and at times quite upset in the presence of the children and the maternal grandfather in circumstances where the maternal grandfather had attended mcdonald’s to effect changeover on behalf of the mother (the father was dropping off the children at mcdonald’s). on the balance of probabilities, the court accepts that the father, on arriving at mcdonald’s, and observing that the maternal grandfather was there and not the mother, believed that he might be breaching previous interim parenting orders in not handing the children over to the mother. he was aware at this time of a procedure within this court known as contravention proceedings because he had instituted his own contravention proceedings against the mother in about early 2023. (the court acknowledges that whilst the interim parenting orders of 27 april 2022 do not expressly state that the mother must be present to effect changeovers on a sunday, thursday changeovers are required to be effected by the father returning two of the children to the mother).   in early 2023 at suburb w mcdonald’s, the father became agitated and at times quite upset in the presence of the children and the maternal grandfather in circumstances where the maternal grandfather had attended mcdonald’s to effect changeover on behalf of the mother (the father was dropping off the children at mcdonald’s). on the balance of probabilities, the court accepts that the father, on arriving at mcdonald’s, and observing that the maternal grandfather was there and not the mother, believed that he might be breaching previous interim parenting orders in not handing the children over to the mother. he was aware at this time of a procedure within this court known as contravention proceedings because he had instituted his own contravention proceedings against the mother in about early 2023. (the court acknowledges that whilst the interim parenting orders of 27 april 2022 do not expressly state that the mother must be present to effect changeovers on a sunday, thursday changeovers are required to be effected by the father returning two of the children to the mother).   the court refers to its above findings under the meaningful relationship primary consideration. (b) the court refers to its above findings relating to the issue of family violence, including coercive and controlling family violence. (c) the father has demonstrated some insight and remorse in relation to aspects of his above discussed found adverse behaviour towards the mother and/or in the presence of the children. (d) the father has taken some steps to address such found adverse behaviour, as discussed above, including positively addressing his own mental health through psychological consultations. in relation to parenting the children, in late 2022 the father engaged in post separation parenting education through ee centre, and met with ms ff at ee centre about once each month until mid-2023. the purpose of the education was to assist the father in understanding the children’s perspective at separation, what they were feeling and how they might need to be supported. the father found the ee centre service to be very helpful and some of the things he learnt included the matters set out at paragraph 149 of his affidavit filed 22 september 2023. he believes he came away from the ee centre education with good resources that he keeps in photos on his phone and refers to when needed. (e) should the court make the proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the children will be subjected to neglect in the father’s care. the court finds that the father is adequately aware of the children’s various food intolerances and allergies and is likely to appropriately manage these issues for the children when they are spending time with him. the court accepts that the father acknowledges that his lack of preparation for the trip that he and the children went on in late 2023 caused discomforts for the children which he regrets, it is likely that the father has developed some insight relating to his lack of preparation for this event with this issue having been ventilated extensively in these proceedings. (f) the father’s significant disappointment that his relationship with the mother had broken down together with the restriction upon his time to be spent with the children post separation probably significantly contributed towards his above discussed found adverse behaviour towards the mother and/or in the presence of the children. the court would assess that presently the father probably has an acceptance that his former relationship with the mother is now over. (g) the court’s proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration embrace a gradual build-up of time, including overnight time, between the children and the father, thus affording the children (in particular, y) and the mother appropriate time to become emotionally comfortable with having such time with the father. these proposed orders further provide for clear parameters as to time to be spent with the father and in relation to changeovers which will minimise the risk of the children experiencing any uncertainty in relation to such issues. (h) during such a gradual build-up of time, the mother, if necessary, can utilise her present supports (for example, her psychological counselling and having access to previous parenting courses that she has carried out) to manage any anxiety experienced by her in relation to such time between the children and the father. the mother’s parenting capacity for the children should not be adversely affected by the children spending time with the father as discussed by the court above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration. the child y can, if necessary, also consult with her psychologist in this context. (i) the father will have time to reflect upon these reasons, including the court’s findings relating to family violence. (j) again, should the court make the father’s proposed final parenting orders, which provide, inter alia, for the children ultimately spending five nights each fortnight with the father during school term times, the court has a significant concern that the parties will be unable to adequately co-parent the children without conflict.   the court refers to its above findings relating to the issue of family violence, including coercive and controlling family violence. (c) the father has demonstrated some insight and remorse in relation to aspects of his above discussed found adverse behaviour towards the mother and/or in the presence of the children. (d) the father has taken some steps to address such found adverse behaviour, as discussed above, including positively addressing his own mental health through psychological consultations. in relation to parenting the children, in late 2022 the father engaged in post separation parenting education through ee centre, and met with ms ff at ee centre about once each month until mid-2023. the purpose of the education was to assist the father in understanding the children’s perspective at separation, what they were feeling and how they might need to be supported. the father found the ee centre service to be very helpful and some of the things he learnt included the matters set out at paragraph 149 of his affidavit filed 22 september 2023. he believes he came away from the ee centre education with good resources that he keeps in photos on his phone and refers to when needed. (e) should the court make the proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the children will be subjected to neglect in the father’s care. the court finds that the father is adequately aware of the children’s various food intolerances and allergies and is likely to appropriately manage these issues for the children when they are spending time with him. the court accepts that the father acknowledges that his lack of preparation for the trip that he and the children went on in late 2023 caused discomforts for the children which he regrets, it is likely that the father has developed some insight relating to his lack of preparation for this event with this issue having been ventilated extensively in these proceedings. (f) the father’s significant disappointment that his relationship with the mother had broken down together with the restriction upon his time to be spent with the children post separation probably significantly contributed towards his above discussed found adverse behaviour towards the mother and/or in the presence of the children. the court would assess that presently the father probably has an acceptance that his former relationship with the mother is now over. (g) the court’s proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration embrace a gradual build-up of time, including overnight time, between the children and the father, thus affording the children (in particular, y) and the mother appropriate time to become emotionally comfortable with having such time with the father. these proposed orders further provide for clear parameters as to time to be spent with the father and in relation to changeovers which will minimise the risk of the children experiencing any uncertainty in relation to such issues. (h) during such a gradual build-up of time, the mother, if necessary, can utilise her present supports (for example, her psychological counselling and having access to previous parenting courses that she has carried out) to manage any anxiety experienced by her in relation to such time between the children and the father. the mother’s parenting capacity for the children should not be adversely affected by the children spending time with the father as discussed by the court above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration. the child y can, if necessary, also consult with her psychologist in this context. (i) the father will have time to reflect upon these reasons, including the court’s findings relating to family violence. (j) again, should the court make the father’s proposed final parenting orders, which provide, inter alia, for the children ultimately spending five nights each fortnight with the father during school term times, the court has a significant concern that the parties will be unable to adequately co-parent the children without conflict.   the father has demonstrated some insight and remorse in relation to aspects of his above discussed found adverse behaviour towards the mother and/or in the presence of the children. (d) the father has taken some steps to address such found adverse behaviour, as discussed above, including positively addressing his own mental health through psychological consultations. in relation to parenting the children, in late 2022 the father engaged in post separation parenting education through ee centre, and met with ms ff at ee centre about once each month until mid-2023. the purpose of the education was to assist the father in understanding the children’s perspective at separation, what they were feeling and how they might need to be supported. the father found the ee centre service to be very helpful and some of the things he learnt included the matters set out at paragraph 149 of his affidavit filed 22 september 2023. he believes he came away from the ee centre education with good resources that he keeps in photos on his phone and refers to when needed. (e) should the court make the proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the children will be subjected to neglect in the father’s care. the court finds that the father is adequately aware of the children’s various food intolerances and allergies and is likely to appropriately manage these issues for the children when they are spending time with him. the court accepts that the father acknowledges that his lack of preparation for the trip that he and the children went on in late 2023 caused discomforts for the children which he regrets, it is likely that the father has developed some insight relating to his lack of preparation for this event with this issue having been ventilated extensively in these proceedings. (f) the father’s significant disappointment that his relationship with the mother had broken down together with the restriction upon his time to be spent with the children post separation probably significantly contributed towards his above discussed found adverse behaviour towards the mother and/or in the presence of the children. the court would assess that presently the father probably has an acceptance that his former relationship with the mother is now over. (g) the court’s proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration embrace a gradual build-up of time, including overnight time, between the children and the father, thus affording the children (in particular, y) and the mother appropriate time to become emotionally comfortable with having such time with the father. these proposed orders further provide for clear parameters as to time to be spent with the father and in relation to changeovers which will minimise the risk of the children experiencing any uncertainty in relation to such issues. (h) during such a gradual build-up of time, the mother, if necessary, can utilise her present supports (for example, her psychological counselling and having access to previous parenting courses that she has carried out) to manage any anxiety experienced by her in relation to such time between the children and the father. the mother’s parenting capacity for the children should not be adversely affected by the children spending time with the father as discussed by the court above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration. the child y can, if necessary, also consult with her psychologist in this context. (i) the father will have time to reflect upon these reasons, including the court’s findings relating to family violence. (j) again, should the court make the father’s proposed final parenting orders, which provide, inter alia, for the children ultimately spending five nights each fortnight with the father during school term times, the court has a significant concern that the parties will be unable to adequately co-parent the children without conflict.   the father has taken some steps to address such found adverse behaviour, as discussed above, including positively addressing his own mental health through psychological consultations. in relation to parenting the children, in late 2022 the father engaged in post separation parenting education through ee centre, and met with ms ff at ee centre about once each month until mid-2023. the purpose of the education was to assist the father in understanding the children’s perspective at separation, what they were feeling and how they might need to be supported. the father found the ee centre service to be very helpful and some of the things he learnt included the matters set out at paragraph 149 of his affidavit filed 22 september 2023. he believes he came away from the ee centre education with good resources that he keeps in photos on his phone and refers to when needed. (e) should the court make the proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the children will be subjected to neglect in the father’s care. the court finds that the father is adequately aware of the children’s various food intolerances and allergies and is likely to appropriately manage these issues for the children when they are spending time with him. the court accepts that the father acknowledges that his lack of preparation for the trip that he and the children went on in late 2023 caused discomforts for the children which he regrets, it is likely that the father has developed some insight relating to his lack of preparation for this event with this issue having been ventilated extensively in these proceedings. (f) the father’s significant disappointment that his relationship with the mother had broken down together with the restriction upon his time to be spent with the children post separation probably significantly contributed towards his above discussed found adverse behaviour towards the mother and/or in the presence of the children. the court would assess that presently the father probably has an acceptance that his former relationship with the mother is now over. (g) the court’s proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration embrace a gradual build-up of time, including overnight time, between the children and the father, thus affording the children (in particular, y) and the mother appropriate time to become emotionally comfortable with having such time with the father. these proposed orders further provide for clear parameters as to time to be spent with the father and in relation to changeovers which will minimise the risk of the children experiencing any uncertainty in relation to such issues. (h) during such a gradual build-up of time, the mother, if necessary, can utilise her present supports (for example, her psychological counselling and having access to previous parenting courses that she has carried out) to manage any anxiety experienced by her in relation to such time between the children and the father. the mother’s parenting capacity for the children should not be adversely affected by the children spending time with the father as discussed by the court above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration. the child y can, if necessary, also consult with her psychologist in this context. (i) the father will have time to reflect upon these reasons, including the court’s findings relating to family violence. (j) again, should the court make the father’s proposed final parenting orders, which provide, inter alia, for the children ultimately spending five nights each fortnight with the father during school term times, the court has a significant concern that the parties will be unable to adequately co-parent the children without conflict.   should the court make the proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration the court is not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the children will be subjected to neglect in the father’s care. the court finds that the father is adequately aware of the children’s various food intolerances and allergies and is likely to appropriately manage these issues for the children when they are spending time with him. the court accepts that the father acknowledges that his lack of preparation for the trip that he and the children went on in late 2023 caused discomforts for the children which he regrets, it is likely that the father has developed some insight relating to his lack of preparation for this event with this issue having been ventilated extensively in these proceedings. (f) the father’s significant disappointment that his relationship with the mother had broken down together with the restriction upon his time to be spent with the children post separation probably significantly contributed towards his above discussed found adverse behaviour towards the mother and/or in the presence of the children. the court would assess that presently the father probably has an acceptance that his former relationship with the mother is now over. (g) the court’s proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration embrace a gradual build-up of time, including overnight time, between the children and the father, thus affording the children (in particular, y) and the mother appropriate time to become emotionally comfortable with having such time with the father. these proposed orders further provide for clear parameters as to time to be spent with the father and in relation to changeovers which will minimise the risk of the children experiencing any uncertainty in relation to such issues. (h) during such a gradual build-up of time, the mother, if necessary, can utilise her present supports (for example, her psychological counselling and having access to previous parenting courses that she has carried out) to manage any anxiety experienced by her in relation to such time between the children and the father. the mother’s parenting capacity for the children should not be adversely affected by the children spending time with the father as discussed by the court above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration. the child y can, if necessary, also consult with her psychologist in this context. (i) the father will have time to reflect upon these reasons, including the court’s findings relating to family violence. (j) again, should the court make the father’s proposed final parenting orders, which provide, inter alia, for the children ultimately spending five nights each fortnight with the father during school term times, the court has a significant concern that the parties will be unable to adequately co-parent the children without conflict.   the father’s significant disappointment that his relationship with the mother had broken down together with the restriction upon his time to be spent with the children post separation probably significantly contributed towards his above discussed found adverse behaviour towards the mother and/or in the presence of the children. the court would assess that presently the father probably has an acceptance that his former relationship with the mother is now over. (g) the court’s proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration embrace a gradual build-up of time, including overnight time, between the children and the father, thus affording the children (in particular, y) and the mother appropriate time to become emotionally comfortable with having such time with the father. these proposed orders further provide for clear parameters as to time to be spent with the father and in relation to changeovers which will minimise the risk of the children experiencing any uncertainty in relation to such issues. (h) during such a gradual build-up of time, the mother, if necessary, can utilise her present supports (for example, her psychological counselling and having access to previous parenting courses that she has carried out) to manage any anxiety experienced by her in relation to such time between the children and the father. the mother’s parenting capacity for the children should not be adversely affected by the children spending time with the father as discussed by the court above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration. the child y can, if necessary, also consult with her psychologist in this context. (i) the father will have time to reflect upon these reasons, including the court’s findings relating to family violence. (j) again, should the court make the father’s proposed final parenting orders, which provide, inter alia, for the children ultimately spending five nights each fortnight with the father during school term times, the court has a significant concern that the parties will be unable to adequately co-parent the children without conflict.   the court’s proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration embrace a gradual build-up of time, including overnight time, between the children and the father, thus affording the children (in particular, y) and the mother appropriate time to become emotionally comfortable with having such time with the father. these proposed orders further provide for clear parameters as to time to be spent with the father and in relation to changeovers which will minimise the risk of the children experiencing any uncertainty in relation to such issues. (h) during such a gradual build-up of time, the mother, if necessary, can utilise her present supports (for example, her psychological counselling and having access to previous parenting courses that she has carried out) to manage any anxiety experienced by her in relation to such time between the children and the father. the mother’s parenting capacity for the children should not be adversely affected by the children spending time with the father as discussed by the court above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration. the child y can, if necessary, also consult with her psychologist in this context. (i) the father will have time to reflect upon these reasons, including the court’s findings relating to family violence. (j) again, should the court make the father’s proposed final parenting orders, which provide, inter alia, for the children ultimately spending five nights each fortnight with the father during school term times, the court has a significant concern that the parties will be unable to adequately co-parent the children without conflict.   during such a gradual build-up of time, the mother, if necessary, can utilise her present supports (for example, her psychological counselling and having access to previous parenting courses that she has carried out) to manage any anxiety experienced by her in relation to such time between the children and the father. the mother’s parenting capacity for the children should not be adversely affected by the children spending time with the father as discussed by the court above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration. the child y can, if necessary, also consult with her psychologist in this context. (i) the father will have time to reflect upon these reasons, including the court’s findings relating to family violence. (j) again, should the court make the father’s proposed final parenting orders, which provide, inter alia, for the children ultimately spending five nights each fortnight with the father during school term times, the court has a significant concern that the parties will be unable to adequately co-parent the children without conflict.   the father will have time to reflect upon these reasons, including the court’s findings relating to family violence. (j) again, should the court make the father’s proposed final parenting orders, which provide, inter alia, for the children ultimately spending five nights each fortnight with the father during school term times, the court has a significant concern that the parties will be unable to adequately co-parent the children without conflict.   again, should the court make the father’s proposed final parenting orders, which provide, inter alia, for the children ultimately spending five nights each fortnight with the father during school term times, the court has a significant concern that the parties will be unable to adequately co-parent the children without conflict.
limiting the children’s ultimate overnight time with the father, during school term times, to four nights each fortnight (after school friday to before school monday each fortnight and one night in the off week) will lessen the extent to which the parties will need to co-parent the children (the court observes that there is significant distrust between the parties and their level of coparenting communication is poor) and thereby lessen the risk of conflict between them to which the children might be exposed (thus minimising any adverse psychological reaction in the children). such limitation of time will also contribute to assisting the mother to manage any anxiety she may experience in relation to the children spending time with the father including overnight time. limiting conflict between the parties is particularly important for the children (in particular y) because they have been significantly adversely emotionally affected in relation to being exposed to the parties’ conflict to date, in particular conflict post separation, and y has adopted a protective role towards the mother in particular in relation to this conflict.   changeovers usually occurring at school (where the parties need not come into contact with each other) should contribute to minimisation of conflict and lessening of any anxiety in the mother, and such changeovers should contribute to minimising emotional dysregulation in the children (in particular y) by reason of them not anticipating conflict between the parties and/or not being exposed to such conflict at changeovers. on balance, in the past, changeovers at school have worked reasonably well and without conflict. (l) the mother and father should be restrained from: (i) denigrating the other or a member of the mother’s extended family in the presence of or hearing of the children, (ii) using physical discipline towards the children, or (iii) discussing these proceedings in the hearing or presence of the children. (m) the court refers to the observed presentation of the children by the single expert at his assessment of the children, including his view that despite the differences of opinion between the siblings, each of the children presented as having a secure and supportive relationship with each other. the court would assess that following the conclusion of these proceedings there is a significant prospect that the father will appropriately manage any conflict that may occur between the children including by not raising his voice with them, inter alia, the father has probably gained insight into this issue through these proceedings, he has obtained positive mental health treatment, he has participated in a parenting program over a period of time, the children should experience less emotional dysregulation through being significantly less exposed to conflict between the parties, and the resolution of these proceedings will likely remove uncertainty and related stress in the father.   the mother and father should be restrained from: (i) denigrating the other or a member of the mother’s extended family in the presence of or hearing of the children, (ii) using physical discipline towards the children, or (iii) discussing these proceedings in the hearing or presence of the children. (m) the court refers to the observed presentation of the children by the single expert at his assessment of the children, including his view that despite the differences of opinion between the siblings, each of the children presented as having a secure and supportive relationship with each other. the court would assess that following the conclusion of these proceedings there is a significant prospect that the father will appropriately manage any conflict that may occur between the children including by not raising his voice with them, inter alia, the father has probably gained insight into this issue through these proceedings, he has obtained positive mental health treatment, he has participated in a parenting program over a period of time, the children should experience less emotional dysregulation through being significantly less exposed to conflict between the parties, and the resolution of these proceedings will likely remove uncertainty and related stress in the father.   denigrating the other or a member of the mother’s extended family in the presence of or hearing of the children, (ii) using physical discipline towards the children, or (iii) discussing these proceedings in the hearing or presence of the children. (m) the court refers to the observed presentation of the children by the single expert at his assessment of the children, including his view that despite the differences of opinion between the siblings, each of the children presented as having a secure and supportive relationship with each other. the court would assess that following the conclusion of these proceedings there is a significant prospect that the father will appropriately manage any conflict that may occur between the children including by not raising his voice with them, inter alia, the father has probably gained insight into this issue through these proceedings, he has obtained positive mental health treatment, he has participated in a parenting program over a period of time, the children should experience less emotional dysregulation through being significantly less exposed to conflict between the parties, and the resolution of these proceedings will likely remove uncertainty and related stress in the father.  ) using physical discipline towards the children, or (iii) discussing these proceedings in the hearing or presence of the children. (m) the court refers to the observed presentation of the children by the single expert at his assessment of the children, including his view that despite the differences of opinion between the siblings, each of the children presented as having a secure and supportive relationship with each other. the court would assess that following the conclusion of these proceedings there is a significant prospect that the father will appropriately manage any conflict that may occur between the children including by not raising his voice with them, inter alia, the father has probably gained insight into this issue through these proceedings, he has obtained positive mental health treatment, he has participated in a parenting program over a period of time, the children should experience less emotional dysregulation through being significantly less exposed to conflict between the parties, and the resolution of these proceedings will likely remove uncertainty and related stress in the father.  i) discussing these proceedings in the hearing or presence of the children. (m) the court refers to the observed presentation of the children by the single expert at his assessment of the children, including his view that despite the differences of opinion between the siblings, each of the children presented as having a secure and supportive relationship with each other. the court would assess that following the conclusion of these proceedings there is a significant prospect that the father will appropriately manage any conflict that may occur between the children including by not raising his voice with them, inter alia, the father has probably gained insight into this issue through these proceedings, he has obtained positive mental health treatment, he has participated in a parenting program over a period of time, the children should experience less emotional dysregulation through being significantly less exposed to conflict between the parties, and the resolution of these proceedings will likely remove uncertainty and related stress in the father.   the court refers to the observed presentation of the children by the single expert at his assessment of the children, including his view that despite the differences of opinion between the siblings, each of the children presented as having a secure and supportive relationship with each other. the court would assess that following the conclusion of these proceedings there is a significant prospect that the father will appropriately manage any conflict that may occur between the children including by not raising his voice with them, inter alia, the father has probably gained insight into this issue through these proceedings, he has obtained positive mental health treatment, he has participated in a parenting program over a period of time, the children should experience less emotional dysregulation through being significantly less exposed to conflict between the parties, and the resolution of these proceedings will likely remove uncertainty and related stress in the father.
section 60cc(3) additional considerations a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family. k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter. l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.  m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility
summary
property
proposals
evidence
balance sheet
ownership
description
applicant’s value
respondent’s value
assets
1
j
b bank term deposit
$838,461
2
w
gg bank account #...66 at nov 2023
$10,503
3
gg bank account #...11 at nov 2023
$452
4
h
c company
$nil
5
westpac business account #...70 as at 30 october 2023
$14,245
6
hh bank account #...82 at september 2023 (closed)
$ nil
7
jj bank savings account #...98 at 30 october 2023
$5,025
8
motor vehicle 1
$18,700
11
work tools
$6,000
12
household contents retained by husband
$10,000
total
$903,386
addbacks
13
partial property settlement
$125,000
14
15
partial property settlement (motor vehicle 2, orders of 22 december 2021)
$12,000
16
cash money that h had at separation that was not deposited into h account
$32,000
nil
$294,000
$262,000
liabilities
17
jj company chattel mortgage #...84 (motor vehicle 1)
$10,916
18
gg bank credit card #...06
$637
$11,553
superannuation
member
name of fund
type of interest
applicant’s value
respondent’s value
20
super fund 1
accumulation
$174,244
21
super fund 2
$429,339
$603,583
net total assets
$1,789,416
$1,757,416  mbering as per original)
value
bb bank term deposit
hh bank transaction account #...22 at september 2023 (closed)
9
10
kk company chattel mortgage #...84 (motor vehicle 1)
gg bank bank credit card #...06
section 79(2) of the act
contributions
section 75(2) of the act
justice and equity  his bank accounts: $19,270, (b) his vehicle: $18,700, (c) his work tools: $6,000, (d) his household contents: $10,000, (e) his superannuation: $429,339, totalling $483,309, less his liabilities of $10,916, leaving $472,393, and the wife retain: (a) her bank accounts: $10,955, (b) her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).   his vehicle: $18,700, (c) his work tools: $6,000, (d) his household contents: $10,000, (e) his superannuation: $429,339, totalling $483,309, less his liabilities of $10,916, leaving $472,393, and the wife retain: (a) her bank accounts: $10,955, (b) her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).   his work tools: $6,000, (d) his household contents: $10,000, (e) his superannuation: $429,339, totalling $483,309, less his liabilities of $10,916, leaving $472,393, and the wife retain: (a) her bank accounts: $10,955, (b) her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).   his household contents: $10,000, (e) his superannuation: $429,339, totalling $483,309, less his liabilities of $10,916, leaving $472,393, and the wife retain: (a) her bank accounts: $10,955, (b) her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).   his superannuation: $429,339, totalling $483,309, less his liabilities of $10,916, leaving $472,393, and the wife retain: (a) her bank accounts: $10,955, (b) her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).
totalling $483,309, less his liabilities of $10,916, leaving $472,393, and the wife retain: (a) her bank accounts: $10,955, (b) her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).
less his liabilities of $10,916, leaving $472,393, and the wife retain: (a) her bank accounts: $10,955, (b) her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).
leaving $472,393, and the wife retain: (a) her bank accounts: $10,955, (b) her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).
and the wife retain: (a) her bank accounts: $10,955, (b) her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).   her bank accounts: $10,955, (b) her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).   her superannuation: $174,244, totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).
totalling $185,199, less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).
less her liabilities of $637, leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).
leaving $184,562, then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).
then from the bb bank term deposit of $838,461 the wife should receive $645,016 ($829,578 less $184,562), and the husband should receive $193,444 ($665,837 less $472,393).
deputy associate: dated: 23 november 2023
dated: 23 november 2023