last updated: 9 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
brenna & kolby [2023] fedcfamc2f 1523
orders
the court orders that:  2008, and (b) may 2016.   may 2016.
reasons for judgmentjudge cope
part 1: introduction
issues for determination  what was the date of separation, (b) was the initiating application filed within the two year time limit prescribed by s 44(5) of the act, and (c) in the event that it is determined that the initiating application was filed outside of the two year time limit, should leave to proceed out of time pursuant to s 44(6) of the act be granted to the applicant.   was the initiating application filed within the two year time limit prescribed by s 44(5) of the act, and (c) in the event that it is determined that the initiating application was filed outside of the two year time limit, should leave to proceed out of time pursuant to s 44(6) of the act be granted to the applicant.   in the event that it is determined that the initiating application was filed outside of the two year time limit, should leave to proceed out of time pursuant to s 44(6) of the act be granted to the applicant.
orders sought
part 2: the evidence
material read  reply to response filed 24 may 2022, (b) affidavit of the applicant filed by leave on 6 april 2023, (c) affidavit of applicant sworn on 14 july 2022.   affidavit of the applicant filed by leave on 6 april 2023, (c) affidavit of applicant sworn on 14 july 2022.   affidavit of applicant sworn on 14 july 2022.   amended response to initiating application filed 23 march 2022, (b) affidavit of the respondent filed by leave on 6 april 2023, (c) affidavit of the respondent filed on 5 july 2022, (d) affidavit of the respondent filed on 4 march 2022.   affidavit of the respondent filed by leave on 6 april 2023, (c) affidavit of the respondent filed on 5 july 2022, (d) affidavit of the respondent filed on 4 march 2022.   affidavit of the respondent filed on 5 july 2022, (d) affidavit of the respondent filed on 4 march 2022.   affidavit of the respondent filed on 4 march 2022.
the applicant de facto husband
the respondent de facto wife
findings
part 3: the law
meaning of de facto relationship 4aa(1) a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if:   the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis. paragraph (c) has effect subject to subsection (5).   having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.
working out if persons have a relationship as a couple 4aa(2) those circumstances may include any or all of the following:   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them,   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship,   no particular finding in relation to any circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have a de facto relationship. (4) a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case.   a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case.
the high court held: the act contains no exhaustive definition of the term ‘breakdown’, save that s 4 of the act relevantly provides that in relation to a de facto relationship, it ‘does not include a breakdown of the relationship by reason of death’ ...
... ...the primary judge found that the respondent’s conduct during the demise of the appellant’s mental capacity was inconsistent with a ‘fundamental premise’ of their relationship, namely the strict separation of their assets. that inconsistent conduct, all of which occurred while the appellant was ‘labouring under an incapacity’, comprised: the entry into a new enduring power of attorney that ‘favoured [the respondent’s] rights over hers’, the respondent instructing solicitors to prepare an updated will ‘on terms vastly more favourable to him’, the respondent’s ‘unwillingness to cooperate’ with the appellant’s children in the administration of her affairs, the respondent’s ‘persistent’ refusal to permit the trustee to sell the home ... while ‘neglecting to pay any of the [appellant’s] care costs’, thus depleting her estate, the respondent’s proposal that the appellant’s ‘super be used in the first instance to meet her costs’, and then his subsequent proposal that ‘he pay the ... fees in the first instance and be reimbursed by the [appellant’s] estate’, and the respondent’s ‘ongoing and deliberate frustration’ of the trustee’s lawful administration of the appellant’s financial affairs. the primary judge found that this conduct was ‘unequivocally indicative of and consistent only with ... the cessation of the de facto relationship as it previously existed’. ... ... ...the full court reviewed the conduct identified by the primary judge. none of the conduct was found to be fundamentally inconsistent with a continuing de facto relationship ...
the high court continued: ... cohabitation of a residence or residences is not a necessary feature of ‘living together’. that phrase must be construed to take account of the many various ways in which two people may share their lives together in the modern world. two people, for any number of reasons, may not reside in the same residence, but nonetheless be in a de facto relationship in the sense required by s 4aa. the language of s 4aa of the act and its reference to ‘living together’ requires no different approach to determining whether a relationship exists of the kind defined. ‘living together’ ... should be construed as meaning sharing life as a couple. section 4aa does not prescribe any way by which a couple may share life together. its language is sufficiently broad to accommodate the great variety of ways a de facto relationship may exist....
proceedings in relation to de facto relationships   subject to subsection (6), a party to a de facto relationship may apply for an order under section 90se, 90sg or 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, only if: (a) the application is made within the period (the standard application period) of:   the application is made within the period (the standard application period) of:  2 years after the end of the de facto relationship, or (ii) 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or  ) 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or   both parties to the de facto relationship consent to the application. ...   the court may grant the party leave to apply after the end of the standard application period if the court is satisfied that: (a) hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.  phasis added)  n an application for leave under s 44(3), two broad questions may arise for determination. the first of these is whether the court is satisfied that hardship would be caused to the applicant or a child of the marriage if leave were not granted. if the court is not so satisfied, that is the end of the matter. if the court is so satisfied, the second question arises. that is whether in the exercise of its discretion the court should grant or refuse leave to institute proceedings. (emphasis added)
part 4: consideration & determination
what is the date of separation
the duration of the relationship
applicant’s evidence
respondent’s evidence
the nature and extent of their common residence
whether a sexual relationship exists
the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them
the ownership, use and acquisition of their property
the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life
whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship,
the care and support of children
the reputation and public aspects of the relationship  in late 2019 the parties booked accommodation at j resort, region k for the family. that was cancelled and instead the parties travelled to sydney to spend time with applicant’s family. family photos were produced. the respondent concedes this trip but does not concede that the parties shared a room. i prefer her evidence about that as she has made concessions at times and her evidence is overall more consistent and reliable than that of the applicant. (b) in early 2020 the family trip to j resort, region k occurred and photos are produced. the respondent’s evidence is that she was fearful of the applicant and reluctant to say no to him. (c) in about 2019 the applicant alleges that he purchased an engagement ring for the respondent. the respondent conceded that the applicant gave her a ring which was made from her own family jewellery and that it was subsequently plated in yellow gold. i accept her evidence about that. (d) in early 2020 the applicant paved concrete pathway at b street, town c. a photo was produced. that was conceded. (e) in or about late 2020, the parties travelled together with the children to l venue. although challenged, the applicant was adamant that the parties were in a relationship at that time. (f) in late 2020 the applicant gives evidence that he purchased dogs for the family and ordered clothing for the family. his evidence under cross examination was that he was significantly involved and paid $3,000 to purchase a second puppy. this evidence was different from his affidavit material where he stated simply that they purchased two dogs together. the applicant produced no documents about the cash and his evidence in the witness box was that he used money from the sale of a car. the respondent produces documents reflecting that she was the purchaser of the dogs and gives evidence that she paid. i prefer her evidence due to the applicant’s consistency. (g) in late 2020 the parties attended dinner together.   in early 2020 the family trip to j resort, region k occurred and photos are produced. the respondent’s evidence is that she was fearful of the applicant and reluctant to say no to him. (c) in about 2019 the applicant alleges that he purchased an engagement ring for the respondent. the respondent conceded that the applicant gave her a ring which was made from her own family jewellery and that it was subsequently plated in yellow gold. i accept her evidence about that. (d) in early 2020 the applicant paved concrete pathway at b street, town c. a photo was produced. that was conceded. (e) in or about late 2020, the parties travelled together with the children to l venue. although challenged, the applicant was adamant that the parties were in a relationship at that time. (f) in late 2020 the applicant gives evidence that he purchased dogs for the family and ordered clothing for the family. his evidence under cross examination was that he was significantly involved and paid $3,000 to purchase a second puppy. this evidence was different from his affidavit material where he stated simply that they purchased two dogs together. the applicant produced no documents about the cash and his evidence in the witness box was that he used money from the sale of a car. the respondent produces documents reflecting that she was the purchaser of the dogs and gives evidence that she paid. i prefer her evidence due to the applicant’s consistency. (g) in late 2020 the parties attended dinner together.   in about 2019 the applicant alleges that he purchased an engagement ring for the respondent. the respondent conceded that the applicant gave her a ring which was made from her own family jewellery and that it was subsequently plated in yellow gold. i accept her evidence about that. (d) in early 2020 the applicant paved concrete pathway at b street, town c. a photo was produced. that was conceded. (e) in or about late 2020, the parties travelled together with the children to l venue. although challenged, the applicant was adamant that the parties were in a relationship at that time. (f) in late 2020 the applicant gives evidence that he purchased dogs for the family and ordered clothing for the family. his evidence under cross examination was that he was significantly involved and paid $3,000 to purchase a second puppy. this evidence was different from his affidavit material where he stated simply that they purchased two dogs together. the applicant produced no documents about the cash and his evidence in the witness box was that he used money from the sale of a car. the respondent produces documents reflecting that she was the purchaser of the dogs and gives evidence that she paid. i prefer her evidence due to the applicant’s consistency. (g) in late 2020 the parties attended dinner together.   in early 2020 the applicant paved concrete pathway at b street, town c. a photo was produced. that was conceded. (e) in or about late 2020, the parties travelled together with the children to l venue. although challenged, the applicant was adamant that the parties were in a relationship at that time. (f) in late 2020 the applicant gives evidence that he purchased dogs for the family and ordered clothing for the family. his evidence under cross examination was that he was significantly involved and paid $3,000 to purchase a second puppy. this evidence was different from his affidavit material where he stated simply that they purchased two dogs together. the applicant produced no documents about the cash and his evidence in the witness box was that he used money from the sale of a car. the respondent produces documents reflecting that she was the purchaser of the dogs and gives evidence that she paid. i prefer her evidence due to the applicant’s consistency. (g) in late 2020 the parties attended dinner together.   in or about late 2020, the parties travelled together with the children to l venue. although challenged, the applicant was adamant that the parties were in a relationship at that time. (f) in late 2020 the applicant gives evidence that he purchased dogs for the family and ordered clothing for the family. his evidence under cross examination was that he was significantly involved and paid $3,000 to purchase a second puppy. this evidence was different from his affidavit material where he stated simply that they purchased two dogs together. the applicant produced no documents about the cash and his evidence in the witness box was that he used money from the sale of a car. the respondent produces documents reflecting that she was the purchaser of the dogs and gives evidence that she paid. i prefer her evidence due to the applicant’s consistency. (g) in late 2020 the parties attended dinner together.   in late 2020 the applicant gives evidence that he purchased dogs for the family and ordered clothing for the family. his evidence under cross examination was that he was significantly involved and paid $3,000 to purchase a second puppy. this evidence was different from his affidavit material where he stated simply that they purchased two dogs together. the applicant produced no documents about the cash and his evidence in the witness box was that he used money from the sale of a car. the respondent produces documents reflecting that she was the purchaser of the dogs and gives evidence that she paid. i prefer her evidence due to the applicant’s consistency. (g) in late 2020 the parties attended dinner together.   in late 2020 the parties attended dinner together.
finding as to date of separation  the applicant’s inconsistent and unreliable evidence, (b) the lack of any supporting evidence from family or friends as to money alleged to have been provided for the deposit on the town c property, (c) the lack of any supporting evidence as to whether a de facto relationship existed after 2016, and (d) the lack of evidence as to financial contributions to the acquisition of the town c property or indeed any payments made towards that property.   the lack of any supporting evidence from family or friends as to money alleged to have been provided for the deposit on the town c property, (c) the lack of any supporting evidence as to whether a de facto relationship existed after 2016, and (d) the lack of evidence as to financial contributions to the acquisition of the town c property or indeed any payments made towards that property.   the lack of any supporting evidence as to whether a de facto relationship existed after 2016, and (d) the lack of evidence as to financial contributions to the acquisition of the town c property or indeed any payments made towards that property.   the lack of evidence as to financial contributions to the acquisition of the town c property or indeed any payments made towards that property.
was the initiating application filed within the two-year time limit prescribed by s44(5) of the act
in the event that it is determined that the initiating application was filed outside of the two year time limit, should leave to proceed out of time pursuant to s44(6) of the act be granted to the applicant.
in our view the meaning of “hardship” in subsec. 44(4) is akin to such concepts as hardness, severity, privation, that which is hard to bear or a substantial detriment. cf. the meanings assigned to “hardship” in the shorter oxford dictionary and in webster’s new international dictionary...
in ordinary parlance, hardship means something more burdensome than “any appreciable detriment”. we consider that in subsec. 44(4) the word should have its usual, though not necessarily its most stringent, connotations. it is impossible to lay down in advance what particular facts may or may not amount to hardship in the relevant sense. as a general proposition it might be said that, the inability of an applicant to pursue a claim which in the circumstances of the applicant or a child of the marriage is trifling, generally will not cause hardship. similarly, where the costs which the applicant will have to bear himself or herself are about as much or more than what the applicant is likely to be awarded on a property claim, ordinarily hardship would not result if leave to institute proceedings were not granted. but otherwise we find no warrant in either subsec. 44(3) or 44(4) for saying that that the right or entitlement lost must be a substantial one.   per original)
...now to some extent there may be an exercise of semantics involved here. the case of mcdonald referred to a reasonable prima facie case as the test. other cases such as mckenzie and whitford suggest that the applicant needs to show that she would probably succeed. in the case of perkins and perkins [1979] famca 4, (1979) flc 90-600, lindenmayer j. suggested that the test was that there was a reasonable probability of the claim being successful... in my opinion, sec. 44(3) and (4) are not intended to require a detailed hearing on the merits to determine whether the applicant’s claim will succeed. the exercise is to determine whether there is a reasonable claim to be heard. that is the essence of the inquiry into whether hardship will be suffered by denying the applicant the right to litigate that claim.
fundamental to that [a finding of hardship] is a determination of the quality or character of the potential claim. in relation to that different cases have used somewhat different phrases to describe it so that it has become something of a matter of semantics to describe in different ways what is really the same basic concept...
part 5: conclusion
associate: dated: 29 november 2023
dated: 29 november 2023
[1] reply to response filed 24 may 2022 (as to date of separation).[2] at 78,144 – 78,145. [3] at 77,266 – 77,267.[4] at 78,627.