last updated: 9 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rocha & kerman [2023] fedcfamc2f 1524
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  the child’s education (both current and future), and (b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s names/name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s names/name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s health, and (d) the child’s names/name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s names/name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the mother will be responsible for the day-to-day care, welfare and development of the child whilst the child is living with her, (b) the father will be responsible for the day-to-day care, welfare and development of the child whilst the child is living with him.   the father will be responsible for the day-to-day care, welfare and development of the child whilst the child is living with him.
living arrangements   up to 2 nights from monday at the conclusion of daycare until wednesday at the commencement of daycare in week one, (b) up to 5 nights from friday in week one at the conclusion of daycare until wednesday in week two at the commencement of daycare, and (c) changeover will take place at daycare and if a non-daycare day, at the e playground in suburb f.   up to 5 nights from friday in week one at the conclusion of daycare until wednesday in week two at the commencement of daycare, and (c) changeover will take place at daycare and if a non-daycare day, at the e playground in suburb f.   changeover will take place at daycare and if a non-daycare day, at the e playground in suburb f.
christmas holidays 2023  from the conclusion of daycare on 20 december 2023 until 2:00pm christmas day with the mother, (b) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january 2024 with the father, (c) from 4:00pm on 1 january 2024 the child shall be with the mother until 4:00pm on 8 january 2024, (d) from 4:00pm on 8 january 2024 the child shall be with the father until 4:00pm on 15 january 2024, and (e) from 4:00pm on 15 january 2024 the child shall be with the mother until the commencement of school on 22 january 2024.   from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january 2024 with the father, (c) from 4:00pm on 1 january 2024 the child shall be with the mother until 4:00pm on 8 january 2024, (d) from 4:00pm on 8 january 2024 the child shall be with the father until 4:00pm on 15 january 2024, and (e) from 4:00pm on 15 january 2024 the child shall be with the mother until the commencement of school on 22 january 2024.   from 4:00pm on 1 january 2024 the child shall be with the mother until 4:00pm on 8 january 2024, (d) from 4:00pm on 8 january 2024 the child shall be with the father until 4:00pm on 15 january 2024, and (e) from 4:00pm on 15 january 2024 the child shall be with the mother until the commencement of school on 22 january 2024.   from 4:00pm on 8 january 2024 the child shall be with the father until 4:00pm on 15 january 2024, and (e) from 4:00pm on 15 january 2024 the child shall be with the mother until the commencement of school on 22 january 2024.   from 4:00pm on 15 january 2024 the child shall be with the mother until the commencement of school on 22 january 2024.
from the commencement of the 2024 school year  on two occasions each month for a block of up to seven days on each occasion, with the time to occur in brisbane on the following terms and conditions: (i) the father will provide the mother with at least 14 days written notice of the intended dates and an address for the accommodation or residence where he will be staying with the child. (ii) changeover will take place at the father’s accommodation or the child’s school. (iii) the father will ensure that the child continues to attend school during this time. (iv) there must be a minimum seven-day period in which the child lives with the mother after each block in the father’s care, so that the time in this order is not arranged consecutively. (b) in addition to order 8(a), the father is at liberty to attend school events and special events such as the child’s first day of school. the mother will inform the father of such events and facilitate the father spending time with the child in the event that the father travels to brisbane to attend such events.   the father will provide the mother with at least 14 days written notice of the intended dates and an address for the accommodation or residence where he will be staying with the child. (ii) changeover will take place at the father’s accommodation or the child’s school. (iii) the father will ensure that the child continues to attend school during this time. (iv) there must be a minimum seven-day period in which the child lives with the mother after each block in the father’s care, so that the time in this order is not arranged consecutively.  ) changeover will take place at the father’s accommodation or the child’s school. (iii) the father will ensure that the child continues to attend school during this time. (iv) there must be a minimum seven-day period in which the child lives with the mother after each block in the father’s care, so that the time in this order is not arranged consecutively.  i) the father will ensure that the child continues to attend school during this time. (iv) there must be a minimum seven-day period in which the child lives with the mother after each block in the father’s care, so that the time in this order is not arranged consecutively.  ) there must be a minimum seven-day period in which the child lives with the mother after each block in the father’s care, so that the time in this order is not arranged consecutively.   in addition to order 8(a), the father is at liberty to attend school events and special events such as the child’s first day of school. the mother will inform the father of such events and facilitate the father spending time with the child in the event that the father travels to brisbane to attend such events.   for one half, by number of nights, of the march/april and june/july holidays (queensland) each year, being the first half in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years, and (b) the whole of the september/october school holidays each year from the first saturday immediately after the last day of term.   the whole of the september/october school holidays each year from the first saturday immediately after the last day of term.   from 12:00pm (noon) on the first saturday of the school holidays until no later than 12:00pm (noon) on 31 december in odd numbered years, and (b) from 12:00pm (noon) on 31 december until no later than 12:00pm (noon) on the last saturday of the school holidays in even numbered years.   from 12:00pm (noon) on 31 december until no later than 12:00pm (noon) on the last saturday of the school holidays in even numbered years.
changeover
special occasions  on the father’s birthday, if the child is not living with the father on that day, the child will spend time with the father from the conclusion of daycare/school, or 1:00pm if the child does not attend daycare/school, until 7:00pm. (b) on the mother’s birthday, if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend time with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school, or 1:00pm if the child does not attend daycare/school, until 7:00pm. (c) on the birthday of the child, the child shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not living on that day from the conclusion of daycare/school, or 1:00pm if the child does not attend daycare/school, until the commencement of school the following day. (d) on the birthday of the child’s brother g, if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend the day with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school, or 1:00pm if the child does not attend daycare/school, until 7:00pm. (e) on father’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the father on that day, the child will spend father’s day weekend with the father from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (f) on mother’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend mother’s day weekend with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (g) from and including 2024, the child will spend christmas with each parent as agreed in writing, or failing agreement as follows: (i) from 4:00pm on 20 december until 2:00pm on christmas day with the mother in even numbered years and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.   on the mother’s birthday, if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend time with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school, or 1:00pm if the child does not attend daycare/school, until 7:00pm. (c) on the birthday of the child, the child shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not living on that day from the conclusion of daycare/school, or 1:00pm if the child does not attend daycare/school, until the commencement of school the following day. (d) on the birthday of the child’s brother g, if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend the day with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school, or 1:00pm if the child does not attend daycare/school, until 7:00pm. (e) on father’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the father on that day, the child will spend father’s day weekend with the father from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (f) on mother’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend mother’s day weekend with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (g) from and including 2024, the child will spend christmas with each parent as agreed in writing, or failing agreement as follows: (i) from 4:00pm on 20 december until 2:00pm on christmas day with the mother in even numbered years and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.   on the birthday of the child, the child shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not living on that day from the conclusion of daycare/school, or 1:00pm if the child does not attend daycare/school, until the commencement of school the following day. (d) on the birthday of the child’s brother g, if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend the day with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school, or 1:00pm if the child does not attend daycare/school, until 7:00pm. (e) on father’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the father on that day, the child will spend father’s day weekend with the father from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (f) on mother’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend mother’s day weekend with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (g) from and including 2024, the child will spend christmas with each parent as agreed in writing, or failing agreement as follows: (i) from 4:00pm on 20 december until 2:00pm on christmas day with the mother in even numbered years and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.   on the birthday of the child’s brother g, if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend the day with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school, or 1:00pm if the child does not attend daycare/school, until 7:00pm. (e) on father’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the father on that day, the child will spend father’s day weekend with the father from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (f) on mother’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend mother’s day weekend with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (g) from and including 2024, the child will spend christmas with each parent as agreed in writing, or failing agreement as follows: (i) from 4:00pm on 20 december until 2:00pm on christmas day with the mother in even numbered years and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.   on father’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the father on that day, the child will spend father’s day weekend with the father from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (f) on mother’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend mother’s day weekend with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (g) from and including 2024, the child will spend christmas with each parent as agreed in writing, or failing agreement as follows: (i) from 4:00pm on 20 december until 2:00pm on christmas day with the mother in even numbered years and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.   on mother’s day (australia), if the child is not living with the mother on that day, the child will spend mother’s day weekend with the mother from the conclusion of daycare/school on friday to the commencement of daycare/school on monday morning. (g) from and including 2024, the child will spend christmas with each parent as agreed in writing, or failing agreement as follows: (i) from 4:00pm on 20 december until 2:00pm on christmas day with the mother in even numbered years and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.   from and including 2024, the child will spend christmas with each parent as agreed in writing, or failing agreement as follows: (i) from 4:00pm on 20 december until 2:00pm on christmas day with the mother in even numbered years and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.   from 4:00pm on 20 december until 2:00pm on christmas day with the mother in even numbered years and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.  ) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.
airfares – school holidays  the mother will book and pay for the child’s airfares from city b to brisbane, and (b) the father will book and pay for the child’s airfares from brisbane to city b.   the father will book and pay for the child’s airfares from brisbane to city b.
airfares and accommodation – school terms  the father will book and pay for his return airfares from city b to brisbane, and (b) the father will book and pay his accommodation in brisbane, (c) noting the provisions of order 8(a)(i), no less than seven (7) days prior to the travel on each occasion the mother will contribute the sum of $600 to be paid into a bank account nominated by the father, (d) the cost of travel and accommodation and any other cost of spending time during the school term are otherwise the father’s sole responsibility.   the father will book and pay his accommodation in brisbane, (c) noting the provisions of order 8(a)(i), no less than seven (7) days prior to the travel on each occasion the mother will contribute the sum of $600 to be paid into a bank account nominated by the father, (d) the cost of travel and accommodation and any other cost of spending time during the school term are otherwise the father’s sole responsibility.   noting the provisions of order 8(a)(i), no less than seven (7) days prior to the travel on each occasion the mother will contribute the sum of $600 to be paid into a bank account nominated by the father, (d) the cost of travel and accommodation and any other cost of spending time during the school term are otherwise the father’s sole responsibility.   the cost of travel and accommodation and any other cost of spending time during the school term are otherwise the father’s sole responsibility.
communication
video or telephone communication  ensure the child is available to receive the call, (b) ensure that the parent’s mobile telephone or relevant device is operational at that time, (c) provide the mobile number or relative device for the child to operate, (d) ensure the child has privacy during the conversation, (e) ensure that such conversations are not interrupted, (f) arrange for the child to telephone the other parent on the following morning if, for any unforeseen circumstances, the child misses the telephone call from that parent.   ensure that the parent’s mobile telephone or relevant device is operational at that time, (c) provide the mobile number or relative device for the child to operate, (d) ensure the child has privacy during the conversation, (e) ensure that such conversations are not interrupted, (f) arrange for the child to telephone the other parent on the following morning if, for any unforeseen circumstances, the child misses the telephone call from that parent.   provide the mobile number or relative device for the child to operate, (d) ensure the child has privacy during the conversation, (e) ensure that such conversations are not interrupted, (f) arrange for the child to telephone the other parent on the following morning if, for any unforeseen circumstances, the child misses the telephone call from that parent.   ensure the child has privacy during the conversation, (e) ensure that such conversations are not interrupted, (f) arrange for the child to telephone the other parent on the following morning if, for any unforeseen circumstances, the child misses the telephone call from that parent.   ensure that such conversations are not interrupted, (f) arrange for the child to telephone the other parent on the following morning if, for any unforeseen circumstances, the child misses the telephone call from that parent.   arrange for the child to telephone the other parent on the following morning if, for any unforeseen circumstances, the child misses the telephone call from that parent.
travel
international travel  the international travel is to take place during the time that the child is in the travelling parent’s care pursuant to these orders, or (b) on one occasion per calendar year, the international travel may take place and extend beyond the travelling parent’s regular care schedule, for travel of up to four weeks total duration, but which includes no more than two weeks of the school term.   on one occasion per calendar year, the international travel may take place and extend beyond the travelling parent’s regular care schedule, for travel of up to four weeks total duration, but which includes no more than two weeks of the school term.   the travelling parent will provide to the non-travelling parent at least four weeks written notice of the intention to travel including dates of travel. (b) forthwith upon receipt of any such notice, the non-travelling parent shall provide to the travelling parent the child’s passports. (c) two weeks prior to departure the travelling parent is to provide to the non- travelling parent: (i) copies of return tickets, (ii) copies of itinerary for the child, and (iii) address and phone contact for the child during the period they are away.   forthwith upon receipt of any such notice, the non-travelling parent shall provide to the travelling parent the child’s passports. (c) two weeks prior to departure the travelling parent is to provide to the non- travelling parent: (i) copies of return tickets, (ii) copies of itinerary for the child, and (iii) address and phone contact for the child during the period they are away.   two weeks prior to departure the travelling parent is to provide to the non- travelling parent: (i) copies of return tickets, (ii) copies of itinerary for the child, and (iii) address and phone contact for the child during the period they are away.   copies of return tickets, (ii) copies of itinerary for the child, and (iii) address and phone contact for the child during the period they are away.  ) copies of itinerary for the child, and (iii) address and phone contact for the child during the period they are away.  i) address and phone contact for the child during the period they are away.
passport
non-denigration clause   respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child about the personal life of the other parent, (b) speak respectfully of the other parent, their partner and other family members, (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent, their partner or other family members in the presence or hearing of the child, (d) use their best endeavours to prevent any other person denigrating or insulting the other parent, their partner or other family members in the presence or hearing of the child.   speak respectfully of the other parent, their partner and other family members, (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent, their partner or other family members in the presence or hearing of the child, (d) use their best endeavours to prevent any other person denigrating or insulting the other parent, their partner or other family members in the presence or hearing of the child.   not denigrate or insult the other parent, their partner or other family members in the presence or hearing of the child, (d) use their best endeavours to prevent any other person denigrating or insulting the other parent, their partner or other family members in the presence or hearing of the child.   use their best endeavours to prevent any other person denigrating or insulting the other parent, their partner or other family members in the presence or hearing of the child.
procedural
notation
reasons for judgmentjudge cope
current living arrangements
competing proposals
the father’s proposal
the mother’s proposal
family violence allegations
child abuse allegations
... often had to step in to intervene with [ms kerman]’s physical and verbal violent behaviour against the children, which often lasted for hours, as [ms kerman] is unable to calm herself down and come to reason. this included strangling, hitting and very abusive screaming...
issues for determination  whether there is an unacceptable risk of harm for x in either household, (b) whether it is in the child’s best interest to relocate to brisbane with the mother or stay in city b with the father, (c) what configuration of time is in x’s best interests in either event, (d) how the cost of travel for x to spend time with her parents should be met, (e) in the event that the mother is given leave to relocate with the child to brisbane, should only the parents accompany the child when she travels for contact?   whether it is in the child’s best interest to relocate to brisbane with the mother or stay in city b with the father, (c) what configuration of time is in x’s best interests in either event, (d) how the cost of travel for x to spend time with her parents should be met, (e) in the event that the mother is given leave to relocate with the child to brisbane, should only the parents accompany the child when she travels for contact?   what configuration of time is in x’s best interests in either event, (d) how the cost of travel for x to spend time with her parents should be met, (e) in the event that the mother is given leave to relocate with the child to brisbane, should only the parents accompany the child when she travels for contact?   how the cost of travel for x to spend time with her parents should be met, (e) in the event that the mother is given leave to relocate with the child to brisbane, should only the parents accompany the child when she travels for contact?   in the event that the mother is given leave to relocate with the child to brisbane, should only the parents accompany the child when she travels for contact?
material read  further amended initiating application filed by the applicant on 28 july 2022, (b) affidavit of mr rocha filed by the applicant on 7 august 2023, (c) financial statement filed by the applicant on 7 august 2023.   affidavit of mr rocha filed by the applicant on 7 august 2023, (c) financial statement filed by the applicant on 7 august 2023.   financial statement filed by the applicant on 7 august 2023.   amended response filed by the respondent on 7 august 2023, (b) financial statement filed by the respondent on 8 august 2023, (c) affidavit of ms kerman filed by the respondent on 7 august 2023, (d) affidavit of mr n filed by the respondent on 7 august 2023, (e) notice to admit facts and notice of disputing facts.   financial statement filed by the respondent on 8 august 2023, (c) affidavit of ms kerman filed by the respondent on 7 august 2023, (d) affidavit of mr n filed by the respondent on 7 august 2023, (e) notice to admit facts and notice of disputing facts.   affidavit of ms kerman filed by the respondent on 7 august 2023, (d) affidavit of mr n filed by the respondent on 7 august 2023, (e) notice to admit facts and notice of disputing facts.   affidavit of mr n filed by the respondent on 7 august 2023, (e) notice to admit facts and notice of disputing facts.   notice to admit facts and notice of disputing facts.   affidavit of dr r, family report writer, filed by the applicant on 21 march 2023, (b) the child impact report dated 11 july 2022.   the child impact report dated 11 july 2022.   m1 – annexure r-7 of the father’s affidavit filed on 7 august 2023 – parenting agreement between the father and mother dated 11 april 2022, (b) m2 – text messages between the mother and father dated 20 july 2022 to 26 july 2022, (c) m3 – text messages between the mother and father dated 26 december 2022, (d) m4 – email between the parents dated 7-14 may 2023 in relation to mother’s day, (e) m5 – email from the mother to the father in relation to making plans for child’s schooling.   m2 – text messages between the mother and father dated 20 july 2022 to 26 july 2022, (c) m3 – text messages between the mother and father dated 26 december 2022, (d) m4 – email between the parents dated 7-14 may 2023 in relation to mother’s day, (e) m5 – email from the mother to the father in relation to making plans for child’s schooling.   m3 – text messages between the mother and father dated 26 december 2022, (d) m4 – email between the parents dated 7-14 may 2023 in relation to mother’s day, (e) m5 – email from the mother to the father in relation to making plans for child’s schooling.   m4 – email between the parents dated 7-14 may 2023 in relation to mother’s day, (e) m5 – email from the mother to the father in relation to making plans for child’s schooling.   m5 – email from the mother to the father in relation to making plans for child’s schooling.
witnesses
the father
the mother
mr n – the mother’s fiancé
family report writer
findings
the law  godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102, (2007) 208 flr 287 at [36] (b) mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520, (2007) 37 fam lr 518 (c) mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, (2009) flc 93-405 (d) sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22, (2011) 44 fam lr 439   mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520, (2007) 37 fam lr 518 (c) mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, (2009) flc 93-405 (d) sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22, (2011) 44 fam lr 439   mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, (2009) flc 93-405 (d) sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22, (2011) 44 fam lr 439   sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22, (2011) 44 fam lr 439   b and b: family law reform act 1995 (1997) flc 92-755 at 84,194 (b) a v a: relocation approach [2000] famca 751, (2000) flc 93-035 (c) ams v aif, aif v ams (1999) flc 92-852 (d) u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) flc 93-112 (e) zahawi & rayne [2016] famcafc 90 at [48]   a v a: relocation approach [2000] famca 751, (2000) flc 93-035 (c) ams v aif, aif v ams (1999) flc 92-852 (d) u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) flc 93-112 (e) zahawi & rayne [2016] famcafc 90 at [48]   ams v aif, aif v ams (1999) flc 92-852 (d) u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) flc 93-112 (e) zahawi & rayne [2016] famcafc 90 at [48]   u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) flc 93-112 (e) zahawi & rayne [2016] famcafc 90 at [48]   zahawi & rayne [2016] famcafc 90 at [48]
... [w]hen dealing with a case concerning the future living arrangements for a child, and involving a significant change in the geographical place where the child is to live, the preferred approach according to established principle has been not to deal with that change, or relocation, as a separate or discrete issue, but rather as just one of the proposals for the child’s future living arrangements, at least in so far as that approach is possible (see u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238, (2002) flc 93-112 and bolitho v cohen [2005] famca 458, (2005) flc 93-224).
application of the law to the circumstances of the case
s 60cc(2) the primary considerations   “[ms kerman] is volatile and can be violent”,[4] (b) the child has reported to him that she doesn't want to go back to the mother as “momma is angry”,[5] (c) the mother has a “history of violence and having an aggressive demeanour and an explosive temper,”[6] (d) he “often had to step in to intervene with [ms kerman]’s physical and verbal violent behaviour against the children, which often lasted for hours, as [ms kerman] is unable to calm herself down and come to reason. this included strangling, hitting and very abusive screaming”,[7] (e) the child had reported that the mother smacks her.[8]   the child has reported to him that she doesn't want to go back to the mother as “momma is angry”,[5] (c) the mother has a “history of violence and having an aggressive demeanour and an explosive temper,”[6] (d) he “often had to step in to intervene with [ms kerman]’s physical and verbal violent behaviour against the children, which often lasted for hours, as [ms kerman] is unable to calm herself down and come to reason. this included strangling, hitting and very abusive screaming”,[7] (e) the child had reported that the mother smacks her.[8]   the mother has a “history of violence and having an aggressive demeanour and an explosive temper,”[6] (d) he “often had to step in to intervene with [ms kerman]’s physical and verbal violent behaviour against the children, which often lasted for hours, as [ms kerman] is unable to calm herself down and come to reason. this included strangling, hitting and very abusive screaming”,[7] (e) the child had reported that the mother smacks her.[8]   he “often had to step in to intervene with [ms kerman]’s physical and verbal violent behaviour against the children, which often lasted for hours, as [ms kerman] is unable to calm herself down and come to reason. this included strangling, hitting and very abusive screaming”,[7] (e) the child had reported that the mother smacks her.[8]   the child had reported that the mother smacks her.[8]   saying to the child words to the effect that she “has to protect papa from [mr n]”, (b) saying to the child words to the effect that “[mr n]’s not nice to papa” and “[mr n] is trying to take you away from papa and hurts papa”, (c) saying to the child “let’s not talk about [mr n]”, (d) refusing to allow the child to spend time with the mother on christmas eve or christmas day 2022, failing to respond to the mother’s request for time on mother’s day this year until almost 10:00am on mother’s day, (e) baking a cake with the child on mother’s day for the mother despite not having arranged time as requested, noting that he offered time on the day when it was in effect too late, and then sending the mother a photo of the child with the cake.   saying to the child words to the effect that “[mr n]’s not nice to papa” and “[mr n] is trying to take you away from papa and hurts papa”, (c) saying to the child “let’s not talk about [mr n]”, (d) refusing to allow the child to spend time with the mother on christmas eve or christmas day 2022, failing to respond to the mother’s request for time on mother’s day this year until almost 10:00am on mother’s day, (e) baking a cake with the child on mother’s day for the mother despite not having arranged time as requested, noting that he offered time on the day when it was in effect too late, and then sending the mother a photo of the child with the cake.   saying to the child “let’s not talk about [mr n]”, (d) refusing to allow the child to spend time with the mother on christmas eve or christmas day 2022, failing to respond to the mother’s request for time on mother’s day this year until almost 10:00am on mother’s day, (e) baking a cake with the child on mother’s day for the mother despite not having arranged time as requested, noting that he offered time on the day when it was in effect too late, and then sending the mother a photo of the child with the cake.   refusing to allow the child to spend time with the mother on christmas eve or christmas day 2022, failing to respond to the mother’s request for time on mother’s day this year until almost 10:00am on mother’s day, (e) baking a cake with the child on mother’s day for the mother despite not having arranged time as requested, noting that he offered time on the day when it was in effect too late, and then sending the mother a photo of the child with the cake.   baking a cake with the child on mother’s day for the mother despite not having arranged time as requested, noting that he offered time on the day when it was in effect too late, and then sending the mother a photo of the child with the cake.
s 60cc(3) the additional considerations   contribute $300 to each return flight for the father and the child, (b) contribute $300 per week to the father’s accommodation in brisbane when he attends during school terms.   contribute $300 per week to the father’s accommodation in brisbane when he attends during school terms.
consideration & determination  the parties have in the past been able to communicate appropriately and i am confident that once these proceedings are at an end they will each do so again for the sake of x. (b) in the event that the child remained in city b, the mother had made a proposal as to an appropriate school. although there was no agreement from the father, the mother has demonstrated a willingness to think ahead and consult for the sake of the child. (c) the orders sought by the mother nominate the child’s school in the event that she lives in brisbane and that order is not opposed by the father. (d) the parties agree that they should have equal shared parental responsibility, reflecting a willingness to move on from past issues. (e) the parties intend that if they live in the same city again in the future that the child will spend equal time with each of them. this reflects their willingness to promote the child’s relationship with each other.   in the event that the child remained in city b, the mother had made a proposal as to an appropriate school. although there was no agreement from the father, the mother has demonstrated a willingness to think ahead and consult for the sake of the child. (c) the orders sought by the mother nominate the child’s school in the event that she lives in brisbane and that order is not opposed by the father. (d) the parties agree that they should have equal shared parental responsibility, reflecting a willingness to move on from past issues. (e) the parties intend that if they live in the same city again in the future that the child will spend equal time with each of them. this reflects their willingness to promote the child’s relationship with each other.   the orders sought by the mother nominate the child’s school in the event that she lives in brisbane and that order is not opposed by the father. (d) the parties agree that they should have equal shared parental responsibility, reflecting a willingness to move on from past issues. (e) the parties intend that if they live in the same city again in the future that the child will spend equal time with each of them. this reflects their willingness to promote the child’s relationship with each other.   the parties agree that they should have equal shared parental responsibility, reflecting a willingness to move on from past issues. (e) the parties intend that if they live in the same city again in the future that the child will spend equal time with each of them. this reflects their willingness to promote the child’s relationship with each other.   the parties intend that if they live in the same city again in the future that the child will spend equal time with each of them. this reflects their willingness to promote the child’s relationship with each other.
living arrangements  as both parents are determined in their primary positions, the child must either live with the father in city b or the mother in brisbane. (b) i am satisfied that the mother will encourage and facilitate the child’s relationship with the father. i do not have the same confidence as regards the father based on his conduct and the findings that i have made as set out in these reasons. (c) the child’s sibling relationship will be better supported if she lives in brisbane with her brother. (d) based on the findings i have made, i am satisfied that the mother is better placed to meet the child’s emotional and psychological needs. (e) on the mother’s proposal, provided that the father does the travel, an equal time or close to equal time arrangement can be sustained, given the mother’s commitment to support the cost of travel. the father’s proposal would mean less time for the child with her mother and sibling. (f) as the child’s primary carer, i am satisfied that the mother will communicate and consult appropriately with the father.   i am satisfied that the mother will encourage and facilitate the child’s relationship with the father. i do not have the same confidence as regards the father based on his conduct and the findings that i have made as set out in these reasons. (c) the child’s sibling relationship will be better supported if she lives in brisbane with her brother. (d) based on the findings i have made, i am satisfied that the mother is better placed to meet the child’s emotional and psychological needs. (e) on the mother’s proposal, provided that the father does the travel, an equal time or close to equal time arrangement can be sustained, given the mother’s commitment to support the cost of travel. the father’s proposal would mean less time for the child with her mother and sibling. (f) as the child’s primary carer, i am satisfied that the mother will communicate and consult appropriately with the father.   the child’s sibling relationship will be better supported if she lives in brisbane with her brother. (d) based on the findings i have made, i am satisfied that the mother is better placed to meet the child’s emotional and psychological needs. (e) on the mother’s proposal, provided that the father does the travel, an equal time or close to equal time arrangement can be sustained, given the mother’s commitment to support the cost of travel. the father’s proposal would mean less time for the child with her mother and sibling. (f) as the child’s primary carer, i am satisfied that the mother will communicate and consult appropriately with the father.   based on the findings i have made, i am satisfied that the mother is better placed to meet the child’s emotional and psychological needs. (e) on the mother’s proposal, provided that the father does the travel, an equal time or close to equal time arrangement can be sustained, given the mother’s commitment to support the cost of travel. the father’s proposal would mean less time for the child with her mother and sibling. (f) as the child’s primary carer, i am satisfied that the mother will communicate and consult appropriately with the father.   on the mother’s proposal, provided that the father does the travel, an equal time or close to equal time arrangement can be sustained, given the mother’s commitment to support the cost of travel. the father’s proposal would mean less time for the child with her mother and sibling. (f) as the child’s primary carer, i am satisfied that the mother will communicate and consult appropriately with the father.   as the child’s primary carer, i am satisfied that the mother will communicate and consult appropriately with the father.
other orders
in conclusion
associate: dated: 29 november 2023
dated: 29 november 2023
[1] affidavit of the father filed 7 august 2023, paragraphs 118, 142 and 162.[2] affidavit of the father filed 7 august 2023, paragraphs 118, 142 and 162.[3] family report dated 10 march 2023, p.59.[4] father’s affidavit filed 7 august 2023, paragraph 162.[5] father’s affidavit filed 7 august 2023, paragraph 57.[6] father’s affidavit filed 7 august 2023, paragraph 118.[7] father’s affidavit filed 7 august 2023, paragraph 142.[8] father’s affidavit filed 7 august 2023, paragraph at 150.[9] mother’s affidavit filed on 7 august 2023, paragraph 130.