last updated: 27 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
tyrrell & tyrrell [2023] fedcfamc2f 1604
orders
the court orders by consent that:
parental responsibility  x born in 2012 (“x”), and (b) y born in 2014 (“y”)   y born in 2014 (“y”)  e children”).
care arrangements
and the court orders that:  during school terms, each alternate week from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if not a school day) thursday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday,
and the court orders by consent that:  for one half of the school term holidays by agreement, or failing agreement, for the first half, (b) for one half of the long summer holidays by agreement, or failing agreement on an alternating ‘week-about’ basis, commencing in the first week, (c) for christmas from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in odd numbered years, and from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in even numbered years, (d) during easter from 5.00pm on the thursday preceding good friday until 5.00pm easter saturday in even numbered years, and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in odd numbered years, (e) should father’s day fall on a weekend when the children are not in the father’s care, from 5.00pm saturday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday on the father’s day weekend, and (f) at such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties.   for one half of the long summer holidays by agreement, or failing agreement on an alternating ‘week-about’ basis, commencing in the first week, (c) for christmas from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in odd numbered years, and from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in even numbered years, (d) during easter from 5.00pm on the thursday preceding good friday until 5.00pm easter saturday in even numbered years, and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in odd numbered years, (e) should father’s day fall on a weekend when the children are not in the father’s care, from 5.00pm saturday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday on the father’s day weekend, and (f) at such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties.   for christmas from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in odd numbered years, and from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in even numbered years, (d) during easter from 5.00pm on the thursday preceding good friday until 5.00pm easter saturday in even numbered years, and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in odd numbered years, (e) should father’s day fall on a weekend when the children are not in the father’s care, from 5.00pm saturday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday on the father’s day weekend, and (f) at such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties.   during easter from 5.00pm on the thursday preceding good friday until 5.00pm easter saturday in even numbered years, and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in odd numbered years, (e) should father’s day fall on a weekend when the children are not in the father’s care, from 5.00pm saturday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday on the father’s day weekend, and (f) at such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties.   should father’s day fall on a weekend when the children are not in the father’s care, from 5.00pm saturday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday on the father’s day weekend, and (f) at such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties.   at such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties.   for christmas from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in even numbered years, and from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in odd numbered years, (b) during easter from 5.00pm on the thursday preceding good friday until 5.00pm easter saturday in odd numbered years, and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in even numbered years, (c) should mother’s day fall on a weekend when the children are not in the mother’s care, from 5.00pm saturday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday on the mother’s day weekend.   during easter from 5.00pm on the thursday preceding good friday until 5.00pm easter saturday in odd numbered years, and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in even numbered years, (c) should mother’s day fall on a weekend when the children are not in the mother’s care, from 5.00pm saturday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday on the mother’s day weekend.   should mother’s day fall on a weekend when the children are not in the mother’s care, from 5.00pm saturday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday on the mother’s day weekend.
changeovers
communication
travel  of their intention to go on a holiday, (b) a detailed itinerary including flight details if applicable and accommodations for the duration of travel, and (c) contact details for the children for the duration of travel.   a detailed itinerary including flight details if applicable and accommodations for the duration of travel, and (c) contact details for the children for the duration of travel.   contact details for the children for the duration of travel.
schooling and extra curricular activities  x to commence year 7 at d school, town c in 2024, (b) y to commence grade 4 at e school, town c in 2024, and (c) y to commence year 7 at d school, town c in 2027, or such other year as she may commence secondary school.   y to commence grade 4 at e school, town c in 2024, and (c) y to commence year 7 at d school, town c in 2027, or such other year as she may commence secondary school.   y to commence year 7 at d school, town c in 2027, or such other year as she may commence secondary school.
exchange of information
restraints
and the court notes that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
background
the distances involved
the parties cases
3. the children spend time with the father: during school terms from the date of these orders until the beginning of term one of the school yar in 2027 for two consecutive weekends out of every three from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if not a school day) thursday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school da) monday, during school terms beginning in term one of the school year in 2027, or whenever [y] starts secondary school which is the later, on a ‘week-about’ basis with each parent from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if not a school day) monday until following monday at that time.
3. the children spend time with the father during school terms each alternate week from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if not a school day) thursday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday. .  he children”).
care arrangements 2. the children live with the mother. 3. the children spend time with the father:  e dispute] ... for one half of the school term holidays by agreement, or failing agreement, for the first half, for one half of the long summer holidays by agreement, or failing agreement on an alternating ‘week-about’ basis, commencing in the first week, for christmas from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in odd numbered years, and from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in even numbered years, during easter from 5.00pm on the thursday preceding good friday until 5.00pm easter saturday in even numbered years, and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in odd numbered years, should father’s day fall on a weekend when the children are not in the father’s care, from 5.00pm saturday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday on the father’s day weekend, and i. at such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties.
4. the children’s time with the father pursuant to order 3 hereof be suspended: for christmas from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in even numbered years, and from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in odd numbered years, during easter from 5.00pm on the thursday preceding good friday until 5.00pm easter saturday in odd numbered years, and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in even numbered years, should mother’s day fall on a weekend when the children are not in the mother’s care, from 5.00pm saturday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am if not a school day) monday on the mother’s day weekend. despite anything to the contrary herein the children will spend up to two hours with each parent on the children’s respective birthdays by agreement. if naidoc week falls during a period the children are with the father, his time will be suspended for that period and he shall be afforded make-up time by agreement between the parties. changeovers changeovers are to be at the children’s school/s on school days or if it is a non-school day, at [b park] in [town c], or otherwise by written agreement between the parties. communication the parties each facilitate the children communicating with the other parent by electronic means (including by telephone, videocall, social media or messaging platforms) whilst in their respective care at all reasonable times requested by the children. each of the parties be permitted to communicate with the children by electronic means (including by telephone or videocall) on tuesdays and fridays by placing a call to the other parent’s nominated telephone number by no later than 6.00pm on such days. the parties shall communicate with respect to the children directly by either text message or telephone call with such communication to be via the parents' nominated telephone numbers only. travel each party be permitted to take the children on a holiday for up to 14 days each year and that each party provide to the other party with at least 30 days’ notice in writing:
a. of their intention to go on a holiday, a detailed itinerary including flight details if applicable and accommodations for the duration of travel, and c. contact details for the children for the duration of travel. upon the written request of either parent the parties will do all things required and sign all documents to cause the children to obtain passports, with the father to pay for the costs of the passports and any renewal thereof, and once issued the passports will be held by the father save for the purpose of any travel with the mother, with the mother to be provided with a colour copy thereof forthwith upon receipt of passports by the father. in the event that the mother intends to travel internationally with the children, the father shall provide the children’s passports to the mother not less than 21 days prior to such travel and the mother shall return them to the father within 14 days of the children’s return to australia.
schooling and extra curricular activities 14. both parties do all acts and things so as to enrol:
a. [x] to commence year 7 at [d school] [town c] in 2024, [y] to commence grade 4 at [e school] [town c] in 2024, and [y] to commence year 7 at [d school] [town c] in 2027, or such other year as she may commence secondary school. neither party enrol either of the children in any school save as provided for at order 15 hereof, save and except with the express written consent of the other party. unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the parties do all such acts and things and sign all documents necessary for the children to participate in one extra-curricular sporting activity in the [town c] area, being, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, [sports] for [x] and [y]. the parties be, and are hereby, restrained from enrolling the children in any extra-curricular activity which is to occur in the time the children are to spend with the other party without the written consent of the other party. the parties shall each ensure any school the children may attend is authorised to provide school reports, newsletters and applications for school photographs to both parents. each party is at liberty to attend all school, sporting and extracurricular events it is usual for parents to attend.
exchange of information the parties shall keep each other informed at all times of their respective residential addresses and contact telephone numbers. each parent shall ensure that other, as soon as practicable, is notified of any injury, illness, hospital visits or medication prescribed for the children including in respect of mental health issues. restraints each party be and hereby is restrained by injunction from abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent, or their respective partners within the hearing or the presence of the children or any of them. the parties be and are hereby restrained from permitting the children to have any communication or come into contact with [mr f] 24. all extant applications and responses thereto be otherwise dismissed.
applicable law
section 60ca
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a curt must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
section 60cc   subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child’s best interest, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit of the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b) (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weigh it should give to the child’s views, (b) the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfill, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficult or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain persona and direct contact with bot parent son a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including grandparent or other relative of the child)   the benefit of the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weigh it should give to the child’s views, (b) the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfill, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficult or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain persona and direct contact with bot parent son a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including grandparent or other relative of the child)   the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfill, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficult or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain persona and direct contact with bot parent son a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including grandparent or other relative of the child)   each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child)  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child)   the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfill, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficult or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain persona and direct contact with bot parent son a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including grandparent or other relative of the child)   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,  ) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,  i) to communicate with the child,  ) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfill, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficult or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain persona and direct contact with bot parent son a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including grandparent or other relative of the child)   the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficult or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain persona and direct contact with bot parent son a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including grandparent or other relative of the child)   either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,  ) any other child, or person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficult or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain persona and direct contact with bot parent son a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including grandparent or other relative of the child)   the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including grandparent or other relative of the child)   each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including grandparent or other relative of the child)  ) any other person (including grandparent or other relative of the child)
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) that attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child o a member of the child’s family, (k) if any family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) that attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child o a member of the child’s family, (k) if any family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) that attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child o a member of the child’s family, (k) if any family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   that attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child o a member of the child’s family, (k) if any family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any family violence involving the child o a member of the child’s family, (k) if any family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   if any family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,  ) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,  i) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,   any other relevant matter,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
section 61da   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court mut apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that the other person’s family), or (b) family violence. (3) when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that the other person’s family), or (b) family violence.   family violence.
section 65daa
equal time (1) subject to subsection (6), if a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child's parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, the court must: (a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents. substantial and significant time (2) subject to subsection (6), if: (a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child's parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child's parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,
the court must: (c) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   for the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend substantial and significant time with a parent only if:  the time the child spends with the parent includes both: days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and (b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in: (i) the child's daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   subsection (3) does not limit the other matters to which a court can have regard in determining whether the time a child spends with a parent would be substantial and significant. reasonable practicality (5) in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child's parents, the court must have regard to:  how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents' current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents' current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.  the parents' current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents' current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the parents' current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and
2. the children live with the mother. the children shall spend time with the father from the date of these orders until the beginning of term four of the school year in 2023:  (a) every alternate week from thursday 3.30pm (or the conclusion of school) until monday 9.00am (or the beginning of school),
the family report
... the predominant issue in dispute between the parties is the future parenting arrangements of the children, whether they should live in an equal-time arrangement or primarily live with one parent and spend time with the other parent. whether there would be an adverse impact upon the children of enduring extensive travel to facilitate any parenting arrangements, particularly if a week-about arrangement was considered. each parent is seeking/planning to relocate further from one another, and they remain in dispute as to whether the children should be enrolled at a new school or remain at their current school in [town t]. ... [mr tyrrell] is 33 years of age ... [mr tyrrell] said that he and his partner do not cohabitate. he explained that he has constructed his business where he operates one week in [city cc] whilst staying with his partner and the other week each fortnight he works in [town c], which supports his time with the children each fortnight. ... [mr tyrrell] stated that his residence in [town c] has been provided via the parties’ insurance company due to serious [storm damage] that demolished the former family home, and he will remain in this property until [early] 2024. afterwards, he is proposing to move to [city h] with his partner. he advised the former family home is on the market for sale, and it has been agreed between the parties they will share any proceeds upon sale. ... [mr tyrrell] stated that he is wanting to move to [city h], whilst [ms tyrrell] is seeking to relocate to [town g], [50] minutes [away] with her partner, whose house comes with his employment role at a local [enterprise]. whilst he took no issue with [ms tyrrell] wanting to relocate, he was of the view the children should remain attending the same primary school in [town t] where they are presently enrolled. however, [ms tyrrell] would like to change the children’s enrolment to a school in [town c], which is a half an hour drive and that little bit closer for her. he added that [x] will be transitioning to high school in 2024, and [ms tyrrell] is proposing he attends [town c] high school, but this is a large school, whereas the high school in [town t] is much smaller, being his preference. given the totality of such issues, he is considering moving to [town j], just out of [city h], and he would drive the children to school each morning to [town t] only [50] minutes away. if [ms tyrrell] was to agree to this plan, he would then support her position to move and live with her partner, provided the children remain attending their current school. [mr tyrrell] said [ms tyrrell] has been prohibited via court orders from relocating at this stage, but believes she already has a lot of her belongings at her partner’s home, and once again, he has no plans to move until after [early] 2024. ... as to the parties’ dealings with one another within the parameters of the status quo, [mr tyrrell] saw that both are getting along with one another reasonably well, they keep in touch, send one another photos of the children if they are participating in some activity, and overall, he did not see that there are many problems or issues in the parenting relationship. ... [ms tyrrell] was asked to reflect upon the status quo, and advised that, “to a point” parenting arrangements are working... notwithstanding such issues, [ms tyrrell] rated the status quo as an 8/10 to indicate the extent to which she was satisfied with such. [ms tyrrell] advised that whilst considering any future parenting arrangements, she would like to ensure the children maintain a relationship with their father... to this end, [ms tyrrell] stated that she disagreed with an equal-time parenting arrangement, as it appears in her view, [mr tyrrell] picks and choose when he would like to spend time with the children after he elected to drop the wednesday visits. ... [ms tyrrell] elaborated that because she is seeking to relocate and change the children’s school enrolment, it would not be realistic to maintain a week-about parenting arrangement in such circumstances... ... [x] said he misses each parent when he is at the home of the other, and did not see that he missed either parent more than the other, and confirmed he has never been frightened of either parent. ... [y] said she would like to spend one additional day with her father to have five overnights in his care. she saw the lengthy drive to school in her father’s care as uneventful, advising that she plays on her ipad during the journey and does not see that such is too lengthy. however, whilst exploring her father’s proposal, [y] said that in reference to a week-about arrangement, “that’d be okay”. [y] said she misses each parent when she is at the home of the other and has never been frightened or scared whilst with either parent. when asked how she saw that each parent looked after her, [y] said they make sure she is safe, particularly if she has ever been injured. ... the observations of the interactions between [ms tyrrell] and both children appeared positive and no issues of concern were identified. such observations were suggestive of the notion that a close, warm and loving relationship exists between the children and their mother. moreover, there are appeared to be a positive relationship between the children and [mr p]. ... the observations of the interactions between [mr tyrrell] and both children appeared equally positive and no issues of concern were noted. such observations were also indicative of the notion that a loving, close and warm relationship exists between the children and their father. moreover, [ms m] also appeared to have a positive and familiar relationship with the children. ... the terms of [mr tyrrell] and [ms tyrrell]’s relationship are detailed above and it was relatively common ground the relationship between the parties was not riddled with high conflict or substantial marital struggles, but more that through the years their marriage slowly dissolved and they grew apart. [ms tyrrell]’s employment, which took him away from the family for lengthy periods of time, did little to assist in solidifying family. ... [mr tyrrell] presently resides in [town t] with the maternal grandparents, where she has lived with both children since the time of separation three years ago, and she travels to [town c] for work daily. she is proposing to relocate with the children to [town g] and commence cohabitation with her partner... to better support the parenting arrangements from her perspective, she proposes to change the children’s school enrolment to [town c], and school would be in the same town as her employment. she disagrees with [ms tyrrell]’s position that the children should remain attending their local school in [town t] because it would be too far to travel each day, and she would have to drive through the town where she works and then return to work. as she starts work at 8:30 a.m., it would require the children to be dropped off at school much too early or potentially requiring before school care so she could return and arrive at work by 8:30 a.m. [ms tyrrell] proposes to maintain the current parenting arrangements so the children spend time with their father on alternate weekends. [mr tyrrell] is presently residing in rental accommodation in [town c] provided through the parties’ insurance company and he will remain until [early] 2024. he is self-employed and explained that he works one-week in the local [town c] area and the other week in [city cc], where his partner and their young child resides, which is the week he does not spend time with the children. he is proposing to move to the [city h] area, likely after [early] 2024 when he must exit his rental accommodation, and then both he and his partner will commence cohabitation when she moves from [city cc]. as to parenting, he is seeking that the children continue attending their current school in [town t] and the parties could then maintain a week-about arrangement, where in his view, the children would experience roughly a similar drive of a little more than an hour from his home and a similar distance from that of their mothers. [mr tyrrell] also appears to see that from a logistical perspective, there is little reason why he could not maintain a week-about arrangement as such is what he has actually been doing for some time, albeit slightly differently, as he spends one-week in [city cc] and the other week in [town c]. notwithstanding the above, it would appear in this report writer’s opinion that each parent holds steadfast to their respective position, attempting to prioritise what they purport to be the best interests of the children, but in actuality, such would appear to better meet their own personal needs... he would appear in this report writer’s opinion, to remain fixated upon one plan to move with his partner to [city h], keep the children in their current routine and current school, and commence a week-about parenting arrangement, without being prepared to even consider alternative options. ... [mr tyrrell] and [ms tyrrell] present competing positions, where each seeks to highlight the merit of their respective views regarding the future parenting arrangements... this report writer has been concerned with both parent’s respective positions as either way, the children will be experiencing lengthy travel either between each parent’s respective homes or to/from school, but there would be less travel should the children remain primarily living with their mother and she relocates to [town g]. further, it is this report writer’s assessment that it would appear [ms tyrrell] has a greater need to stabilise her living arrangements, provide independence, and a move would also provide opportunity for the children to have more appropriate living arrangements in the new home she aims to establish with her partner... based upon the aforementioned and in the absence of any further information to the contrary, it is respectfully recommended [mr tyrrell] and [ms tyrrell] equally share parental responsibility regarding both subject children, [x] born [in] 2012 and [y] born [in] 2014. [x] and [y] to remain living with their mother, [ms tyrrell]. [ms tyrrell] be permitted to relocate with both subject children to [town g]. the parties to enrol [x] and [y] at a new high school and primary school respectively in [town c] to commence the 2024 academic year at schools as agreed between the parties. [mr tyrrell] to spend time with [x] and [y] for two weekends out of every three from the conclusion of school on friday to the commencement of same the following monday morning. ...
application of the law  whether that is in the children’s best interests, and (b) consider whether that is reasonably practicable.   consider whether that is reasonably practicable.
associate: dated: 13 december 2023
dated: 13 december 2023