last updated: 31 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
baires & lagrande [2023] fedcfamc2f 1700
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  when making long term decisions about x’s health, welfare and development, the parent making the decision must give the other parent at least seven (7) days’ written notice of what they suggest should be decided and why (“notice”), (b) within seven (7) days of receiving the notice, the other parent will consider the notice and give the parent making the decision a written response outlining their response and the reasons for it (“other parent’s response”), (c) if the parents: (i) agree about the decision to be taken they must jointly ensure it is actioned, or (ii) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is not urgent, then they will participate in family dispute resolution to reach agreement, or (iii) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is urgent the father is authorised to make the decision and inform the mother in writing of the decision taken.   within seven (7) days of receiving the notice, the other parent will consider the notice and give the parent making the decision a written response outlining their response and the reasons for it (“other parent’s response”), (c) if the parents: (i) agree about the decision to be taken they must jointly ensure it is actioned, or (ii) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is not urgent, then they will participate in family dispute resolution to reach agreement, or (iii) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is urgent the father is authorised to make the decision and inform the mother in writing of the decision taken.   if the parents: (i) agree about the decision to be taken they must jointly ensure it is actioned, or (ii) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is not urgent, then they will participate in family dispute resolution to reach agreement, or (iii) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is urgent the father is authorised to make the decision and inform the mother in writing of the decision taken.   agree about the decision to be taken they must jointly ensure it is actioned, or (ii) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is not urgent, then they will participate in family dispute resolution to reach agreement, or (iii) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is urgent the father is authorised to make the decision and inform the mother in writing of the decision taken.  ) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is not urgent, then they will participate in family dispute resolution to reach agreement, or (iii) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is urgent the father is authorised to make the decision and inform the mother in writing of the decision taken.  i) are unable to agree and the decision to be taken is urgent the father is authorised to make the decision and inform the mother in writing of the decision taken.
live with, spend time with & communicate with orders  from friday 1 december 2023 until the commencement of school on monday 4 december 2023, being for three (3) consecutive nights, (b) from friday 15 december 2023 at the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school on monday 18 december 2023, being for three (3) consecutive nights, and changeover will be at x’s school, (c) commencing friday 5 january 2024, each alternate weekend from 3:00pm on friday until 10:00am on monday, being for three (3) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at the city c childrens contact service, (d) commencing term 1 2024, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school tuesday (or 10:00am if x is not attending school), being for four (4) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at x’s school, (e) commencing term 3 2024 and for all school terms thereafter, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school wednesday (or 10:00am if x is not attending school), being for five (5) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at x’s school, and (f) other times as agreed between the parents in writing.   from friday 15 december 2023 at the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school on monday 18 december 2023, being for three (3) consecutive nights, and changeover will be at x’s school, (c) commencing friday 5 january 2024, each alternate weekend from 3:00pm on friday until 10:00am on monday, being for three (3) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at the city c childrens contact service, (d) commencing term 1 2024, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school tuesday (or 10:00am if x is not attending school), being for four (4) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at x’s school, (e) commencing term 3 2024 and for all school terms thereafter, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school wednesday (or 10:00am if x is not attending school), being for five (5) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at x’s school, and (f) other times as agreed between the parents in writing.   commencing friday 5 january 2024, each alternate weekend from 3:00pm on friday until 10:00am on monday, being for three (3) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at the city c childrens contact service, (d) commencing term 1 2024, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school tuesday (or 10:00am if x is not attending school), being for four (4) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at x’s school, (e) commencing term 3 2024 and for all school terms thereafter, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school wednesday (or 10:00am if x is not attending school), being for five (5) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at x’s school, and (f) other times as agreed between the parents in writing.   commencing term 1 2024, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school tuesday (or 10:00am if x is not attending school), being for four (4) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at x’s school, (e) commencing term 3 2024 and for all school terms thereafter, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school wednesday (or 10:00am if x is not attending school), being for five (5) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at x’s school, and (f) other times as agreed between the parents in writing.   commencing term 3 2024 and for all school terms thereafter, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday (or from 3:00pm if x is not attending school) until the start of school wednesday (or 10:00am if x is not attending school), being for five (5) consecutive nights, and changeovers will be at x’s school, and (f) other times as agreed between the parents in writing.   other times as agreed between the parents in writing.   commencing during the term 1 school holidays in 2024, the father’s fortnightly time will still commence on the same day but will extend to seven (7) consecutive nights, concluding at 4:00pm on the following friday during each of the term 1, term 2 and term 3 school holiday periods. (b) commencing december 2024/january 2025 summer school holidays, from 28 december each year during summer school holidays, the parents will have week about care of x, with the father’s time continuing to be in week one of each rotation, starting as usual on friday at 3:00pm and concluding at 4:00pm the following friday.   commencing december 2024/january 2025 summer school holidays, from 28 december each year during summer school holidays, the parents will have week about care of x, with the father’s time continuing to be in week one of each rotation, starting as usual on friday at 3:00pm and concluding at 4:00pm the following friday.
special occasions   christmas 2023 and each odd numbered year afterwards: x will spend time with the father from 4:00pm christmas day to 4:00pm boxing day. x will spend time with the mother from 4:00pm christmas eve to 4:00pm christmas day. (b) christmas 2024 and each even numbered year afterwards: x will spend time with the father from 4:00pm christmas eve to 4:00pm christmas day. x will spend time with the mother from 4:00pm christmas day to 4:00pm boxing day. (c) mother’s day: x will spend time with the mother from 10:00am mother’s day to commencement of school monday. (d) father’s day: x will spend time with the father from 10:00am father’s day to commencement of school monday.   christmas 2024 and each even numbered year afterwards: x will spend time with the father from 4:00pm christmas eve to 4:00pm christmas day. x will spend time with the mother from 4:00pm christmas day to 4:00pm boxing day. (c) mother’s day: x will spend time with the mother from 10:00am mother’s day to commencement of school monday. (d) father’s day: x will spend time with the father from 10:00am father’s day to commencement of school monday.   mother’s day: x will spend time with the mother from 10:00am mother’s day to commencement of school monday. (d) father’s day: x will spend time with the father from 10:00am father’s day to commencement of school monday.   father’s day: x will spend time with the father from 10:00am father’s day to commencement of school monday.
changeovers of care
involvement with x’s school and medical care
communication between the parents  the mother and the father will use civil and respectful language when communicating with each other, (b) they will limit their discussions to child-related matters and these orders, and (c) their communication will be brief and to the point.   they will limit their discussions to child-related matters and these orders, and (c) their communication will be brief and to the point.   their communication will be brief and to the point.   speaking negatively, abusively, insultingly, belittlingly, or rudely to or about each other or any member of the other parent’s family (including spouses, partners or parents) in the presence of x and will remove x from being present if that is occurring, (b) discussing these proceedings or any future dispute with the other parent in the presence or hearing of x, and (c) asking x and/or placing pressure on x to disclose information about the other parent, their household or their family, and nor will they themselves start a conversation with x about their time with the other parent, other than an initial social greeting when they collect x from changeover, and the parents will each immediately remove x from the presence of any other person(s) doing so.   discussing these proceedings or any future dispute with the other parent in the presence or hearing of x, and (c) asking x and/or placing pressure on x to disclose information about the other parent, their household or their family, and nor will they themselves start a conversation with x about their time with the other parent, other than an initial social greeting when they collect x from changeover, and the parents will each immediately remove x from the presence of any other person(s) doing so.   asking x and/or placing pressure on x to disclose information about the other parent, their household or their family, and nor will they themselves start a conversation with x about their time with the other parent, other than an initial social greeting when they collect x from changeover, and the parents will each immediately remove x from the presence of any other person(s) doing so.
other injunctions & responsibilities  directly or indirectly threatening, abusing or assaulting the other parent, (b) entering the residential address of the other parent, unless they have the express written consent of the other parent beforehand, (c) being affected by alcohol to the point of intoxication in the presence of x, or taking and consuming any prescription medication for which they do not hold a prescription, or taking and consuming any illicit substances when x is in their care and for the twelve (12) hours prior to x coming into their care, and (d) bringing x into contact with any person that they know or suspect to be under the influence of any substance(s) during those periods that x is in their care.   entering the residential address of the other parent, unless they have the express written consent of the other parent beforehand, (c) being affected by alcohol to the point of intoxication in the presence of x, or taking and consuming any prescription medication for which they do not hold a prescription, or taking and consuming any illicit substances when x is in their care and for the twelve (12) hours prior to x coming into their care, and (d) bringing x into contact with any person that they know or suspect to be under the influence of any substance(s) during those periods that x is in their care.   being affected by alcohol to the point of intoxication in the presence of x, or taking and consuming any prescription medication for which they do not hold a prescription, or taking and consuming any illicit substances when x is in their care and for the twelve (12) hours prior to x coming into their care, and (d) bringing x into contact with any person that they know or suspect to be under the influence of any substance(s) during those periods that x is in their care.   bringing x into contact with any person that they know or suspect to be under the influence of any substance(s) during those periods that x is in their care.   department of education, children and young people, for the records of b school and child safety services, (b) e hospital, (c) tasmania police, and (d) city h contact service.   e hospital, (c) tasmania police, and (d) city h contact service.   tasmania police, and (d) city h contact service.   city h contact service.
the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge taglieri  the child has a medical condition which required surgery at birth and is now regularly monitored and managed. he attends b school but has had poor attendance, which is likely a significant disadvantage to his development and progression. (b) the father is 31 years of age and lives alone. he receives a disability support pension and lives with a medical condition. (c) the mother is 25 years of age and suffers poor mental health, predating her relationship with the father. her mental health has at times been quite unstable, not well managed and manifests in avoidant behaviours, which i infer is the explanation for her non-attendance for the final hearing. (d) the parties had a short relationship characterised by mutual conflict and violence. the details of this are graphically displayed by the summary in the icl’s case outline drawn from various reports identified in it. (e) although final parenting orders were made in 2019, conflict continued between the parents and this has led to these proceedings. (f) despite the parental conflict and the child's awareness of and presence during conflict, the child has a meaningful relationship with both parents, who are loving and caring of him.   the father is 31 years of age and lives alone. he receives a disability support pension and lives with a medical condition. (c) the mother is 25 years of age and suffers poor mental health, predating her relationship with the father. her mental health has at times been quite unstable, not well managed and manifests in avoidant behaviours, which i infer is the explanation for her non-attendance for the final hearing. (d) the parties had a short relationship characterised by mutual conflict and violence. the details of this are graphically displayed by the summary in the icl’s case outline drawn from various reports identified in it. (e) although final parenting orders were made in 2019, conflict continued between the parents and this has led to these proceedings. (f) despite the parental conflict and the child's awareness of and presence during conflict, the child has a meaningful relationship with both parents, who are loving and caring of him.   the mother is 25 years of age and suffers poor mental health, predating her relationship with the father. her mental health has at times been quite unstable, not well managed and manifests in avoidant behaviours, which i infer is the explanation for her non-attendance for the final hearing. (d) the parties had a short relationship characterised by mutual conflict and violence. the details of this are graphically displayed by the summary in the icl’s case outline drawn from various reports identified in it. (e) although final parenting orders were made in 2019, conflict continued between the parents and this has led to these proceedings. (f) despite the parental conflict and the child's awareness of and presence during conflict, the child has a meaningful relationship with both parents, who are loving and caring of him.   the parties had a short relationship characterised by mutual conflict and violence. the details of this are graphically displayed by the summary in the icl’s case outline drawn from various reports identified in it. (e) although final parenting orders were made in 2019, conflict continued between the parents and this has led to these proceedings. (f) despite the parental conflict and the child's awareness of and presence during conflict, the child has a meaningful relationship with both parents, who are loving and caring of him.   although final parenting orders were made in 2019, conflict continued between the parents and this has led to these proceedings. (f) despite the parental conflict and the child's awareness of and presence during conflict, the child has a meaningful relationship with both parents, who are loving and caring of him.   despite the parental conflict and the child's awareness of and presence during conflict, the child has a meaningful relationship with both parents, who are loving and caring of him.
associate: dated: 9 january 2024
dated: 9 january 2024