last updated: 9 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bowers & bowers [2023] fedcfamc2f 1546
orders
the court orders that:  $300,103 to the nominated trust account for the applicant husband’s solicitors, and (b) $162,235 to the nominated trust account for the respondent wife’s solicitors.   $162,235 to the nominated trust account for the respondent wife’s solicitors.   his motor vehicle 1, (b) bank funds held in accounts in his individual name, (c) furniture currently in his possession, (d) his superannuation benefits, (e) other money and assets in his possession.   bank funds held in accounts in his individual name, (c) furniture currently in his possession, (d) his superannuation benefits, (e) other money and assets in his possession.   furniture currently in his possession, (d) his superannuation benefits, (e) other money and assets in his possession.   his superannuation benefits, (e) other money and assets in his possession.   other money and assets in his possession.   the real property situate and known as e street, suburb f, in the state of new south wales, being the whole of the land comprised in certificate of title lot ... in deposited plan ..., (b) her motor vehicle 2, (c) furniture currently in her possession, (d) her superannuation benefits, (e) other money and assets in her possession.   her motor vehicle 2, (c) furniture currently in her possession, (d) her superannuation benefits, (e) other money and assets in her possession.   furniture currently in her possession, (d) her superannuation benefits, (e) other money and assets in her possession.   her superannuation benefits, (e) other money and assets in her possession.   other money and assets in her possession.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property (including choses in action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party forgo any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (c) insurance policies are to remain the sole property of the owner names thereon, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled to pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party forgo any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (c) insurance policies are to remain the sole property of the owner names thereon, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled to pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies are to remain the sole property of the owner names thereon, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled to pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled to pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for judgment
judge j young
introduction
background
issues in dispute  categorisation of items in the property pool: (a) whether the wife’s debt of $14,000, incurred post-separation, for the installation of fixtures on the suburb f property should be included in the property pool, (b) whether the husband’s withdrawal of $20,000 from his superannuation fund post-separation should be added-back to the property pool, (c) whether the following other expenses of the wife post-separation should be included in the asset pool: (i) roof repairs to the suburb f property, (ii) a shortfall in rental income of the suburb c property and outgoings, (iii) loan repayments of the wife of a loan taken out in 2016 in the wife’s name on the husband’s behalf, and (iv) repayments of professional photos taken in 2019 prior to the parties’ separation. (2) what the husband’s financial contributions were during the relationship, (3) whether there was any wastage by the husband purchasing illicit substances during the relationship, (4) what non-financial contributions the husband made during the relationship, and (5) whether family violence affected the wife’s capacity to make contributions.   whether the wife’s debt of $14,000, incurred post-separation, for the installation of fixtures on the suburb f property should be included in the property pool, (b) whether the husband’s withdrawal of $20,000 from his superannuation fund post-separation should be added-back to the property pool, (c) whether the following other expenses of the wife post-separation should be included in the asset pool: (i) roof repairs to the suburb f property, (ii) a shortfall in rental income of the suburb c property and outgoings, (iii) loan repayments of the wife of a loan taken out in 2016 in the wife’s name on the husband’s behalf, and (iv) repayments of professional photos taken in 2019 prior to the parties’ separation.   whether the husband’s withdrawal of $20,000 from his superannuation fund post-separation should be added-back to the property pool, (c) whether the following other expenses of the wife post-separation should be included in the asset pool: (i) roof repairs to the suburb f property, (ii) a shortfall in rental income of the suburb c property and outgoings, (iii) loan repayments of the wife of a loan taken out in 2016 in the wife’s name on the husband’s behalf, and (iv) repayments of professional photos taken in 2019 prior to the parties’ separation.   whether the following other expenses of the wife post-separation should be included in the asset pool: (i) roof repairs to the suburb f property, (ii) a shortfall in rental income of the suburb c property and outgoings, (iii) loan repayments of the wife of a loan taken out in 2016 in the wife’s name on the husband’s behalf, and (iv) repayments of professional photos taken in 2019 prior to the parties’ separation.   roof repairs to the suburb f property, (ii) a shortfall in rental income of the suburb c property and outgoings, (iii) loan repayments of the wife of a loan taken out in 2016 in the wife’s name on the husband’s behalf, and (iv) repayments of professional photos taken in 2019 prior to the parties’ separation.  ) a shortfall in rental income of the suburb c property and outgoings, (iii) loan repayments of the wife of a loan taken out in 2016 in the wife’s name on the husband’s behalf, and (iv) repayments of professional photos taken in 2019 prior to the parties’ separation.  i) loan repayments of the wife of a loan taken out in 2016 in the wife’s name on the husband’s behalf, and (iv) repayments of professional photos taken in 2019 prior to the parties’ separation.  ) repayments of professional photos taken in 2019 prior to the parties’ separation.   what the husband’s financial contributions were during the relationship, (3) whether there was any wastage by the husband purchasing illicit substances during the relationship, (4) what non-financial contributions the husband made during the relationship, and (5) whether family violence affected the wife’s capacity to make contributions.   whether there was any wastage by the husband purchasing illicit substances during the relationship, (4) what non-financial contributions the husband made during the relationship, and (5) whether family violence affected the wife’s capacity to make contributions.   what non-financial contributions the husband made during the relationship, and (5) whether family violence affected the wife’s capacity to make contributions.   whether family violence affected the wife’s capacity to make contributions.
documents relied on by the parties
orders sought
the hearing
legal principles  to identify the pool of assets and liabilities generally, and usually at the time of hearing, (2) to assess the relative contributions of both the financial, non-financial, direct and indirect nature as specified by s 79(4) of the act, (3) to determine whether any adjustment is required for the s 75(2) factors, and (4) bearing in mind all of the foregoing matters, to determine whether the order the court proposes to make is just and equitable to both parties.   to assess the relative contributions of both the financial, non-financial, direct and indirect nature as specified by s 79(4) of the act, (3) to determine whether any adjustment is required for the s 75(2) factors, and (4) bearing in mind all of the foregoing matters, to determine whether the order the court proposes to make is just and equitable to both parties.   to determine whether any adjustment is required for the s 75(2) factors, and (4) bearing in mind all of the foregoing matters, to determine whether the order the court proposes to make is just and equitable to both parties.   bearing in mind all of the foregoing matters, to determine whether the order the court proposes to make is just and equitable to both parties.
property pool
add backs  where the parties have expended money on legal fees, (b) where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets, and (c) “waste” or wanton, negligent, or reckless dissipation of assets.   where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets, and (c) “waste” or wanton, negligent, or reckless dissipation of assets.   “waste” or wanton, negligent, or reckless dissipation of assets.
the fundamental precept that addbacks are exceptional, reflected in the decisions just referred to, also mirrors what has been said in earlier decisions of the full court that, for example, “the family court must take the property of a party to the marriage as it finds it” at trial. an important parallel proposition is that the parties do not “go into a state of suspended economic animation” after separation. thus, reasonably incurred expenditure does not usually come within accepted categories of addback. two fundamental premises emerge from ajo & gro and the authorities preceding it. first, “adding back” is a discretionary exercise. when the discretion is exercised in favour of adding back, it reflects a decision that, exceptionally, in the particular circumstances of a case, justice and equity requires it. the second premise is its corollary: in cases that are not “exceptional” justice and equity can be achieved, not by adding back, but by the exercise of a different discretion – usually by taking up the same as a relevant s 75(2) factor. indeed, it has been said that the latter is “a course which is, perhaps, technically more correct” than adding back to the list of existing interests in property. (footnotes omitted).
contributions
initial contributions
uncontested financial contributions during the relationship
contributions 2000 - 2007
contributions 2007 - 2016
contributions 2016 -2019
post-separation
contributions to the welfare of the family
family violence
put shortly, our view is that where there is a course of violent conduct by one party towards the other during the marriage which is demonstrated to have had a significant adverse impact upon that party’s contributions to the marriage, or, put the other way, to have made his or her contributions significantly more arduous then they ought to have been, that is a fact which a trial judge is entitled to take into account in assessing the parties’ respective contributions within s 79. we prefer this approach to the concept of “negative contributions” which is sometimes referred to in this discussion. in the above formulation, we have referred only to domestic violence, for the reasons which we indicated earlier, but its application is not limited to that. we think the earlier cases may have overlooked the distinction which more recent cases have emphasised. however, if it is thought now to be artificial to distinguish those long standing authorities in that way, it appears to us, having regard to the reconsideration which has been given to this matter over recent times, that it may now be appropriate for this court to treat those authorities as no longer binding and to be subject to the qualifications and distinguishing feature referred to in the recent decisions of this court. there have been marked changes in perceptions, both legal and social, about domestic violence and its impact in recent times and it appears appropriate to give effect to them. (references to case law in original omitted) however, it is important to consider the “floodgates” argument. that is these principles, which should only apply to exceptional cases, may become common coinage in property cases and be used inappropriately as tactical weapons or for personal attacks and so return this court to fault and misconduct in property matters – a circumstance which proved so debilitating in the past. in addition, there is the risk of substantial additional time and cost. however, in our view, s 79 should encompass the exceptional cases which we described above. it would not be appropriate to exclude them as a matter of policy because of this risk. it is a matter of common sense for lawyers involved and, where that may not be sufficient, it is a matter for a firm hand by the court at an early stage when a case appears to raise those issues. it is essential to bear in mind the relatively narrow band of cases to which these considerations apply. to be relevant, it would be necessary to show that the conduct occurred during the course of the marriage and had a discernible impact upon the contributions of the other party. it is not directed to conduct which does not have that effect and of necessity it does not encompass ... conduct related to the breakdown of the marriage.
contributions conclusion
impact on earning capacity
section 75(2) factors
as a statement of general principle, i am firmly of the view that financial losses incurred by parties or either of them in the course of a marriage whether such losses result from a joint or several liability, should be shared by them (although not necessarily equally) except in the following circumstances:   where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.   where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.
the high court directed in stanford that the first step in the consideration of whether to exercise the power under s 79 is to identify, according to ordinary legal and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of each of the parties in the property in dispute (at [37]). the practice of creating notional ‘add-backs’ for assets that have been dissipated has no place in this assessment, however, it does not follow that unilateral behaviours resulting in the dissipation of property or premature distributions are no longer relevant — in appropriate circumstances they may affect the final order by virtue of s 75(2)(o).
conclusion  the wife will retain the suburb f property, her superannuation and other assets and receive a cash payment of $162,235 (rounded) from the net proceeds of the sale of the suburb c property, and (b) the husband will retain his assets, his superannuation and receive a cash payment of $300,103 (rounded) from the net proceeds of the sale of the suburb c property.   the husband will retain his assets, his superannuation and receive a cash payment of $300,103 (rounded) from the net proceeds of the sale of the suburb c property.
associate: dated: 4 december 2023
dated: 4 december 2023