last updated: 23 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
jun & genyu (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 1549
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge boymal   the husband’s costs fixed in the sum of $7,075.00, and (b) the second respondent’s costs fixed in the sum of $7,075.00.   the second respondent’s costs fixed in the sum of $7,075.00.
the final hearing  first, to pay all costs of sale and agent commission, (b) secondly to discharge the mortgage, (c) thirdly, to pay the second respondent the sum of $271,254.00, and (d) the balance to the wife.   secondly to discharge the mortgage, (c) thirdly, to pay the second respondent the sum of $271,254.00, and (d) the balance to the wife.   thirdly, to pay the second respondent the sum of $271,254.00, and (d) the balance to the wife.   the balance to the wife.
the asset pool is modest. the characterisation of the money advanced by the husband’s parents has a significant impact on the quantum of the net assets to be adjusted between the husband and wife.
legal principles  the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.
consideration
financial circumstances of each of the parties: section 117(2a)(a)
the balance of future considerations favour the wife. until, and if, [x] spends time with the husband, the wife will have the sole care of [x] including making herself available to ensure that [x] attends all of her specialist appointments. the wife’s income is limited until she re-engages in paid employment. it is uncertain when she will do so given [x]’s young age and the challenges facing [x].
i consider that on the available evidence i am unable to find that the wife personally has access to financial resources, as inferred by counsel for the husband, other than money already being provided to her by her parents.
were it not for the financial circumstances of the wife (together with another matter referred to by me hereafter), and the fact she will be the primary carer for the children, the court would be pre-disposed to making an order against her requiring a payment relating to the costs incurred by the husband in the property proceeding from the date of his offer in may 2010. the financial circumstances of the wife and her responsibility for the ongoing care of the children to a greater extent than that of the husband, mediate against that course of action. the net funds which will be available to the wife following meeting her legal costs will be substantially less than the $131,329 which she should receive pursuant to the court’s order. thus the financial circumstances of the parties, when weighed by me, convince me there should not be an order for costs in the broad terms as sought by the husband (the whole of the husband’s costs from may 2010).
whether either party has made an offer in writing to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer: section 117(2a)(f)
...offers must be seen in the context of the case and the extent of the offeree’s knowledge of the parties’ financial circumstances while the offer is live. in the family law jurisdiction, it is not uncommon to find relationships where one party, often the wife, has significantly less grasp of the parties’ financial arrangements, or the financial circumstances are so complex that it would be premature to accept an offer. there are also cases where the contents of the offer are in themselves the subject of disputed value and legitimate subject matter for determination. these and other features of the context of offers must be taken into account when considering whether it was reasonable or not to accept an offer, no matter how close to the ultimate result the offer may be.
the husband’s offer
the second respondent’s offer(s)
conduct of the parties to the proceedings: section 117(2a)(c)  the wife’s evidence overall was evasive, misleading and untruthful. she fabricated some of her evidence, (b) the wife had not come to court prepared with any information in relation to her ability to source funds to repay the loan, (c) the wife’s evidence as to her income and financial resources was particularly confusing and misleading which required counsel to fulsomely cross-examine her on this issue, (d) the wife failed to make timely disclosure, at times only when such documents were called for during the running of the trial, (e) the wife changed her instructions to her counsel in the running of the case in relation to issues that at the commencement of the hearing had resolved, (f) the wife failed to make appropriate concessions, (g) the wife made allegations and assertions during her evidence that were either not mentioned or particularised in her affidavit material which required the husband to be recalled to give evidence, (h) the evidence of the husband and second respondent in relation to the money advanced was known by the wife prior to the commencement of the final hearing, and (i) the wife had already examined the documents provided by the second respondent by way of discovery. the wife unreasonably maintained that the quantum of the money advanced was in the sum of $200,000.00 and fulsome cross-examination was required.   the wife had not come to court prepared with any information in relation to her ability to source funds to repay the loan, (c) the wife’s evidence as to her income and financial resources was particularly confusing and misleading which required counsel to fulsomely cross-examine her on this issue, (d) the wife failed to make timely disclosure, at times only when such documents were called for during the running of the trial, (e) the wife changed her instructions to her counsel in the running of the case in relation to issues that at the commencement of the hearing had resolved, (f) the wife failed to make appropriate concessions, (g) the wife made allegations and assertions during her evidence that were either not mentioned or particularised in her affidavit material which required the husband to be recalled to give evidence, (h) the evidence of the husband and second respondent in relation to the money advanced was known by the wife prior to the commencement of the final hearing, and (i) the wife had already examined the documents provided by the second respondent by way of discovery. the wife unreasonably maintained that the quantum of the money advanced was in the sum of $200,000.00 and fulsome cross-examination was required.   the wife’s evidence as to her income and financial resources was particularly confusing and misleading which required counsel to fulsomely cross-examine her on this issue, (d) the wife failed to make timely disclosure, at times only when such documents were called for during the running of the trial, (e) the wife changed her instructions to her counsel in the running of the case in relation to issues that at the commencement of the hearing had resolved, (f) the wife failed to make appropriate concessions, (g) the wife made allegations and assertions during her evidence that were either not mentioned or particularised in her affidavit material which required the husband to be recalled to give evidence, (h) the evidence of the husband and second respondent in relation to the money advanced was known by the wife prior to the commencement of the final hearing, and (i) the wife had already examined the documents provided by the second respondent by way of discovery. the wife unreasonably maintained that the quantum of the money advanced was in the sum of $200,000.00 and fulsome cross-examination was required.   the wife failed to make timely disclosure, at times only when such documents were called for during the running of the trial, (e) the wife changed her instructions to her counsel in the running of the case in relation to issues that at the commencement of the hearing had resolved, (f) the wife failed to make appropriate concessions, (g) the wife made allegations and assertions during her evidence that were either not mentioned or particularised in her affidavit material which required the husband to be recalled to give evidence, (h) the evidence of the husband and second respondent in relation to the money advanced was known by the wife prior to the commencement of the final hearing, and (i) the wife had already examined the documents provided by the second respondent by way of discovery. the wife unreasonably maintained that the quantum of the money advanced was in the sum of $200,000.00 and fulsome cross-examination was required.   the wife changed her instructions to her counsel in the running of the case in relation to issues that at the commencement of the hearing had resolved, (f) the wife failed to make appropriate concessions, (g) the wife made allegations and assertions during her evidence that were either not mentioned or particularised in her affidavit material which required the husband to be recalled to give evidence, (h) the evidence of the husband and second respondent in relation to the money advanced was known by the wife prior to the commencement of the final hearing, and (i) the wife had already examined the documents provided by the second respondent by way of discovery. the wife unreasonably maintained that the quantum of the money advanced was in the sum of $200,000.00 and fulsome cross-examination was required.   the wife failed to make appropriate concessions, (g) the wife made allegations and assertions during her evidence that were either not mentioned or particularised in her affidavit material which required the husband to be recalled to give evidence, (h) the evidence of the husband and second respondent in relation to the money advanced was known by the wife prior to the commencement of the final hearing, and (i) the wife had already examined the documents provided by the second respondent by way of discovery. the wife unreasonably maintained that the quantum of the money advanced was in the sum of $200,000.00 and fulsome cross-examination was required.   the wife made allegations and assertions during her evidence that were either not mentioned or particularised in her affidavit material which required the husband to be recalled to give evidence, (h) the evidence of the husband and second respondent in relation to the money advanced was known by the wife prior to the commencement of the final hearing, and (i) the wife had already examined the documents provided by the second respondent by way of discovery. the wife unreasonably maintained that the quantum of the money advanced was in the sum of $200,000.00 and fulsome cross-examination was required.   the evidence of the husband and second respondent in relation to the money advanced was known by the wife prior to the commencement of the final hearing, and (i) the wife had already examined the documents provided by the second respondent by way of discovery. the wife unreasonably maintained that the quantum of the money advanced was in the sum of $200,000.00 and fulsome cross-examination was required.   the wife had already examined the documents provided by the second respondent by way of discovery. the wife unreasonably maintained that the quantum of the money advanced was in the sum of $200,000.00 and fulsome cross-examination was required.
whether any party has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings: section 117(2a)(e)
a party’s failure to comply with previous orders: section 117(2a)(d)
such other matters as the court considers relevant, section 117(2a)(g)
conclusion  $3,768.84 being counsel’s fees for one full day on 15 march 2023, (b) $1,883.63 being counsel’s fees for half a day on 16 march 2023, and (c) $1,422.04 being preparation for an additional day after the second day. the matter was originally listed for final hearing with an estimate of two days duration.   $1,883.63 being counsel’s fees for half a day on 16 march 2023, and (c) $1,422.04 being preparation for an additional day after the second day. the matter was originally listed for final hearing with an estimate of two days duration.   $1,422.04 being preparation for an additional day after the second day. the matter was originally listed for final hearing with an estimate of two days duration.
it is likewise contended that in this case the allegations made by the wife regarding the quantum of the loan, and whether or not it was a loan, are allegations of the type to be expected in property division proceedings involving an intervener seeking the repayment of an alleged loan. it is not uncommon for the court to find that one litigant or another to be an unimpressive witness or to have embellished their evidence or given untruthful evidence. similarly, it is not uncommon for a party to make imperfect financial disclosure, especially when self-represented. it is submitted that this case is devoid of any special or unusual feature such as would warrant a departure from the usual course.
associate: dated: 6 december 2023
dated: 6 december 2023
[1] first respondent’s written submissions dated 21 june 2023 at annexure 1.[2] medlon & medlon (no. 6) (indemnity costs) [2015] famcafc 157; (2015) flc 93-664.[3] pbf as child representative for af (legal aid commission of tasmania) & trf & lkl [2005] famca 158.[4] i and i (no 2) [1995] famca 80; (1995) flc 92-625 at [5].[5] first respondent’s written submissions dated 21 june 2023, p.2.[6] section 117(2a)(b) of the family law act 1975 (cth).[7] lenova & lenova (costs) [2011] famcafc 141.[8] in the marriage of murray and murray (1990) flc 92-173.[9] browne v green [2002] famca 791; (2002) flc 93-115.[10] husband’s written submissions dated 3 may 2023 at annexure b.[11] first respondent’s written submissions dated 21 june 2023 at [21].[12] second respondent’s written submissions dated 22 may 2023 at annexure 4.[13] kooee communications pty ltd v primus telecommunications pty ltd (no 2) [2008] nswca 85.[14] harris & harris [1987] famca 7 at [20].[15] second respondent’s written submissions dated 22 may 2023 at [39].[16] latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59.