last updated: 9 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
groff & fox [2023] fedcfamc2f 1729
orders
the court orders that:  on a fortnightly basis: (i) with the respondent from 3:00pm saturday to 3:00pm wednesday, (ii) with the applicant from 3:00pm wednesday to 3:00pm sunday, (iii) with the respondent from 3:00pm sunday to 3:00pm wednesday, (iv) with the applicant from 3:00pm wednesday to 3:00pm saturday.   with the respondent from 3:00pm saturday to 3:00pm wednesday, (ii) with the applicant from 3:00pm wednesday to 3:00pm sunday, (iii) with the respondent from 3:00pm sunday to 3:00pm wednesday, (iv) with the applicant from 3:00pm wednesday to 3:00pm saturday.  ) with the applicant from 3:00pm wednesday to 3:00pm sunday, (iii) with the respondent from 3:00pm sunday to 3:00pm wednesday, (iv) with the applicant from 3:00pm wednesday to 3:00pm saturday.  i) with the respondent from 3:00pm sunday to 3:00pm wednesday, (iv) with the applicant from 3:00pm wednesday to 3:00pm saturday.  ) with the applicant from 3:00pm wednesday to 3:00pm saturday.   that until the commencement of the school year in january or february 2028, during the long summer school holiday period at the end of term 4: (i) the child is to spend half the school holiday time with each parent in alternating week about blocks. (ii) to facilitate such, the child is to spend time with the respondent from the last day of school term for seven (7) nights and then to the care of the applicant for seven (7) nights and time is to continue on a week about basis until the first day of the school term in the new year.   the child is to spend half the school holiday time with each parent in alternating week about blocks. (ii) to facilitate such, the child is to spend time with the respondent from the last day of school term for seven (7) nights and then to the care of the applicant for seven (7) nights and time is to continue on a week about basis until the first day of the school term in the new year.  ) to facilitate such, the child is to spend time with the respondent from the last day of school term for seven (7) nights and then to the care of the applicant for seven (7) nights and time is to continue on a week about basis until the first day of the school term in the new year.   in the odd numbered years, for the first half of the school holiday with the respondent commencing from the last day of school for school term until 5.00pm on the friday three weeks thereafter and the remainder of the school holidays nights with the applicant. (b) in the even numbered years, for the first half of the school holiday with the applicant commencing from the last day of school for school term until 5.00pm on the friday three weeks thereafter and the remainder of the school holidays nights with the respondent. (c) with the respondent from 2.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day in odd-numbered years and with the applicant from 2.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day in even-numbered years, and (d) with the respondent from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day in even-numbered years and with the applicant from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day in odd-numbered years.   in the even numbered years, for the first half of the school holiday with the applicant commencing from the last day of school for school term until 5.00pm on the friday three weeks thereafter and the remainder of the school holidays nights with the respondent. (c) with the respondent from 2.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day in odd-numbered years and with the applicant from 2.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day in even-numbered years, and (d) with the respondent from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day in even-numbered years and with the applicant from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day in odd-numbered years.   with the respondent from 2.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day in odd-numbered years and with the applicant from 2.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day in even-numbered years, and (d) with the respondent from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day in even-numbered years and with the applicant from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day in odd-numbered years.   with the respondent from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day in even-numbered years and with the applicant from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day in odd-numbered years.   with the respondent in odd-numbered years and with the applicant in even-numbered years from 10.00am easter saturday on the easter weekend until 9:00am easter monday.
and the court notes that:
oral reasons for judgment
judge myers:
each of the parties do all such acts and things as are necessary to cause new south wales registry of births, deaths and marriages - change [x]'s birth certificate: (a) to record the respondent as parent 1 and/or birth mother, and (b) to remove the name, [groff] - remove from the birth certificate.   to record the respondent as parent 1 and/or birth mother, and (b) to remove the name, [groff] - remove from the birth certificate.   to remove the name, [groff] - remove from the birth certificate.
the applicant to do such things as are necessary to ensure [x] does not come into contact with nor not to be around [ms d] or [mr e].
are you carrying the baby?
to which ms groff responded:
no. we did ivf and have used my egg, but [ms fox] is carrying bub.
birth mother is [ms fox]. registrar 2021.   if:   a child is born to a woman as a result of the carrying out of an artificial conception procedure while the woman was married to, or a de facto partner of, another person (the other intended parent), and (b) either:  the woman and the other intended parent consented to the carrying out of the procedure, and any other person who provided genetic material used in the procedure consented to the use of the material in an artificial conception procedure, or (ii) under a prescribed law of the commonwealth or of a state or territory, the child is a child of the woman and of the other intended parent,
then, whether or not the child is biologically a child of the woman and of the other intended parent, for the purposes of this act:   the child is the child of the woman and of the other intended parent, and (d) if a person other than the woman and the other intended parent provided genetic material -- the child is not the child of that person.   groff] and i met in 2011. we commenced a relationship shortly thereafter. [ms groff] and i then commenced cohabitation in 2014 up until [late] 2014. in [late] 2014, we decided to have a break and i moved out. [ms groff] and i resumed cohabitation [in early] 2018 until we separated on a final basis on 14 april 2021. in 2015, i wanted to have children, but the plan was put on hold due to being diagnosed with [a medical condition]. [in] 2018, [ms groff] and i became engaged. in 2018, [ms groff] and i then decided to fall pregnant. we sourced a donor, [mr g] through [h authority]. [ms groff] and i went to [suburb j] to meet [mr g] sometime in 2018. in 2018, [ms groff] and i performed the sperm insemination ourselves. fortunately, i fell pregnant on the first go. in 2019, i again met the donor after falling pregnant and he signed the donor contract agreement to assign all parentage rights to myself.
hi [mr g], my partner and myself have been together for 7 years and planning on getting married in 2020. we have children from previous relationships but would like to expand our family together. if you are still available for sperm donations we would like to chat with you further. thank you for your time. [ms groff] and [ms fox].  ) when a woman who is married to or who is the the de factor partner of another woman has undergone a fertilisation procedure as a result of which she becomes pregnant:   the other woman is presumed to be a parent of any child born as a result of the pregnancy, but only if the other woman consented to the procedure, and (b) the woman who has become pregnant is presumed to be the mother of any child born as a result of the pregnancy even if she did not provide the ovum used in the procedure.   x was born to ms fox as a result of carrying out of an artificial conception procedure while she was a de facto partner of ms groff. (2) ms fox and ms groff consented to the carrying out of the procedure, and mr g consented to the use of his sperm in the procedure where his sperm was used to artificially impregnate ms fox by syringe.   ms fox and ms groff consented to the carrying out of the procedure, and mr g consented to the use of his sperm in the procedure where his sperm was used to artificially impregnate ms fox by syringe.
the applicant do all such things as are necessary to ensure [x] does not come into contact with nor not to be around [ms d] nor [mr e].   is not to be around [ms d] or [mr e].
the injunctive order sought by ms fox is not in the best interests of x where it would deprive x of a relationship with her sister and her sister’s partner. the court does not need to make the injunctive order so as to protect x from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. further, the court does not consider the granting of an injunctive order is appropriate for x’s welfare. the application made by ms fox that provides the applicant do with such things as are necessary to ensure x does not come into contact with nor be around ms d or mr e is refused.   it was in this case important for the court to make orders such that if the parents are able to leave the court process feeling as though their relationship with x is affirmed in terms of time, then that may assist in building some cooperation between the parties. (2) that it may be helpful for x to be able to spend significant time with both parents. (3) it is possible that if the parties leave the court process feeling as though they have not been heard or that their views have not been taken into account in terms of validity of their relationship with x, that it is possible that the conflict could continue or that they could undermine or try to undermine the other parent’s relationship with x. (4) that it may be difficult to have an arrangement that is not an equal time arrangement. (5) that based upon the expert’s observations of x with ms groff and also ms fox, their relationships were indistinguishable, and that x seemed to have quite a good, positive relationship with both parents. (6) that both parents presented as having a normal mother-child relationship with x.   that it may be helpful for x to be able to spend significant time with both parents. (3) it is possible that if the parties leave the court process feeling as though they have not been heard or that their views have not been taken into account in terms of validity of their relationship with x, that it is possible that the conflict could continue or that they could undermine or try to undermine the other parent’s relationship with x. (4) that it may be difficult to have an arrangement that is not an equal time arrangement. (5) that based upon the expert’s observations of x with ms groff and also ms fox, their relationships were indistinguishable, and that x seemed to have quite a good, positive relationship with both parents. (6) that both parents presented as having a normal mother-child relationship with x.   it is possible that if the parties leave the court process feeling as though they have not been heard or that their views have not been taken into account in terms of validity of their relationship with x, that it is possible that the conflict could continue or that they could undermine or try to undermine the other parent’s relationship with x. (4) that it may be difficult to have an arrangement that is not an equal time arrangement. (5) that based upon the expert’s observations of x with ms groff and also ms fox, their relationships were indistinguishable, and that x seemed to have quite a good, positive relationship with both parents. (6) that both parents presented as having a normal mother-child relationship with x.   that it may be difficult to have an arrangement that is not an equal time arrangement. (5) that based upon the expert’s observations of x with ms groff and also ms fox, their relationships were indistinguishable, and that x seemed to have quite a good, positive relationship with both parents. (6) that both parents presented as having a normal mother-child relationship with x.   that based upon the expert’s observations of x with ms groff and also ms fox, their relationships were indistinguishable, and that x seemed to have quite a good, positive relationship with both parents. (6) that both parents presented as having a normal mother-child relationship with x.   that both parents presented as having a normal mother-child relationship with x.   the person must identify as aboriginal, (2) the aboriginal community must recognise the person as aboriginal, and (3) the person is aboriginal by way of descent.   the aboriginal community must recognise the person as aboriginal, and (3) the person is aboriginal by way of descent.   the person is aboriginal by way of descent.
associate: dated: 6 december 2023
dated: 6 december 2023