last updated: 26 march 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
marsten & marsten [2023] fedcfamc2f 1587
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
background
some significant events
mr marsten stays with his daughter: much trouble and an epoa
the intervention order
lawyers, a new will and new epoa
initiating application issued just before mr marsten dies
the matrimonial property pool
the early correspondence between lawyers
we note that when you filed that application on 19 january 2022, you are [ms hanley] were clearly of the view that [mr marsten] was a person who needed a litigation guardian. ... that you both formed the view that [mr marsten] was a person who needed a litigation guardian is perfectly reasonable and understandable in the circumstances. ... obviously, it is not only the court that can appoint someone as a litigation guardian. a person cannot appoint themselves as a litigation guardian, they can only apply to the court for an order that they be so appointed by the court. likewise, it is self-evident that no-one can act as a litigation guardian unless and until the court appoints them to be a litigation guardian. it is only after a person is appointed as a litigation guardian that proceeding can be commenced by them pursuant to rule 3.13 on behalf of the person who needs a litigation guardian. given all of the above, in our opinion, the only sensible interpretation of the initiating application that you prepared, signed and filed on 19 january 2022 is that it is an application by [ms hanley] pursuant to rule 3.15(1) for an interlocutory order of the court pursuant to rules 3.15(20 and 5.02 that [ms hanley] be appointed as a litigation guardian for [mr marsten], for the purpose of allowing [ms hanley] to then commence proceedings as a litigation guardian for [mr marsten] against our client [ms marsten] for a property settlements pursuant to section 79 of the family law act 1975 (cth). we seek your confirmation asap that our understanding of the nature of your initiating application filed on 19 january 2022 is correct. if our understanding is not correct, then we suggest that your filing of the initiating application was in clear breach of rule 3.13 and the proceeding should be struck out as a nullity. in that event, we reserve our client’s right to seek an order for costs against you personally. [emphasis added]
the proceedings
the 1 august 2022 directions
the court orders that: interim defended hearing the matter is listed for an interim defended hearing before judge o'shannessy on 19 september 2022 at 10.00 am noting that the issue to be determined is the standing of [ms hanley] as litigation guardian to commence the proceedings in circumstances where the respondent questions the validity of the of power of attorney. not later than 4.00 pm on 8 august 2022, the proposed legal personal representative provide to the respondent a copy of all medical reports they seek to rely on at the interim defended hearing. not later than 4.00 pm on 22 august 2022, each party file and serve one consolidated supporting affidavit in relation to issues to be determined at the interim defended hearing and one affidavit of each witness, noting the provisions of rules 5.04 and 5.08 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 together with the central practice direction – family law case management. pursuant to the central practice direction – family law case management, by 4.00 pm on 15 september 2022, each party file and serve:   an outline of case (interim hearing), and (b) a minute of orders sought. not later than 4.00 pm on 5 september 2022, the respondent must file and serve any written submissions on which that party intends to rely. not later than 4.00 pm on 12 september 2022, the proposed legal personal representative must file and serve any written submissions on which that party intends to rely.  phasis added]
the adjournment application
...
the adjournment application heard on 19 september 2022
mr antill: no. no. look, i think, your honour, based on the summary dismissal principles could find that he did have capacity to execute the epa [in early 2022]. his honour: but your contentions were that he didn’t. mr antill: ... i think, your honour, based on the summary dismissal principles could find that he did have capacity to execute the epa [in early 2022]. his honour: but your contentions were that he didn’t. mr antill: my contention was that – in my written submissions were that there wasn’t perhaps sufficient evidence about that, but given the discourse and your honour’s pointing out that it is a summary dismissal application and evidence at the highest form, then i don’t press that submission, but what i do press is that there is no evidence to establish that he was a person in need of a litigation guardian.
the further procedural orders
the 27 october 2022 further hearing
documents relied upon at resumed hearing
objections
exhibits tendered
the medical evidence
mildly disorientated note daughter is seeking epoa today. discussed with [mr marsten]. he has a general idea of epoa + mtdm [medical treatment decision maker] discussed role of mtdm + epoa, financial + lifestyle. he was able to show understanding of all of the above and openly stated he trusts his daughter to hold any or all of these. i think there is an underlying cognitive deficit but it’s mild and he has capacity to appoint mtdm/epoa[12].
met with [mr marsten] + daughter discussed pall care referral epoa done ... jp
in my opinion, he is in the capacity to make decision. he has [a serious illness] and he will most likely to deteriorate further in next few weeks. he will require higher doses on analgesia and his capacity to make the decision will be affected.
events subsequent to mr marsten’s death
i was first involved in [mr marsten’s] care when he was an inpatient at [a hospital]. he was experiencing pain from his [illness] which was end stage, having progressed through multiple lines of treatment. ... i reviewed him again [days later]... i subsequently reviewed [mr marsten] [late 2021] while he remained an inpatient at [the hospital]. i had telephone calls with his daughter during this time. we agreed to meet to discuss enduring power of attorney and medical treatment decision making with [mr marsten] and his daughter. during the admission [mr marsten] was often fatigued and at times drowsy however did not show any overt signs of confusion. on the day of the review, [mr marsten] was mildly disorientated however we had an extensive discussion regarding the role of enduring power of attorney and appointing a medical treatment decision maker for which [mr marsten] was able to express his understanding of the role of both of these appointments and the impact it would have on his ongoing care and decision making as well as the implications of those appointments on others. with regards to the making of a will this was not formally assessed and on review of my notes ...i made no documentation of attesting of his capacity. in specific response to the questions in your letter, in my opinion [mr marsten] had an understanding of what a will was as he demonstrated the capacity to understand enduring power of attorney and medical treatment decision maker. i did not make an assessment of his general understanding of the nature and extent of his estate or assets. i did not formally test his capacity to consider beneficiaries of his will nor did i attest his capacity to have the ability to evaluate and discriminate between those potential beneficiaries and make provisions for them. [a few days later] was my last review and interaction with [mr marsten]. i note that his will was signed [in early] 2022 and given the time that had passed between the making of the will and my assessment of his cognitive abilities, i am unable to comment on what his cognitive abilities would likely have been at the time of signing of the will.
i was asked to provide a medical statement regarding [mr marsten’s] capacity to make a legal decision. [mr marsten] had a: long stay at [h hospital] [in late 2021]. [in late] 2021, he was examined by myself and palliative care specialist [dr d]. we both believe he had a general idea of making power of attorney and will. i last spoken and examined [mr marsten] [in early] 2022. on my assessment, he was not drowsy or confused. he is in capacity to make a legal decision.
the applicable law
the rules and a litigation guardian
1.04 overarching purpose   the overarching purpose of these rules, as provided by section 67 of the federal circuit and family court act, is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes according to law and as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.
note 1: these rules must be interpreted and applied, and any power conferred or duty imposed by them must be exercised or carried out, in the way that best promotes the overarching purpose (see subsection 67(3) of the federal circuit and family court act). note 2: see sections 190 and 191 of the federal circuit and family court act in relation to the overarching purpose of the rules of the federal circuit and family court (division 2). see also the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) (family law) rules 2021 which applies these rules with modifications.   parties to family law proceedings must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose.
note: see subsection 68(1) of the federal circuit and family court act.   a party’s lawyer must, in the conduct of a proceeding before the court (including negotiations for settlement) on the party’s behalf: (a) take account of the duty imposed on the party referred to in subrule (2), and (b) assist the party to comply with the duty.   take account of the duty imposed on the party referred to in subrule (2), and (b) assist the party to comply with the duty.   assist the party to comply with the duty.
note: see subsection 68(2) of the federal circuit and family court act.
1.05 definitions
... litigation guardian means a person appointed by the court under rule 3.15 to manage and conduct a proceeding for a person who needs a litigation guardian (also known as a next friend, guardian ad litem or tutor) (see part 3.5).
... 1.31 court may make orders or dispense with these rules   the court may, in the interests of justice, dispense with compliance, or full compliance, with any of these rules at any time. (2) if, in a proceeding, the court gives a direction or makes an order that is inconsistent with any of these rules, the direction or order of the court prevails in that proceeding.   if, in a proceeding, the court gives a direction or makes an order that is inconsistent with any of these rules, the direction or order of the court prevails in that proceeding.
... 2.01 which application form must be filed   unless otherwise provided in these rules, a proceeding must be started by filing an application for final orders in accordance with the relevant approved form. (2) an application for final orders may include an application for an interlocutory order. (3) a person must not file an application for an interlocutory order unless:   an application for final orders may include an application for an interlocutory order. (3) a person must not file an application for an interlocutory order unless:   a person must not file an application for an interlocutory order unless:   an application for final orders is current in the proceeding, or (b) the application includes an application for final orders.   if a person makes an application for an interlocutory order after the start of the proceeding and before final orders have been made in the proceeding, the application must be made by filing an application in a proceeding. (5) the required documents must be filed with an application if they have not already been filed in the proceeding.   the required documents must be filed with an application if they have not already been filed in the proceeding.  ) an application must concisely state the orders sought.   the relevant approved forms are set out in table 2.1.
... 2.14 formal requirements for documents (1) documents, other than forms, filed with the court must: (a) be typed in at least 12 point font size (times new roman or equivalent) with line spacing of 1.5 lines, and (b) have margins (left, right, top and bottom) of approximately 2.5 cm, and (c) have each page consecutively numbered, and (d) have a coversheet in the approved form including the court file number distinctive to the proceeding. (2) paper documents should be: (a) legible and without erasures, blotting out or material disfigurement, and (b) printed on one side only of white a4 paper, and (c) securely bound or fastened.   be typed in at least 12 point font size (times new roman or equivalent) with line spacing of 1.5 lines, and (b) have margins (left, right, top and bottom) of approximately 2.5 cm, and (c) have each page consecutively numbered, and (d) have a coversheet in the approved form including the court file number distinctive to the proceeding.   have margins (left, right, top and bottom) of approximately 2.5 cm, and (c) have each page consecutively numbered, and (d) have a coversheet in the approved form including the court file number distinctive to the proceeding.   have each page consecutively numbered, and (d) have a coversheet in the approved form including the court file number distinctive to the proceeding.   have a coversheet in the approved form including the court file number distinctive to the proceeding.   legible and without erasures, blotting out or material disfigurement, and (b) printed on one side only of white a4 paper, and (c) securely bound or fastened.   printed on one side only of white a4 paper, and (c) securely bound or fastened.   securely bound or fastened.   electronic documents must be filed in pdf format. (4) a document filed or served (other than an affidavit, annexure or exhibit) must be signed by a party or by the lawyer for the party unless the nature of the document is such that signature is inappropriate. (5) subrules (1) to (4) do not need to be strictly complied with if the nature of the document, or the manner of filing, means that strict compliance would be impracticable.   a document filed or served (other than an affidavit, annexure or exhibit) must be signed by a party or by the lawyer for the party unless the nature of the document is such that signature is inappropriate. (5) subrules (1) to (4) do not need to be strictly complied with if the nature of the document, or the manner of filing, means that strict compliance would be impracticable.   subrules (1) to (4) do not need to be strictly complied with if the nature of the document, or the manner of filing, means that strict compliance would be impracticable.
note: for formal requirements for affidavits, see part 8.3.
... part 3.5—litigation guardians 3.12 person who needs a litigation guardian   for these rules, a person needs a litigation guardian in relation to a proceeding if the person: (a) does not understand the nature and possible consequences of the proceeding, or (b) is not capable of adequately conducting, or giving adequate instruction for the conduct of, the proceeding. (2) unless the court otherwise orders, a minor in a proceeding is taken to need a litigation guardian in relation to the proceeding.   does not understand the nature and possible consequences of the proceeding, or (b) is not capable of adequately conducting, or giving adequate instruction for the conduct of, the proceeding.   is not capable of adequately conducting, or giving adequate instruction for the conduct of, the proceeding.   unless the court otherwise orders, a minor in a proceeding is taken to need a litigation guardian in relation to the proceeding.
3.13 starting, continuing, defending or inclusion in proceeding   a person who needs a litigation guardian may start, continue, respond to or seek to be included as a party to a proceeding only by the person’s litigation guardian.   the litigation guardian of a party to a proceeding: (a) must do anything required by these rules to be done by the party, and (b) may, for the benefit of the party, do anything permitted by these rules to be done by the party.   must do anything required by these rules to be done by the party, and (b) may, for the benefit of the party, do anything permitted by these rules to be done by the party.   may, for the benefit of the party, do anything permitted by these rules to be done by the party.
note 1: person may apply for an interlocutory order to be appointed as a litigation guardian in relation to a prospective proceeding (see rule 5.02(2)(b)). note 2: rule 6.01(3) applies the duty of disclosure to a litigation guardian appointed under this part. note 3: subrules 5.28(3) and 10.04(3) require a litigation guardian seeking a consent order to file an affidavit setting out the facts relied on to satisfy the court that the order is in the party’s best interests.
3.14 who may be a litigation guardian a person may be a litigation guardian in a proceeding if the person:   is an adult, and (b) has no interest in the proceeding adverse to the interest of the person needing the litigation guardian, and (c) can fairly and competently conduct the proceeding for the person needing the litigation guardian.   has no interest in the proceeding adverse to the interest of the person needing the litigation guardian, and (c) can fairly and competently conduct the proceeding for the person needing the litigation guardian.   can fairly and competently conduct the proceeding for the person needing the litigation guardian.
3.15 appointment of litigation guardian   a person may apply for the appointment, replacement or removal of a person as the litigation guardian of a party. (2) the court may, at the request of a party or on its own initiative, appoint or remove a litigation guardian, or substitute another person as litigation guardian, in a proceeding in the interests of a person who needs a litigation guardian. (3) a person becomes a litigation guardian if the person consents to the appointment by filing an affidavit of consent in the proceeding. (4) the court may remove a litigation guardian at the request of the litigation guardian.   the court may, at the request of a party or on its own initiative, appoint or remove a litigation guardian, or substitute another person as litigation guardian, in a proceeding in the interests of a person who needs a litigation guardian. (3) a person becomes a litigation guardian if the person consents to the appointment by filing an affidavit of consent in the proceeding. (4) the court may remove a litigation guardian at the request of the litigation guardian.   a person becomes a litigation guardian if the person consents to the appointment by filing an affidavit of consent in the proceeding. (4) the court may remove a litigation guardian at the request of the litigation guardian.   the court may remove a litigation guardian at the request of the litigation guardian.
3.16 manager of the affairs of a party (1) in this rule:
manager of the affairs of a party includes a person who is authorised by or under a commonwealth, state or territory law to conduct legal proceedings in the name of, or for, a person who needs a litigation guardian.   a person who is a manager of the affairs of a party is entitled to be the litigation guardian in any proceeding to which the person’s authority extends. (3) if, in the opinion of the court, a suitable person is not available for appointment as a litigation guardian for a person who needs a litigation guardian, the court may request that the attorney‑general appoint a person to be a manager of the affairs of the party. (4) the attorney‑general may appoint, in writing, a person to be a manager of the affairs of a party for the purposes of this rule, either generally or for a particular person. (5) a manager of the affairs of a party becomes the litigation guardian of a person who needs a litigation guardian in a proceeding if the manager of the affairs of the party files an affidavit of consent in relation to the person.   if, in the opinion of the court, a suitable person is not available for appointment as a litigation guardian for a person who needs a litigation guardian, the court may request that the attorney‑general appoint a person to be a manager of the affairs of the party. (4) the attorney‑general may appoint, in writing, a person to be a manager of the affairs of a party for the purposes of this rule, either generally or for a particular person. (5) a manager of the affairs of a party becomes the litigation guardian of a person who needs a litigation guardian in a proceeding if the manager of the affairs of the party files an affidavit of consent in relation to the person.   the attorney‑general may appoint, in writing, a person to be a manager of the affairs of a party for the purposes of this rule, either generally or for a particular person. (5) a manager of the affairs of a party becomes the litigation guardian of a person who needs a litigation guardian in a proceeding if the manager of the affairs of the party files an affidavit of consent in relation to the person.   a manager of the affairs of a party becomes the litigation guardian of a person who needs a litigation guardian in a proceeding if the manager of the affairs of the party files an affidavit of consent in relation to the person.
3.17 notice of becoming litigation guardian a person appointed as the litigation guardian of a party to a proceeding must, as soon as practicable after the appointment, give notice of the appointment to each other party and any independent children’s lawyer in the proceeding. 3.18 costs and expenses of litigation guardian the court may make orders for the payment of the costs and expenses of a litigation guardian (including the costs of an application for the appointment of the litigation guardian): (a) by a party, or   from the income or assets of the person for whom the litigation guardian is appointed.
part 3.6—death or bankruptcy of a party division 3.6.1—death of party 3.19 death of party   this rule applies to a property proceeding or an application for the enforcement of a financial obligation. (2) if a party dies, the other party or the legal personal representative of the deceased person must ask the court for procedural orders in relation to the future conduct of the proceeding. (3) the court may order that the legal personal representative of the deceased person be substituted for the deceased person as a party.   if a party dies, the other party or the legal personal representative of the deceased person must ask the court for procedural orders in relation to the future conduct of the proceeding. (3) the court may order that the legal personal representative of the deceased person be substituted for the deceased person as a party.   the court may order that the legal personal representative of the deceased person be substituted for the deceased person as a party.
note 1: the court may make other procedural orders, including that a person has permission to intervene in the proceeding (see rules 1.31 and 3.04). note 2: for the effect of the death of a party in certain proceedings, see subsections 79(1a), 79(8), 79a(1c), 90sm(2), 90sm(8), 90sn(5), 90um(8) and 105(3) of the family law act.
... 10.09 application for summary orders   a party may apply for summary orders after a response has been filed if the party claims, in relation to the application or response, that: (a) the court has no jurisdiction, or (b) the other party has no legal capacity to apply for the orders sought, or (c) it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success. (2) an application under this rule must be made by filing an application in accordance with the approved form.   the court has no jurisdiction, or (b) the other party has no legal capacity to apply for the orders sought, or (c) it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.   the other party has no legal capacity to apply for the orders sought, or (c) it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.   it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.   there is no reasonable likelihood of success.   an application under this rule must be made by filing an application in accordance with the approved form.
section 79(2)   the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.
section 79(4)   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.
section 79(8)   where, before property settlement proceedings are completed, a party to the marriage dies: (a) the proceedings may be continued by or against, as the case may be, the legal personal representative of the deceased party and the applicable rules of court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal representative as a party to the proceedings,   the proceedings may be continued by or against, as the case may be, the legal personal representative of the deceased party and the applicable rules of court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal representative as a party to the proceedings,   if the court is of the opinion: (i) that it would have made an order with respect to property if the deceased party had not died, and (ii) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,   that it would have made an order with respect to property if the deceased party had not died, and (ii) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,  ) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,
the court may make such order as it considers appropriate with respect to: (iii) any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (iv) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, and  i) any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (iv) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, and  ) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, and   an order made by the court pursuant to paragraph (b) may be enforced on behalf of, or against, as the case may be, the estate of the deceased party.
140. making of orders and issue of writs   the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) has power, in relation to matters in which it has jurisdiction, to: (a) make orders of such kinds, including interlocutory orders, as the court considers appropriate, and (b) issue, or direct the issue of, writs of such kinds as the court considers appropriate.   make orders of such kinds, including interlocutory orders, as the court considers appropriate, and (b) issue, or direct the issue of, writs of such kinds as the court considers appropriate.   issue, or direct the issue of, writs of such kinds as the court considers appropriate.
141. declarations of right   the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) may, in relation to a matter in which it has original jurisdiction, make binding declarations of right, whether or not any consequential relief is or could be claimed. (2) a proceeding is not open to objection on the ground that a declaratory order only is sought.
... 143. summary judgment   the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) may give judgment for one party against another in relation to the whole or any part of a proceeding if: (a) the first party is prosecuting the proceeding or that part of the proceeding, and (b) the court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of successfully defending the proceeding or that part of the proceeding. (2) the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) may give judgment for one party against another in relation to the whole or any part of a proceeding if: (a) the first party is defending the proceeding or that part of the proceeding, and (b) the court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting the proceeding or that part of the proceeding. (3) for the purposes of this section, a defence or a proceeding or part of a proceeding need not be:   the first party is prosecuting the proceeding or that part of the proceeding, and (b) the court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of successfully defending the proceeding or that part of the proceeding.   the court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of successfully defending the proceeding or that part of the proceeding.   the first party is defending the proceeding or that part of the proceeding, and (b) the court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting the proceeding or that part of the proceeding.   the court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting the proceeding or that part of the proceeding.  hopeless, or (b) bound to fail,
for it to have no reasonable prospect of success.   this section does not limit any powers that the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) has apart from this section. (5) this section does not apply if the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) is exercising jurisdiction under the family law act 1975 .
... 189. formal defects not to invalidate   proceedings in the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) are not invalidated by a formal defect or an irregularity, unless the court is of the opinion that: (a) substantial injustice has been caused by the defect or irregularity, and   substantial injustice has been caused by the defect or irregularity, and  the injustice cannot be remedied by an order of the court.  the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge may, on such conditions (if any) as the court or judge thinks fit, make an order declaring that the proceeding is not invalid: (a) by reason of a defect that it or the judge considers to be formal, or   by reason of a defect that it or the judge considers to be formal, or  by reason of an irregularity.
190. overarching purpose of civil practice and procedure provisions   the overarching purpose of the civil practice and procedure provisions is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes:  according to law, and (b) as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.
note 1: see also paragraphs 5(a) and (b). note 2: the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) must give effect to principles in the family law act 1975 when exercising jurisdiction in relation to proceedings under that act.   without limiting subsection (1), the overarching purpose includes the following objectives: (a) the just determination of all proceedings before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), (b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court, (c) the efficient disposal of the court's overall caseload, (d) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute. (3) the civil practice and procedure provisions must be interpreted and applied, and any power conferred or duty imposed by them (including the power to make rules of court) must be exercised or carried out, in the way that best promotes the overarching purpose. (4) the civil practice and procedure provisions are the following, so far as they apply in relation to civil proceedings:   the just determination of all proceedings before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), (b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court, (c) the efficient disposal of the court's overall caseload, (d) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.   the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court, (c) the efficient disposal of the court's overall caseload, (d) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.   the efficient disposal of the court's overall caseload, (d) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.   the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.   the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.  the rules of court, (b) any other provision made by or under this act or any other act with respect to the practice and procedure of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2).   any other provision made by or under this act or any other act with respect to the practice and procedure of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2).
22 enduring power of attorney   by an enduring power of attorney a person may authorise an eligible attorney to do anything on behalf of the person that a person can lawfully do by an attorney. (2) without limiting subsection (1), a person may confine what is authorised to be done by an attorney—   without limiting subsection (1), a person may confine what is authorised to be done by an attorney—   to personal matters only, or (b) to financial matters only, or (c) to matters specified in the instrument of appointment.   despite any rule of law to the contrary an enduring power of attorney is not revoked by the principal, after making the power, becoming a person who does not have decision making capacity for any matters to which the power of attorney applies.   in this section—
eligible attorney means a person who is eligible under division 3 to be appointed as an attorney under the power of attorney.
note see section 26 for matters for which power cannot be given under an enduring power of attorney. ... matters for which power cannot be given under an enduring power of attorney to avoid doubt, despite section 22, a principal under an enduring power of attorney is not able to authorise an attorney under that power to— (a) make or revoke a will for the principal, or (b) make or revoke an enduring power of attorney for the principal, or (c) vote on the principal's behalf in an election for the state or the commonwealth or another state or a territory of the commonwealth or a local election or a referendum, or (d) consent to the entering into or dissolution of a marriage of the principal or of a sexual relationship of the principal, or (e) make or give effect to a decision— (i) about the care and wellbeing of any child of the principal, or (ii) about the adoption of a child under 18 years of age of the principal, or (f) to enter into, or agree to enter into, a surrogacy arrangement, within the meaning of the assisted reproductive treatment act 2008, on the principal's behalf, or (g) consent to the making or discharge of a substitute parentage order, within the meaning of the status of children act 1974, on the principal's behalf, or (h) manage the estate of the principal on the death of the principal, or (i) consent to an unlawful act. ... 39 when attorney's power is exercisable   make or revoke a will for the principal, or (b) make or revoke an enduring power of attorney for the principal, or (c) vote on the principal's behalf in an election for the state or the commonwealth or another state or a territory of the commonwealth or a local election or a referendum, or (d) consent to the entering into or dissolution of a marriage of the principal or of a sexual relationship of the principal, or (e) make or give effect to a decision— (i) about the care and wellbeing of any child of the principal, or (ii) about the adoption of a child under 18 years of age of the principal, or (f) to enter into, or agree to enter into, a surrogacy arrangement, within the meaning of the assisted reproductive treatment act 2008, on the principal's behalf, or (g) consent to the making or discharge of a substitute parentage order, within the meaning of the status of children act 1974, on the principal's behalf, or (h) manage the estate of the principal on the death of the principal, or (i) consent to an unlawful act.   make or revoke an enduring power of attorney for the principal, or (c) vote on the principal's behalf in an election for the state or the commonwealth or another state or a territory of the commonwealth or a local election or a referendum, or (d) consent to the entering into or dissolution of a marriage of the principal or of a sexual relationship of the principal, or (e) make or give effect to a decision— (i) about the care and wellbeing of any child of the principal, or (ii) about the adoption of a child under 18 years of age of the principal, or (f) to enter into, or agree to enter into, a surrogacy arrangement, within the meaning of the assisted reproductive treatment act 2008, on the principal's behalf, or (g) consent to the making or discharge of a substitute parentage order, within the meaning of the status of children act 1974, on the principal's behalf, or (h) manage the estate of the principal on the death of the principal, or (i) consent to an unlawful act.   vote on the principal's behalf in an election for the state or the commonwealth or another state or a territory of the commonwealth or a local election or a referendum, or (d) consent to the entering into or dissolution of a marriage of the principal or of a sexual relationship of the principal, or (e) make or give effect to a decision— (i) about the care and wellbeing of any child of the principal, or (ii) about the adoption of a child under 18 years of age of the principal, or (f) to enter into, or agree to enter into, a surrogacy arrangement, within the meaning of the assisted reproductive treatment act 2008, on the principal's behalf, or (g) consent to the making or discharge of a substitute parentage order, within the meaning of the status of children act 1974, on the principal's behalf, or (h) manage the estate of the principal on the death of the principal, or (i) consent to an unlawful act.   consent to the entering into or dissolution of a marriage of the principal or of a sexual relationship of the principal, or (e) make or give effect to a decision— (i) about the care and wellbeing of any child of the principal, or (ii) about the adoption of a child under 18 years of age of the principal, or (f) to enter into, or agree to enter into, a surrogacy arrangement, within the meaning of the assisted reproductive treatment act 2008, on the principal's behalf, or (g) consent to the making or discharge of a substitute parentage order, within the meaning of the status of children act 1974, on the principal's behalf, or (h) manage the estate of the principal on the death of the principal, or (i) consent to an unlawful act.   make or give effect to a decision— (i) about the care and wellbeing of any child of the principal, or (ii) about the adoption of a child under 18 years of age of the principal, or (f) to enter into, or agree to enter into, a surrogacy arrangement, within the meaning of the assisted reproductive treatment act 2008, on the principal's behalf, or (g) consent to the making or discharge of a substitute parentage order, within the meaning of the status of children act 1974, on the principal's behalf, or (h) manage the estate of the principal on the death of the principal, or (i) consent to an unlawful act.   about the care and wellbeing of any child of the principal, or (ii) about the adoption of a child under 18 years of age of the principal, or  ) about the adoption of a child under 18 years of age of the principal, or   to enter into, or agree to enter into, a surrogacy arrangement, within the meaning of the assisted reproductive treatment act 2008, on the principal's behalf, or (g) consent to the making or discharge of a substitute parentage order, within the meaning of the status of children act 1974, on the principal's behalf, or (h) manage the estate of the principal on the death of the principal, or (i) consent to an unlawful act.   consent to the making or discharge of a substitute parentage order, within the meaning of the status of children act 1974, on the principal's behalf, or (h) manage the estate of the principal on the death of the principal, or (i) consent to an unlawful act.   manage the estate of the principal on the death of the principal, or (i) consent to an unlawful act.   consent to an unlawful act.   a principal may specify, in an enduring power of attorney, a time from which, a circumstance in which or an occasion on which the power for all matters or the power for a specified matter under the power of attorney is exercisable, which may be— (a) immediately on the making of the power, or (b) when the principal ceases to have decision making capacity for the matters or matter, or (c) any other time, circumstance or occasion. (2) if a specification is not made in an enduring power of attorney under subsection (1), the power for all matters under the enduring power of attorney is exercisable on and from the making of the power of attorney. (3) despite a specification being made under subsection (1) in an enduring power of attorney, if before the specified time, circumstance or occasion for a matter, the principal does not have decision making capacity for the matter, an attorney who has power for the matter may exercise that power during any period when the principal does not have that capacity. (4) if an attorney is acting under an enduring power of attorney as to a matter because the principal does not have decision making capacity for the matter, a person dealing with the attorney may ask for evidence to establish that the principal does not have the decision making capacity.   immediately on the making of the power, or (b) when the principal ceases to have decision making capacity for the matters or matter, or (c) any other time, circumstance or occasion.   when the principal ceases to have decision making capacity for the matters or matter, or (c) any other time, circumstance or occasion.   any other time, circumstance or occasion.   if a specification is not made in an enduring power of attorney under subsection (1), the power for all matters under the enduring power of attorney is exercisable on and from the making of the power of attorney. (3) despite a specification being made under subsection (1) in an enduring power of attorney, if before the specified time, circumstance or occasion for a matter, the principal does not have decision making capacity for the matter, an attorney who has power for the matter may exercise that power during any period when the principal does not have that capacity. (4) if an attorney is acting under an enduring power of attorney as to a matter because the principal does not have decision making capacity for the matter, a person dealing with the attorney may ask for evidence to establish that the principal does not have the decision making capacity.   despite a specification being made under subsection (1) in an enduring power of attorney, if before the specified time, circumstance or occasion for a matter, the principal does not have decision making capacity for the matter, an attorney who has power for the matter may exercise that power during any period when the principal does not have that capacity. (4) if an attorney is acting under an enduring power of attorney as to a matter because the principal does not have decision making capacity for the matter, a person dealing with the attorney may ask for evidence to establish that the principal does not have the decision making capacity.   if an attorney is acting under an enduring power of attorney as to a matter because the principal does not have decision making capacity for the matter, a person dealing with the attorney may ask for evidence to establish that the principal does not have the decision making capacity.
note an example of evidence that may be given under subsection (4) is a medical certificate as to the principal's decision making capacity. ... 51 death of principal an enduring power of attorney is revoked on the death of the principal.
legal personal representative
79 alteration of property interests ...   where, before property settlement proceedings are completed, a party to the marriage dies: (a) the proceedings may be continued by or against, as the case may be, the legal personal representative of the deceased party and the applicable rules of court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal representative as a party to the proceedings, (b) if the court is of the opinion: (i) that it would have made an order with respect to property if the deceased party had not died, and (ii) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,   the proceedings may be continued by or against, as the case may be, the legal personal representative of the deceased party and the applicable rules of court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal representative as a party to the proceedings, (b) if the court is of the opinion: (i) that it would have made an order with respect to property if the deceased party had not died, and (ii) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,
the court may make such order as it considers appropriate with respect to: (iii) any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (iv) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, and (c) an order made by the court pursuant to paragraph (b) may be enforced on behalf of, or against, as the case may be, the estate of the deceased party.
... 1 s.79(8) 2 [see] rule 3.19(2) 3 s (deceased) & s [2002] famca 1281 per mullane j [25], 4 murdoch & brown (no.2) [2013] famca 732, per cronin j [6] –[14]
documents and filing
6.06 duty of disclosure—financial proceedings   the duty of disclosure applies to a financial proceeding. (2) subrules (3) to (9) do not apply to a party to a property proceeding who is not a party to the marriage or de facto relationship to which the application relates, except to the extent that the party’s financial circumstances are relevant to the issues in dispute. (3) without limiting subrule (1), a party to a financial proceeding must make full and frank disclosure of the party’s financial circumstances ...   subrules (3) to (9) do not apply to a party to a property proceeding who is not a party to the marriage or de facto relationship to which the application relates, except to the extent that the party’s financial circumstances are relevant to the issues in dispute. (3) without limiting subrule (1), a party to a financial proceeding must make full and frank disclosure of the party’s financial circumstances ...   without limiting subrule (1), a party to a financial proceeding must make full and frank disclosure of the party’s financial circumstances ...   paragraph (3)(g) does not apply to a disposal of property made: (a) with the consent or knowledge of the other party, or (b) in the ordinary course of business.   with the consent or knowledge of the other party, or (b) in the ordinary course of business.   in the ordinary course of business.   a party starting, or filing a response or reply to, a financial proceeding (other than by an application for consent orders) must file, at the same time: (a) a financial statement, and (b) unless the party is required by these rules to file an affidavit—a financial questionnaire in accordance with the approved form. (6) if a party is aware that the completion of a financial statement will not fully discharge the duty to make full and frank disclosure, the party must also file an affidavit giving further particulars.   a financial statement, and (b) unless the party is required by these rules to file an affidavit—a financial questionnaire in accordance with the approved form.   unless the party is required by these rules to file an affidavit—a financial questionnaire in accordance with the approved form.   if a party is aware that the completion of a financial statement will not fully discharge the duty to make full and frank disclosure, the party must also file an affidavit giving further particulars.
... [emphasis added]
authorities
“legal personal representative’ is not used elsewhere in the family law act in relation to property proceedings and is not defined in that act. in particular, there is no provision for a person to qualify as, or be appointed as, the legal personal representative of a deceased party. ... judicial registrar loughnan, the learned author of the commentary on the family law rules in the butterworth service “family court legislation” expresses the view (at o 15 r 8.3) of order 15 rule 8 that: “the legal personal representative will generally be the executor/executrix of the deceased person.” the expression “personal representative” is a legal term and thus as such means, in relation to a deceased person, the executor of the will of the deceased (whether probate has been granted or not) or a person to whom a grant of letters of administration has been made for the estate of the deceased (see 17 halsbury's laws 4th edition para 704, vol 3, words and phrases legally defined, butterworths 3rd edition, strouds judicial dictionary 5th edition, sweet and maxwell volume 4 at 1930, butterworths australian legal dictionary (1997) 873).” in relation to the power to substitute a person or persons as the legal personal representative or representatives of a deceased party to proceedings his honour stated at paragraphs 25 to 27 that: “subsection 79(8) does not give power to this court to appoint someone as “legal personal representative” of a deceased party to be substituted to continue the proceedings or to be the person against whom the proceedings may be continued. it does not appear to contemplate an appointment by the court of a representative like a guardian ad litem, for example. indeed, par 79(8)(a) says:
“the applicable rules of court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal representative as a party to the proceedings.”
clearly from the language of the section and the authorities, the person who is to be substituted must already be the legal personal representative of the deceased. this court has no power to appoint a person as legal personal representative of the deceased. in the present circumstances, the applicant would need to obtain from the supreme court, letters of administration with the will annexed, or letters of administration ad litem making her the legal personal representative of the deceased wife before the court can make an order under s 79(8) substituting her for the deceased party.”  in cullen & cullen [2011] fmcafam 375, kemp fm heard a case where, after the evidence had closed, but before judgment was given, the applicant wife died. thereafter, an application was made by the legal personal representative to intervene. however, at the time his honour contemplated the application to intervene, probate had not been granted. but the relevant will was in evidence. the surviving husband consented to the substitution of the legal personal representative, notwithstanding the absence of the grant of probate. [9] his honour queried whether he could make that order. he observed that, while the appointment of the executor was contained within the will, it was ultimately conditional upon the will being proved valid. he referred to s 44 of the probate and administration act 1898 (nsw), which specifically referred to the fact that, upon the granting of probate, all real and personal property of the deceased vests in the executor from the date of the death. this was described by his honour as the doctrine of relation back, to which i have earlier referred. he referred to cases where an executor did things before obtaining probate, and noted that such intermeddling may mean the person is liable to the rightful representative. i interpolate there, however, that all of those situations are predicated on there being such a dispute. in the case before his honour, there was no dispute because there was agreement about the appointment and the entitlement of the executor. [10] his honour then referred to the decision of byers & overton investments proprietary limited [2001] fcafc 760, (2001) 109 fcr 554 the decision of the full court of the federal court of australia. but there, the court distinguished between a legal personal representative having title to property, and the limited status that comes from the will. his honour then said that the executor could apply to become a party in his or her own right to the proceedings, as an intervenor, and that the will provided the basis for that. he said that upon the grant of probate, a legal personal representative could seek to be substituted for the deceased party, and then remove himself or herself as a party in their own right. with respect, i think that is an artificial construction. the critical question is whether the will is accepted as the deceased’s final and legitimate testament. if so, and it seems to have been the case before his honour, as it is indeed here, the relevant issue is not the grant of probate so much as the court making an order authenticating and legitimising the executor’s position at law to stand in the shoes of the deceased in the proceedings. ... [12] ...my view...is that the executor’s position as legal personal representative commences with the will and continues until challenged, at which time a grant of probate must be obtained and produced. nothing in any of the authorities suggests that an order made under the machinery provisions of the family law rules is invalidated by the absence of a grant of probate... [13] rule 6.15 of the family law rules[17] requires the legal personal representative to ask for procedural orders, and the court may substitute the legal personal representative for the deceased, as a party. nothing in that rule alters the legal position of the legal personal representative obtaining his or her rights from the will. procedural orders are, in effect, an authentication of the legal personal representative’s position. thus, it is not critical that probate be granted unless a party joins issue with a legal personal representative as to their title under the will. there have been examples of this court where this court has adjourned proceedings to await a grant of probate, but they refer to the executors regularising their legal position. see, for example, korsky & bright & anor [2007] famca 245, and specifically at paragraph 20. [14] the suspension of the proceedings, as i have indicated, however, does not obviate the fact that the executor still has the right, the entitlement, and the responsibility from the will, pending the authentication by the probate. as such, nothing i have found suggests that a legal personal representative cannot be appointed before probate is granted, provided there is no suggestion that the other party joins issue with the entitlement under the will... [emphasis added, as highlighted by counsel for the applicant]
the central question
the affidavit
ms marsten’s case
but what i would say in relation to that is that that’s, principally, aimed at the grounds in 10.09(1)(c) and (d), that is, reasonable prospects of success, or frivolous, vexation or abuse of process. when we’re dealing with a jurisdictional question, your honour, it’s almost the reverse. it would be a very serious matter for the court to deal with a matter when it didn’t have jurisdiction. and the court needs to be satisfied that it does have jurisdiction...
“hi [the family law solicitor], he is at home. the nurse has just been and she seems to think there are some problems with his combination of medications. he has improved slightly since the nurse has been and they think he may need a blood transfusion, but who knows... he just spoke to [the new wills solicitor] and has asked to have the wills sent through for signing... i’m not trying to be crass, but is there any point in signing the wills if the separation documents aren’t lodged with the court?” i responded to [ms hanley] at 5:19pm [in early] 2022 as follows: “yes, they really go hand in hand, but if [mr marsten’s] wish is to change his will, he should proceed to do so. i will send my letter of advice though, so that if his condition improves he can take action with respect to property settlement.” [in early] 2022 at 9:08am, [ms hanley] sent to me by email a copy of an updated will executed by [mr marsten] [in] 2022. her email said as follows: “dad executed his new will - see attached. he is very tired, but lucid, and becoming agitated about getting his affairs in order before he passes. he is anxious to speak to you to confirm everything has been done. i understand from [the family law solicitor] that it’s not really “done” until separation documents are lodged with the court and that is probably not possible now, but can you tell him it’s all done just to calm him, please? it feels like he is just hanging on to see this through, when he really should be peacefully settling into the process of dying.” i note that i was not prepared to lie to [mr marsten] in relation to proceedings having been commenced and did not agree to do so. [in early] 2022 at approximately 11:10am i spoke with [ms hanley]. she indicated to me the change in [mr marsten] medication levels seemed to have helped him and that she thinks the pain was actually making him seem worse, now his medication has increased he seemed a bit better. she further indicated that [mr marsten] was getting agitated wanting to ensure that everything is done and that he wanted to make sure that he had signed all of the paperwork, and that he was quite resolute about this. in light of the apparent deterioration of [mr marsten’s] health since our meeting [in] 2022, it was during this conversation that i raised with [ms hanley] that if [mr marsten] were not well enough to commence the court proceedings, then we could commence them on the basis that she is appointed as [mr marsten’s] litigation guardian in the proceedings. i again raised the need for a capacity assessment. [in early] 2022 at 2:55pm, i sent [ms hanley] an email which said as follows: dear [ms hanley], i refer to our telephone conversation just now and confirm that [mr marsten] has an appointment with his [specialist] this afternoon. we would be grateful if you could request [mr marsten’s] [specialist] to provide their professional opinion as to the following:
1. whether [mr marsten] currently: has capacity to understand the nature and possible consequences of family law proceedings, and is capable of giving adequate instructions for the conduct of family law proceedings. provide a brief summary of [mr marsten’s] current diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and what impact, if any, this may have on [mr marsten’s] capacity to give instructions on an ongoing basis. [in early] 2022 at 3:46pm, i received an email from [ms hanley] which said:
“did you hear from [dr c]? we’d like to lodge the proceedings tomorrow if possible, please?” [in early] 2022 at 4:03pm i replied to [ms hanley’s] email and indicated i was still waiting to hear from [dr c]. i forwarded to her a copy of the draft initiating application, financial statement and financial questionnaire i had prepared and indicated i required further instructions from [mr marsten] with respect to completion of those documents. i indicated i was still i the process of preparing affidavits. at this point in time, i was preparing the application and supporting affidavit to be signed and affirmed/sworn by [mr marsten] himself as applicant. i was, however, cognisant of [ms hanley] indications of [mr marsten’s] decline in physical health since our meeting [in early] 2022. i was awaiting receipt of the response from [dr c]. i understand that [ms hanley] forwarded a copy of my email to [mr marsten’s] [specialist], [dr c]. [in early] 2022 at 10:59pm i received an email from [dr c] which said as follows: “hi [the family law solicitor] i reviewed [mr marsten] [in early] 2021(sic). in my opinion, he is in capacity to make decision. he has [a serious illness] and he will most likely to deteriorate further in next few weeks. he will require higher dose on analgesia and his capacity to make the decision will be affected. thank you.” i understood the words “he will require higher dose on analgesia and his capacity to make the decision will be affected” to be a reference to a negative effect on [mr marsten’s] capacity to provide instructions which would manifest in the next few weeks. at 8:01am [in early] 2022 [ms hanley] sent me an email with information to update the financial statement. she also said in her email: “if you can’t get it lodged today, we’ll have to forget about it...we’ll have run out of time.” at 10:29am [in early] 2022, i sent [ms hanley] an email which said as follows: “thanks [ms hanley]. i have now received the email from [dr c]. i am just finalising the documents and will email them shortly. can we arrange a zoom meeting today so that i can take [mr marsten] through them and answer any queries he has. can you give an indication of [mr marsten’s] weekly expenses to include in the financial statement?” at 10:37am [in early] 2022, [ms hanley] replied to my email as follows: “hi [the family law solicitor], we can try for a zoom meeting around 1pm, but i really think it’s too late... he is having difficulty swallowing and talking...” she then went on to provide details of [mr marsten’s] financial expenditure. at 10:41am [in early] 2022 [ms hanley] sent me a further email which said as follows: “actually will have to be around 12 – my husband has [an illness] in the middle of this and kids and i are booked in for a test.” at 11:07am [in early] 2022 i sent [ms hanley] an email which said as follows: “hi [ms hanley], sorry to hear this. what a nightmare. based on your updates and on the email from [dr c], i am going to prepare the application so that you will be filing it on [mr marsten’s] behalf seeking to be appointed as his litigation guardian. i have prepared a detailed affidavit for [mr marsten], however, it sounds that he may no longer be up for reading through and swearing the affidavit. i will amend this so that it is an affidavit you will be filing outlining the facts and circumstances, rather than [mr marsten]. i will send you a zoom invitation for 12pm, just so that we can confirm with [mr marsten] that he wants you to proceed to file the application on his behalf.” at 11:53am [in early] 2022, i emailed to [ms hanley] the initiating application and accompanying documents, amended for [ms hanley] to sign as [mr marsten’s] litigation guardian together with a copy of the email i had received from [dr c]. [ms hanley] had sent me by email at 12:39pm [in early] 2022 a copy of an enduring power of attorney document signed by [mr marsten] and dated 2021. that document is included annexure [h]-1 to the affidavit of [ms hanley] sworn [in] 2022 (“the 2021 poa”). at 11:55am [in] 2022, i had a telephone conversation with [ms hanley]. i asked how [mr marsten] was and she responded “not great”. i said can we have a zoom meeting so that i can confirm directly with him that he wants to proceed. she confirmed that she would arrange this. i discussed with her again what it would mean for her to commence to the proceedings as [mr marsten’s] litigation guardian. at 12:09pm [in] 2022 i had zoom meeting with [mr marsten] for approximately 10 minutes. [ms hanley] had set the camera up in front of [mr marsten]. he was lying down. compared to my observations of him during our meeting [earlier in] 2022, his physical health had deteriorated and he appeared to be very weak. i asked if hear could he me. he said “yes”. it was apparent that he was having significant difficulty speaking. i told him that i wanted to confirm that he still wished to commence the family law proceedings. he said “yes”. his response was clear. i then further clarified with him that he was happy for [ms hanley] to commence the proceedings on his behalf as litigation guardian. he again said “yes”. he thanked me for my help and said, “i really appreciate it”. again, [mr marsten’s] speech was slow, strained and clearly physically difficult for him. it was confronting to see that his presentation was so different from when i had spoken to him the week before. i spoke with [ms hanley], in [mr marsten’s] presence, further briefly about the documents and about her signing on [mr marsten’s] behalf. in light of the significant deterioration of [mr marsten’s] health over the last week, coupled with [dr c’s] advice that going forward [mr marsten] would require a higher dose on analgesia which would lead to a further deterioration in his capacity, i settled on the view that [mr marsten] was not and would not be capable of adequately conducting or giving adequate instructions for the conduct of the proceedings, and that it was preferable for the proceedings to be filed with [ms hanley] as his litigation guardian.
... i was present at [mr marsten’s] appointment [dr c]. i cannot remember exactly what [dr c] said about [mr marsten’s] prognosis, but it was vague, and i can recall pressing him for something more concrete, but he did not oblige around this time [mr marsten’s] and i had a very frank and emotional conversation about the fact that he was deteriorating and would not be well enough move to [the retirement village] ... we discussed that if l was to continue the litigation after his death, my already poor relationship with [ms marsten] would likely be further and irretrievably damaged. he thanked me for everything i had done for him, especially in the last month. he reiterated that he wanted me to continue with these proceedings after his death so that i'd "have a few bucks in your pocket" to do something for the kids (my children). i got the strong impression during this conversation he was wanting to leave something to me for his grandchildren, that i could use to remind them of him. [in early] 2022, i contacted the palliative care team and informed them that i was concerned that it seemed that [mr marsten] would not be able to swallow by the afternoon and he may therefore need the syringe driver installed, as had previously been discussed. [in early] 2022 i emailed [the family law solicitor] and requested that the paperwork be finalised that day. [mr marsten] had remained insistent that we keep going with it all and i wanted him to be able to rest knowing his wishes had been complied with. he had appeared to be rallying each time that there was a step in the process to complete. it was an awfully stressful time seeing my beloved father becoming so unwell, but so agitated to get things in order. i wanted to ensure that i was following his express wishes, so that i could assure him it was done, and he could be at peace. i therefore agreed to commence the proceedings as his litigation guardian, in circumstances where he was no longer in a physical state to do so, as his health had begun to deteriorate more rapidly. i agree with the observations made by [the family law solicitor] during her zoom meeting with [mr marsten]. [mr marsten] was very weak physically and due to his dry mouth and difficulty swallowing was having difficulty speaking. the last time [mr marsten] spoke at all was [in early] 2022. [emphasis added]
mr antill: all of the evidence indicates that he was capable of giving instructions. he gave instructions, and the solicitor - - - his honour: well, i think you’ve ..... one step further. he was capable of giving instructions and, therefore, did not need litigation guardian. mr antill: exactly. his honour: yes. mr antill: yes. his honour: so you use the term “capable of giving instructions” - - - mr antill: yes. his honour: and the phrase “needs a litigation guardian” - - - mr antill: yes. his honour: synonymously. mr antill: well, yes – we go back – i’m sorry. i was being sloppy, your honour. if we go back to 3.12 - - - his honour: no, i’m not suggesting you were. i’m just - - - mr antill: yes. his honour: but that’s the nub of your submissions, isn’t it? mr antill: well, if we go back to 3.12, there’s no evidence he did not understand the nature and possible consequences of the proceeding. the evidence is that he did understand that and nothing changed. the evidence is that he was capable on that day of adequately conducting and giving adequate instructions for the conduct of the proceedings because he said, “i want to issue proceedings,” or words to that effect. as i say:
i remain satisfied, however, of [mr marsten’s] genuine independent desire to separate from ..... and to commence the court proceedings, as communicated by him during our extended conference [in 2022] and again during our brief conference [in 2022].
on the morning of [early] 2022, i contacted the palliative care team and informed them that i was concerned that it seemed that [mr marsten] would not be able to swallow by the afternoon and he may therefore need the syringe driver installed, as had previously been discussed.
mr antill: no. so that’s the evidence, and i would say the evidence that is there is in support of the conclusion that he was not in need of a litigation guardian. he’s not in need [in early] 2022. he’s not in need [a week later]. he was not in need [a few days later]. his honour: who has got the burden of proof in this matter? mr antill: in my submission, the applicant is seeking to invoke the jurisdiction of the court and it’s their – burden is on them. so moving on and just picking up, effectively, if this is perhaps a blunder – and when i say “blunder”, it was – if – i would say is, if the proceedings were issued in the name of the husband, that we wouldn’t be here. the evidence is from the solicitor that she got clear instructions from the husband that he wanted to issue the proceedings, she could have signed the document on his behalf. there’s no evidence that he couldn’t have signed the document – is frail, but – but she didn’t. and so then the question is can this court cure that question you posed to me on the last occasion, your honour, and, in my submission, first, it’s no. the court can’t – i mean, i don’t know how you would cure it. [emphasis added]
ms hanley’s case.
discussion
more than mere capacity required to start or conduct a proceeding
conclusions
costs
associate: dated: 12 december 2023
dated: 12 december 2023
[1] in her affidavit of 3 march 2022.[2] annexure 2 to ms hanley’s 22 august 2022 affidavit.[3] the document is annexure 1 to ms hanley’s affidavit of 19 january 2022 (the affidavit filed together with the initiating application seeking property relief) and also annexure 1 to ms hanley’s affidavit of 22 august 2022. the document in original form had recorded ms marsten as his attorney and ms hanley as his alternative attorney. the reference to ms marsten was struck through. [4] see 2021 text message at page 24 of 39 of annexure 4 of ms hanley’s affidavit filed 22 august 2022, “...i am entitled to have a say..”[5] see 2021 text message at page 24 of 39 of annexure 4 of ms hanley’s affidavit filed 22 august 2022, “...i went to see ...”[6] see 2021 text message at page 25 of 39 of annexure 4. ms hanley’s reading of that text message asserts that the word “not” has been unintentionally omitted twice in this text.[7] see annexure d, page 14 of 39 to the affidavit of ms marsten’s solicitor filed 14 september 2022.[8] and absent a severance of the joint tenancies and this was not argued before me.[9] transcript 19 september 2022, tp 32 lines 14-18[10] 19 september 2022 tp40 lines 32 to 35.[11] see 27 october 2022 tp 26 lines 30-32[12] [13] the division 2 rules are only 13 pages including title pages and the [14] transcript page 34. [15] ms hanley’s summary of argument filed 12 september 2022. [16] emphasis added[17] this rule is now obsolete, but read to the same effect as the current almost identical rule 3.19 of the rules, recited earlier. [18] 19 september 2022 transcript page 23. [19] 19 september 2022 transcript page 35.