last updated: 31 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
callahan & eddy [2023] fedcfamc2f 1704
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment(reasons settled from transcript)
judge stewart  an applicant for leave must demonstrate hardship, and if able to convince a court that hardship is established, must then convince the court to exercise the discretion in her favour, in this case, to extend time, (b) the onus is on the applicant to demonstrate hardship, (c) the court needs to be satisfied that the prospective property claim is reasonable or arguable, but i am not required to undertake a detailed hearing on the merits, (d) if hardship is demonstrated, the onus is on the applicant to demonstrate why the discretion to grant leave should be demonstrated in her favour, and (e) if hardship is demonstrated, a range of other factors can be considered when considering whether to exercise the discretion in the applicant’s favour. these factors can include the length of delay, the adequacy of the reasons for delay, and the prejudice that the respondent would suffer if the application for an extension of time is granted.   the onus is on the applicant to demonstrate hardship, (c) the court needs to be satisfied that the prospective property claim is reasonable or arguable, but i am not required to undertake a detailed hearing on the merits, (d) if hardship is demonstrated, the onus is on the applicant to demonstrate why the discretion to grant leave should be demonstrated in her favour, and (e) if hardship is demonstrated, a range of other factors can be considered when considering whether to exercise the discretion in the applicant’s favour. these factors can include the length of delay, the adequacy of the reasons for delay, and the prejudice that the respondent would suffer if the application for an extension of time is granted.   the court needs to be satisfied that the prospective property claim is reasonable or arguable, but i am not required to undertake a detailed hearing on the merits, (d) if hardship is demonstrated, the onus is on the applicant to demonstrate why the discretion to grant leave should be demonstrated in her favour, and (e) if hardship is demonstrated, a range of other factors can be considered when considering whether to exercise the discretion in the applicant’s favour. these factors can include the length of delay, the adequacy of the reasons for delay, and the prejudice that the respondent would suffer if the application for an extension of time is granted.   if hardship is demonstrated, the onus is on the applicant to demonstrate why the discretion to grant leave should be demonstrated in her favour, and (e) if hardship is demonstrated, a range of other factors can be considered when considering whether to exercise the discretion in the applicant’s favour. these factors can include the length of delay, the adequacy of the reasons for delay, and the prejudice that the respondent would suffer if the application for an extension of time is granted.   if hardship is demonstrated, a range of other factors can be considered when considering whether to exercise the discretion in the applicant’s favour. these factors can include the length of delay, the adequacy of the reasons for delay, and the prejudice that the respondent would suffer if the application for an extension of time is granted.   the former matrimonial home, valued at $275,000 (which appears to be an agreed value), (b) the husband’s first car, valued at $800, (c) the husband’s second car, valued at $8,000, (d) the wife’s car, net of loan, which appears to have a value of $14,000 and a loan attached to it of $11,000, bringing its net equity to approximately $3,000, and (e) some modest savings held by each of the parties. overall, the non-superannuation asset pool appears to be around $286,800, of which the wife holds $3,000, or approximately 1 per cent.   the husband’s first car, valued at $800, (c) the husband’s second car, valued at $8,000, (d) the wife’s car, net of loan, which appears to have a value of $14,000 and a loan attached to it of $11,000, bringing its net equity to approximately $3,000, and (e) some modest savings held by each of the parties. overall, the non-superannuation asset pool appears to be around $286,800, of which the wife holds $3,000, or approximately 1 per cent.   the husband’s second car, valued at $8,000, (d) the wife’s car, net of loan, which appears to have a value of $14,000 and a loan attached to it of $11,000, bringing its net equity to approximately $3,000, and (e) some modest savings held by each of the parties. overall, the non-superannuation asset pool appears to be around $286,800, of which the wife holds $3,000, or approximately 1 per cent.   the wife’s car, net of loan, which appears to have a value of $14,000 and a loan attached to it of $11,000, bringing its net equity to approximately $3,000, and (e) some modest savings held by each of the parties. overall, the non-superannuation asset pool appears to be around $286,800, of which the wife holds $3,000, or approximately 1 per cent.   some modest savings held by each of the parties. overall, the non-superannuation asset pool appears to be around $286,800, of which the wife holds $3,000, or approximately 1 per cent.
overall, the non-superannuation asset pool appears to be around $286,800, of which the wife holds $3,000, or approximately 1 per cent.
associate: dated: 9 january 2024
dated: 9 january 2024