last updated: 29 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
tassou & pandelis (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 1608
orders
the court orders that:
x’s movement to the father’s care  that the mother, ms pandelis, be restrained from attending within 200 metres of x’s school, (b) that the mother, ms pandelis, be restrained from attending within 100 metres of any residence where the child, x, and the father, mr tassou, may reside, (c) that the mother, ms pandelis, be restrained from collecting or causing a third party to collect the child, x, from her school or any other location, (d) that the mother, ms pandelis, be restrained from communicating, approaching or attempting to communicate or approach the child, x other than provided for specifically in these orders.   that the mother, ms pandelis, be restrained from attending within 100 metres of any residence where the child, x, and the father, mr tassou, may reside, (c) that the mother, ms pandelis, be restrained from collecting or causing a third party to collect the child, x, from her school or any other location, (d) that the mother, ms pandelis, be restrained from communicating, approaching or attempting to communicate or approach the child, x other than provided for specifically in these orders.   that the mother, ms pandelis, be restrained from collecting or causing a third party to collect the child, x, from her school or any other location, (d) that the mother, ms pandelis, be restrained from communicating, approaching or attempting to communicate or approach the child, x other than provided for specifically in these orders.   that the mother, ms pandelis, be restrained from communicating, approaching or attempting to communicate or approach the child, x other than provided for specifically in these orders.
parental responsibility
live with
spend time with  on saturday 10 february 2024 and each saturday for five weeks thereafter for a period of three hours as agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 10:00am to 1:00pm, with such time to be supervised by b contact centre or such other service as agreed between the parties in writing. (b) thereafter on saturday 23 march 2024 and each saturday thereafter for five weeks from 10:00am to 6:00pm, and (c) thereafter from 10:00am saturday 4 may 2024 to 6:00pm sunday 5 may 2024 and from 10:00am saturday 18 may 2024 to 6:00pm sunday 19 may 2024.   thereafter on saturday 23 march 2024 and each saturday thereafter for five weeks from 10:00am to 6:00pm, and (c) thereafter from 10:00am saturday 4 may 2024 to 6:00pm sunday 5 may 2024 and from 10:00am saturday 18 may 2024 to 6:00pm sunday 19 may 2024.   thereafter from 10:00am saturday 4 may 2024 to 6:00pm sunday 5 may 2024 and from 10:00am saturday 18 may 2024 to 6:00pm sunday 19 may 2024.   in week one from after school (or 3:00pm if it is a non-school day) friday to before school (or 9:00am if it is a non-school day) monday with such time to recommence on the first friday of each school term, (b) in week two from after school (or 3:00pm if it is a non-school day) wednesday to before school (or 9:00am if it is a non-school day) thursday, (c) for the first half of the school holiday periods at the conclusion of terms 1 – 3 with changeover to take place from the conclusion of school on the last day that students are to attend to 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period, (d) for one half of the term 4 school holiday period as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement: - (i) from the conclusion of school on the last day that students are to attend to 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period in every year ending with an even number, and (ii) from 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period to before school on the first day that students are to attend on the next school year in every year ending with an odd number, and   in week two from after school (or 3:00pm if it is a non-school day) wednesday to before school (or 9:00am if it is a non-school day) thursday, (c) for the first half of the school holiday periods at the conclusion of terms 1 – 3 with changeover to take place from the conclusion of school on the last day that students are to attend to 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period, (d) for one half of the term 4 school holiday period as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement: - (i) from the conclusion of school on the last day that students are to attend to 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period in every year ending with an even number, and (ii) from 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period to before school on the first day that students are to attend on the next school year in every year ending with an odd number, and   for the first half of the school holiday periods at the conclusion of terms 1 – 3 with changeover to take place from the conclusion of school on the last day that students are to attend to 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period, (d) for one half of the term 4 school holiday period as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement: - (i) from the conclusion of school on the last day that students are to attend to 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period in every year ending with an even number, and (ii) from 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period to before school on the first day that students are to attend on the next school year in every year ending with an odd number, and   for one half of the term 4 school holiday period as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement: - (i) from the conclusion of school on the last day that students are to attend to 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period in every year ending with an even number, and (ii) from 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period to before school on the first day that students are to attend on the next school year in every year ending with an odd number, and   from the conclusion of school on the last day that students are to attend to 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period in every year ending with an even number, and (ii) from 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period to before school on the first day that students are to attend on the next school year in every year ending with an odd number, and  ) from 5:00pm on the middle day of such school holiday period to before school on the first day that students are to attend on the next school year in every year ending with an odd number, and
such other times as may be agreed to by the parents in writing from time to time.  on the mother’s day weekend, from the conclusion of school on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to the commencement of school on the monday immediately following mother’s day, (b) on the father’s day weekend, the x’s time with the mother that weekend will be suspended,   on the father’s day weekend, the x’s time with the mother that weekend will be suspended,   in odd-numbered years x will spend time with the father from 5:00pm on 24 december until 3:00pm on 25 december and x will spend time with the mother from 3:00pm on 25 december until 5:00pm on 26 december, (b) in even-numbered years x will spend time with the mother from 5:00pm on 24 december until 3:00pm on 25 december and x will spend time with the father from 3:00pm on 25 december until 5:00pm on 26 december.   in even-numbered years x will spend time with the mother from 5:00pm on 24 december until 3:00pm on 25 december and x will spend time with the father from 3:00pm on 25 december until 5:00pm on 26 december.   within 21 days of the date of these orders the parties are to do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to facilitate x spending time with her mother supervised by b contact centre, (b) the father is to pay all costs associated with x spending time with the mother supervised by b contact centre.   the father is to pay all costs associated with x spending time with the mother supervised by b contact centre.
facetime communication
therapy for x  complete any and all intake documentation and either have scheduled or attend the first available appointment with ms e of f centre, (b) attend all appointments and follow all recommendations of ms e, (c) use his best endeavours to ensure that x attends all appointments as required by ms e, (d) use his best endeavours to ensure that ms g attend all appointments as required by ms e, and (e) be responsible for the costs of therapy with ms e.   attend all appointments and follow all recommendations of ms e, (c) use his best endeavours to ensure that x attends all appointments as required by ms e, (d) use his best endeavours to ensure that ms g attend all appointments as required by ms e, and (e) be responsible for the costs of therapy with ms e.   use his best endeavours to ensure that x attends all appointments as required by ms e, (d) use his best endeavours to ensure that ms g attend all appointments as required by ms e, and (e) be responsible for the costs of therapy with ms e.   use his best endeavours to ensure that ms g attend all appointments as required by ms e, and (e) be responsible for the costs of therapy with ms e.   be responsible for the costs of therapy with ms e.
the provision of information and attendance at events  any major long-term decisions concerning x, including decisions in relation to her health and education, (b) the names and contact details of any specialists providing health or medical treatment to x, and (c) the names and contact details of any counsellor, psychologist or psychiatrist providing treatment to x.   the names and contact details of any specialists providing health or medical treatment to x, and (c) the names and contact details of any counsellor, psychologist or psychiatrist providing treatment to x.   the names and contact details of any counsellor, psychologist or psychiatrist providing treatment to x.
injunctive orders   making critical or derogatory remarks about the other parent to or in the presence or hearing of x, and (b) discussing these court proceedings in the presence of or hearing of x unless under the guidance of a doctor, counsellor, psychologist, psychiatrist or therapist.   discussing these court proceedings in the presence of or hearing of x unless under the guidance of a doctor, counsellor, psychologist, psychiatrist or therapist.
leave to the father  a sealed copy of these orders and reasons for judgment, and (b) ms j’s report dated 10 may 2022.   ms j’s report dated 10 may 2022.
x’s school
airport watch list orders
the independent children’s lawyer
and the court notes:
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch:
introduction
background
“my daughter has been recently coming to me reporting about domestic violence she is witnessing and is showing effects of the dv and i am seeking counselling for my daughter.” [3]
hi [mr tassou]. [ms pandelis] called [...] it's the phone number on the court orders. we were not sure if we are allowed to send [x] or not due to lockdown. they said the current lockdown is still in place and the allowed distance to travel is 10km. they said it isn't safe to travel the distance until lockdown is lifted again. we are going to give a phone number for [x] so you can video chat her tomorrow (call on the days you are supposed to see her). they gave [ms pandelis] a phone number to call to sort any time loss etc. when restrictions lift. if needed.
the parties’ positions
the evidence
the mother relied on the: -
the single expert’s evidence
the father impressed as co-operative and forthcoming in his approach to the assessment. he appeared to answer most questions posed to him in a direct manner without evasion. he did not attempt to take control of the direction of the interview nor did he attempt to dominate in the interview. he responded to challenge with measured responses.[6]
throughout the clinical/assessment interview the mother jumped from one topic to another. she displayed notable difficulties in staying on track and answering questions directly which required her to be redirected back to topic frequently. the mother’s indirect narrative did not impress as being a consequence of formal thought disorder, there was no thought blocking or derailment. she did however display rather circumstantial thinking, excessive semi relevant details tended to predominate her dialogue. she maintained her original train of thought but provided unnecessary detail, sometimes tangential to the subject, before circling back to her main point or being directed back to the main point. overall the impression was gained that much of the time the mother was trying to control heightened emotions which resulted in her speaking quickly and trying to impart information that she believed was important rather than respond to questioning directly in a measured fashion. at other times, the mother impressed as evasive wanting to steer the direction of the interview away from topics she did not want to cover or found uncomfortable. her speech was delivered with normal volume, prosody was intact. the speed of her speech was not overly pressured but was rapid in its delivery. [7]
the hearing
counsel: you have been charged with two incidents of assault? mother: i’m a [health care worker].
the legal principles
the issues and factual findings to be made
x
situational tension and stress as a consequence of worry about separation from a significant adult figure, and free floating anxiety about a range of other issues relating to physical wellbeing of those close to her. [9]
risk of harm arising from abuse, negelct or family violencethe parties
x’s allegations
dad was yelling at [qq] for 4 days and [qq] left and went to [rr’s] and [qq] was swearing at [mr tassou] as she left. ... [qq] had to go to [rr’s] house and there was a lot of crying, banging, and yelling before she left for [rr’s] with a bag. [qq] was crying and hugging me then i cried too because i was scared. i didn’t sleep that night because i wasn’t happy. [13]
dad picked up my arm and slammed it into a table during math’s and [qq] wasn’t there to help me. dad told me it was an accident.   returns home from spending time with her father exhibiting behaviours such as being afraid to see her father, nightmares, crying, bed wetting, low mood and anxiousness.[15]
because even when we are playing he makes a problem/like if we are colouring-says colour [i]n the line/....if i’m eating and im too slow- he says...eat in [ss language]. he touches me in ways i don’t like - he holds me by the feet and holds me upside down/he thinks its funny but i don’t like it. says steam comes out of mum’s head and starts laughing like it’s funny.... .... he’s always on his phone.... i play with [qq] mostly picks me up at school – but then starts frowning everyday.[17]
when is dad coming. i don’t want to see him. he is abusive.[19]
..he banged my hand on the coffee table. it felt like my bones went through my body”. when [x] was describing this event her “twitch” or tic worsened.[23]   then spontaneously advised “i don’t’ feel bad saying these things, cause he is abusive to me”. she did express some concern at one point that what she was saying would be related back to her father. she felt he would be angry with her as a result. however if she does not see him again this will not represent a problem.[25]
can u pls talk to me rn i’m realy upset my mum is sick and she’s having surgery really soon and she can die having it and i will be with my (grandad) and she will be with my nan but there trying to make me leave her now and there’s her bday. idk if anyone noticed but i was getting really emotional in health because my dad abused me and i’m still in court with him and if mum died he will take me away. he threatened to kill me and he touches me inappropriately but my mum is with my boyfriend but there fighting alot do they want mum to live with nan so that can stop and i dont know what to do because i’m not going to see her through surgery ....
ms shea: it must be because he has done those things? the mother:: i’m just going to say yes. ms shea: you need to tell the truth. the mother: it’s not because of my sickness.
...it does make me wonder why these allegations would just be accepted.
ms shea: do you believe father threatened to kill her? the mother: that’s hard to answer. ms shea try your best. the mother: i want to believe everything she says. ms shea: that wasn’t my question the mother: i can’t ms shea: why can you answer the others? the mother: that one is scary. ms shea: is it that you’re not sure she’s telling the truth. do you find it difficult to believe she has lied? the mother: it’s the context, not about lying. ms shea: can you think of any reason why she might not be telling the truth about these allegations? the mother: i can’t imagine why she would lie. ms shea: not any reason at all? the mother: no.
the father’s response
findings
i asked [x] for details – the type of questioning that non-leading questioning, but details about these alleged events and that’s probably why ‘through’ the coffee table and ‘on’ the coffee table is relevant. because when i said, “right through the coffee table?” she revised it to “on” but still kept the dramatic effect i suppose by saying it felt like the bones went through my body. it was very dramatically told but when i asked for details of the chair being thrown, because i think she also alleged at one point that he threw a chair at his current partner. they were allegations but she could not tell me any details that would lend weight to credibility of those allegations.
i think it can be reasonably assumed that any alleged abuse that occurred did not occur in recent times. [x] did not disclose anything of a child sexual abuse nature to me. i can say that possibly she did not feel comfortable in doing so but she did talk about abuse but was unable to tell me what abuse means and i tried to get details of incidents [x] said where she said her father abused her but she was unable to provide me with details of these events... i am concerned that these allegations that came out in the sms are reactive to a fear of her losing her mother and a fear that she appears to be very aware of the court proceedings and possible outcomes and that could have been a motivating factor to her making those allegations against her father because she has to justify why if anything happens to her mother she can’t go to him. but whenever a child makes allegations they need to be taken seriously.
coupled with this can be consolidation of ‘recollection’ of the perceived harmful events to fit a narrative which justifies avoidant response. if a child is repeatedly questioned about an event, they can begin over time to incorporate distortion which validates their response. this can especially be the case where adults are either directly challenging their account or feeding the anxiety by suggestion.[29]
x’s relationships and expressed views   tassou] positively interacted and engaged with [x] throughout the visit. they had a variety of conversations. they played games and completed art and craft activities together. [mr tassou] provided [x] with drinks and lunch. [mr tassou] managed the end of visit well. overall, [x] was happy, and content and the visit appeared to be a positive one. [31]   repeatedly said she didn’t want to attend the visit and appeared distressed and cried....she said her father abused her and she didn’t feel safe. [32]
she was faking it and pretending to be nice to her father. she said her father gave her googly eyes and she felt like she had to give him a hug.” [33]   walked in smiling, waving and said ‘hello!’ [mr tassou] was sitting with his arms out, wide, smiling largely, and with a high, excited pitch said “hello! awww, look at you!!’ [x] walked over to [mr tassou] as they embraced in a hug. [mr tassou] began softly touching [x]’s hair and face whilst complimenting her...[x] stood closely next to [mr tassou] and began chatting freely... [35]
the observations as to this visit included:   tassou] and [x] both remained in close proximity throughout contact, during play, standing and sitting...their conversation flowed very easily- [mr tassou] and [x] were both very chatty, their tones displayed as excited...they both brought up memories of times together from the past. their eye contact was observed to remain constant, and they both smiled at each other and laughed at times throughout the contact. [mr tassou] gently grabbed and cuddles [x] a couple of times during the contact, and kissed her on the forehead, and wrapped his arms around her, and touched her hair- [x] did not push away when this occurred. [x] was also observed to lean in toward her dad during conversation..... [mr tassou] and [x] embraced in a cuddle during their farewell.[36]
their conversation was free flowing, child friendly and well balanced throughout the contact. they continuously talked to each other while smiling and laughing at times. they sat at the table in close proximity of each other for an extended period of time- sharing food and talking. [37]
i pretend to be fun and happy when i am here but i am just pretending so that he doesn’t become angry..” [41]
...she just didn’t want to be there because in the past they said bad things about her mum and they probably still do. she also talked about her father being an angry person and pretends to be nice when someone is watching. cm asked if it could be possible that perhaps those things didn’t happen anymore and that at the contacts those things aren’t allowed to happen [x] said it was possible but they were probably still like that [42]   was asked whether there was anything she would like to tell the judge. [x] had made it clear at the commencement of the assessment she understood she was at the appointment because a report was being prepared for court. [x] was asked how she knew this. she did not respond and changed the subject. [x] advised she wanted the judge to know that “i never want to see my dad and i want to stay with my mum. mum and her side of the family are the best”.[44]
i faked it when i said i was happy there. i told my mummy. i don’t want him to be angry with me. i don’t want to hug him. he gives me googly eyes.[45]
on entering the room [x] greeted her father and [ms g] with a big smile and a wave. she established and maintained eye-contact with them. she did not look to the author for guidance or support during the observation session. after entering, she then proceeded to talk animatedly and happily with them, leading the conversation which covered a range of recent happenings for the next ½ hour. she raised the issue of being bullied at school by a certain boy with her father. her father listened carefully, acknowledged the child’s concern and made suggestions about raising the issue with a teacher if she was worried. ... she laughed at jokes her father made. she made unsolicited offers to send them pictures she had taken and computer graphics she has made. at the end of her time with the father and [ms g], which was signalled by this author and not initiated by the child, the child rose to leave and stepped forward towards them (they had remained seated as agreed), she then caught herself and stopped, she smiled opened her arms indicating a hug, blew them kisses and left. she did not appear distressed on leaving the room. she smiled at the author and then rejoined her mother and grandfather. .... it was observed that the tic/” twitching” that [x] had evidenced during her individual interview was much milder and less frequent during her time with the father and [ms g] and had decreased in frequency as her time with them progressed.[46]
...she was behaving in her initial movement toward physical proximity – in an emotionally congruent manner in how she was actually feeling and she realised this was not consistent with her position that dad is not okay and she stopped.
maintaining eye contact, initiating interaction rather than being a passive recipient, body posture whether it is open to recipient or closed and away, whether there is any sign of nervousness, anxiety, avoidance, consistency in words spoken and quality of their delivery – whether words appear forced by tone volume and delivery or whether they appear to be natural.
children who are confronted with competing accounts (attributions) will try to reconcile their account with a dominant carer to avoid further conflict or in an attempt to please that carer, thus reducing tension. this can especially be the case if the child fears the consequences of displeasing the carer or is insecure in their attachments. it was considered important that [x] now identifies that nothing her mother does is ever wrong and that everything her father does is. this consolidates her security with her mother (primary carer). her behaviour during the observation conducted with her father did not in any way reflect a child who is anxious or frightened of her father. this was similar to the report by [b contact centre], which documented that [x] had a good, supervised visit with her father, then after a hiatus, was completely rejecting contact with her father. i would suggest that the child’s resistance to spending time with the father is building. it is a universal rejection and not situation based. her opinions about her parents have become polarised. she feels safer in her relationship with her mother by agreeing to her mother’s opinions of avoidance and rejection of the father. her mother has been her primary carer and so this relationship is paramount for the child.[47]
experiencing internal conflict between the position she feels she needs to adopt and what’s happening around her, which could be enjoying time with dad. she then needs to find a way to reconcile that and it can be “i’ll just reject him” because it’s easier to do that than to try and reconcile information i have got from mum that is harmful, if that is what’s occurring, with the person i am enjoying time with. so rather than struggling with this emotional push and pull that i’ve got where i’ve been told one thing and i’m adopting these opinions of a person who it is important to me, but the evidence in front of me is saying something different, i will reconcile by rejecting the relationship and when people point it out to me, when they create dissonance: “it looked as though you were enjoying time with dad” the way to resolve that, is to say “i faked it.” it’s a simplistic way of doing it but it resolves the dissonance occurring... the way the child has reconciled that dissonance, that rift, that contradiction, is “i’m faking it.”
the mother’s parenting capacity
he spoke of being at a loss as to how to deal with the mother so that a post-separation relationship focused on parenting [x] without discord could be achieved. the father noted that when the mother is unhappy with someone, she “cuts them out completely”. there did appear to be some credibility in the father’s account based on other documentation reviewed and information gathered.[51]
the mother’s mental health
she impressed as a black and white or dichotomous thinker. as an example, she described individuals in her life as being universally good or bad, situations or people were perfect or unbearable. her dialogue was peppered with expansive descriptions, which when further explored represented exaggeration. neutrality, balance or appreciation of nuance in her attitudes towards people and situations appeared absent.[54]
during her dialogue in the clinical interview she provided differing and sometimes contradictory information about her history and mental health function. she made reference to suffering from a wide range of negative emotions, anxiety, anger, worry depression. she spoke of avoidance of socio-emotional experience, including withdrawal from interpersonal interactions absolutely when she falls into dispute with others. she displayed elements of exaggerated self-importance with concomitant expectation that she deserves special treatment, she described feeling frequently misunderstood by others in a manner which suggested exaggerated interpersonal sensitivity. some of her history indicated an overwhelming need for affiliation and fear of abandonment accompanied by relational volatility.[55]
...presented herself as a person who has been the victim in multiple relationships, without questioning what role she may have played in the disharmony. she impressed as a dichotomous thinker, presenting extreme opinions on others which lacked appreciation of nuance. despite providing information to the effect that she is independent, the mother impressed as being quite dependent in relationships and needing validation of her relationship status for self-esteem regulation. she impressed as vulnerable to anxiety and apprehension, threatened by uncertainty, resulting in an exaggerated need for control. information contained in the subpoenaed material (police material in particular) suggested that the mother can become dysregulated when her relationships are challenged to a degree where she will “lash out”. she did not impress as an empathic individual and appeared uncritical of her own behaviour/motivations. her dialogue was predominated by first person/personal references suggesting egocentricity, she discarded information which challenged her position and impressed as rigid in her approach to problem solving. [56]
a predominance of such characteristics, even sub-clinically, can result in a person having ongoing problems in interpersonal function and relationship stability. as a parent they can fail to have adequate parent/child boundaries which offer children security. emotional dysregulation can result in exposing children to aggression or extreme hostility. impulsivity associated with personality disorder characteristics can result in risk taking behaviour, rapid changes in life direction and in developing intense relationships quickly without considering appropriateness or relationship longevity/stability. [57]
the mother’s relationships
separated with bf.....smashed to lower lip.. bruised...to lower lip.. counselling.[59]   p]: goodnight, sweet dreams. sleep tight & don’t let the bed bugs bite. make sure you say your prayers. you and momma are always in mine. catch you on the flip side. ... [x]: i feel upset with my dad because i see my dad yell at [qq] and she cries and my dad wants me to go ....i really need to be my dad.... .i really need you to be my dad*** .... [mr p]: .....i am here for you lil critter ... [x]: ha papa darlin ... [mr p]: hey there ...you know how mommy’s [health] can get sometimes. it’s not something she can help,, and its so much less scary to deal with when she has me to talk to on the phone. it woke her up.....momma let me know you were able to go to the feelings doctor....may i ask what you talked about? were you able to tell them about some of our conversations? [61]
the mother’s changes of residence
the mid-2023 message
x’s school attendances
the mother’s employment
the mother’s use of medication
the father’s parenting capacity
the father’s mental health
whilst the father did not present with significant signs of psychological disturbance, his narrative did impress as indicating that there are limitations to the father’s ability to see relationships between thoughts, feelings and actions and how to integrate these to best effect in dealing with difficult situations. he appeared at a loss to suggest how he could improve his parenting relationship with the mother. this suggested the father has adopted an external locus of control, at least in his dealings with the mother, wherein he is subject to her behaviour/moods without strategies to deal with this. he also appeared at a loss as to how to deal effectively with allegations made by the child regarding incidents of aggression he is described as having directed towards her and reported incidents of verbal aggression towards his partner. he described his attempts at addressing these directly with the child and his frustration that the child’s account, which he said is untrue, appears to have been accepted in his understanding, by treatment providers. he fears this will consolidate [x]’s allegations.
ability to meet x’s needs
allegations as to the father’s care of x
the father’s willingness to spend time with x
i am just reviewing the orders of 13 march, [ms ae] can you advise if you received signed undertakings from the father’s parents or partner pursuant to order 2 of the orders made by consent. [69]
medical decisions
the ability and capacity to facilitate a meaningful relationship between x and the other parent
as noted above the mother had been [x]’s primary caregiver. if the father’s account of the post-separation parenting experience is accurate, his predictability as a stable figure and presence in [x]’s life has been interrupted by the mother’s unwillingness to facilitate a meaningful relationship between [x] and her father. within the father’s account when there is positive movement towards strengthening his relationship with [x], the mother acts or influences [x], to undermine this.[70]
although the mother posited that it is important for a child, generally, to have a relationship with both parents, she could not provide a plan or suggestion as to how [x] could spend time with the father in a way that she feels [x]’s physical and emotional safety can be guaranteed.[72] overall, the mother did not impress as showing any willingness to facilitate a meaningful relationship between the father and [x].[73] unless there is significant change in the mother’s approach to communicating with the father, there will be a continuation of the difficulties which at this time result in parenting decisions/disagreement not being resolved.[74]
the mother: i can’t answer this i feel uncomfortable. ms shea: what do you mean? the mother: i don’t know how to explain i’m having difficulty healing and doing everything.
the likely impact on x of each parent’s proposals as to her future living arrangements and time with the other parent.
what orders are least likely to lead to further litigation between the parties
ms shea: how are your orders going to work? the mother: just follow the order.
ms shea: has anything changed since march? the mother: only family therapy. ms shea: do you think family therapy has achieved anything? the mother: i don’t think it’s been long enough.
parental responsibility
live with orders
option 1: that x remain living with the mother
her honour: does it cause you concern that it is the mother’s evidence that she accepts all of the allegations that have made by [x] with respect to the father and most particularly the assertions contained in the latest message that she sent to her friend about the father threatening to kill her and touching her inappropriately? her evidence is that she accepted that, and then seeks orders from this court that the father spend time with [x] moving to unsupervised overnight time. does that disparity in what it appears to be the mothers beliefs as compared to the orders she is seeking – does that cause you concern? single expert: it does because it’s a clear contradiction and it would suggest to me as a psychologist that one of those two propositions is not actually held – either she believes the abuse or she believes it’s okay for [x] to spend time with the father, so one of those propositions i think the mother would be more likely to go with on the basis of what she thinks would be achievable her honour: so is it your view that those two propositions simply cannot stand together? single expert: not if a parent cares about a child, no. so if you’re willing to believe allegations of serious abuse to say that it is then okay for the child to be with an abuser – it contradicts itself.
ms shea: what are you hoping will change such that after 6 months she will be safe to spend unsupervised time with her father? the mother: i hope it changes so she can safely and happily come back telling me good things. happy things. ms shea: and if she doesn’t? the mother: i’d be concerned. ms shea: but the orders you propose go automatically after 6 months to unsupervised time? the mother: that’s the hope and the aim. ms shea: and ultimately the arrangement you propose is only one night different from what were the orders in 2018? the 2018 orders were for 4 nights a fortnight? the mother: yes. ms shea: and ultimately you propose 3 nights a fortnight. the mother: yes i see that is quite similar. ms shea: so what’s the benefit to [x] of the arrangement you ultimately get to in your current proposal compared to what it was in 2018? the mother: i guess i went off how i used to see my own father. i guess when i was her age and that worked for me so i guess i’m kind of looking from that perspective. i used to see him fortnightly. ms shea: is that seriously your answer? the mother: i don’t know how we came up with it. me and my lawyer just came up with that arrangement.
option 2: to cease time with the father
a fracturing of her relationship with her father, a fracturing of her relationship with the father’s partner which was reported as being close in the past. there is also the potential fracturing of other relationships if the mother, the other parent in this case, conducts volatile all or nothing relationships. – any relationship that [x] forms for eg with the mothers new partner or a new partner of the mother, that could be suddenly terminated, there will be no security that relationships will be ongoing. ...   cannot become invested in any of those relationships because they may well not become permanent. [x] is more likely than not to learn that relationships are painful things that end with acrimony. they are not long term and they are not supportive and that reduces a child’s ability to form the necessary psychosocial supports and relationships going into the future that are necessary for psychological health and wellbeing.
option 3: for x’s changeover to occur at school
no. ... it’s the messaging that is probably going on which explains [x]’s refusal/rejection behaviour. it’s the messaging that is is feeding the need to refuse or reject the relationship with her father. it’s not contingent on the child being picked up from a neutral location.
the child starts not being at present on the friday when the collection is meant to take place and the child misses a lot of school.
option 4: for x to live with the father
that can always happen. individual factors have to be taken into account. but when relocation of a child’s residence is considered by the court, so it’s sometimes better to have a graded return rather than 8 weeks no contact and straight into 4 days – because, a child that is going to feel loved and secure and attached in her new residence is less likely to refuse to go home after a visit with who was whom the preferred parent – it just depends on how much pressure is put on the child.
i’ve seen it happen. people’s coping strategies change over time and sometimes it takes a while to adopt, for a person that has been used to black and white thinking, to adopt a more nuanced perspective of the world, and sometimes rejection can turn into approval and it’s thrown on its head.   is already under stress. so, it’s likely to manifest as it is now. ... from the time that i saw her, i would expect her to be frightened and unsure for a period of time, hopefully until she adapts, raised emotions, there may be some minor problems with behaviour, and by minor problems i mean acting out her anxiety so temper tantrums and things like that.
it's no big reaction – it’s calm, quiet, but still caring. acknowledging that the child is hurting but not enforcing the same level of compliance that would be expected for a child’s behaviour 6 months or 12 months down the track, giving them a bit of leeway.
he contained his emotions, and not in a bad way, during the observation period with me. a lot of parents would have found that very hurtful. that ultimate rejection at the end. he sat in his chair as was negotiated. he didn’t attempt to bend that rule. he engaged well and empathically and that was what i read in the supervision notes as well. he knew how far to push and didn’t push too far. he didn’t let his own emotional needs supersede what was agreed or what [x] expressed.
determination as to with whom x shall live
there is the risk that if the mother perceives the child strengthening her relationship with the father the mother will interpret this as the child rejecting her and may either reject the child or increase her efforts to win back the child’s allegiance.[80]
spend time orders
family therapy
it’s been tried and it’s failed and all the other indicators that have gone along with that including what appeared to be an increased resistance in refusal dynamic developing, would suggest the harder she is pushed into trying reconciling these irreconcilable relationships, the more stressed she will become.
x’s therapy
ancillary orders
conclusion
associate: dated: 14 december 2023
dated: 14 december 2023
[1] family report of ms r dated 12 december, 2017 (exhibit icl 18). [2] exhibit f9. [3] exhibit icl8. [4] exhibit icl 13. [5] whisprun pty ltd v dixon [2003] hca 48.[6] single expert report of ms j dated 10 may 2022, paragraph 111 (“single expert report”). [7] single expert report, paragraphs 220 – 224.[8] single expert report, paragraph 287.[9] single expert report, paragraph 289.[10] exhibit f12.[11] exhibit icl 14.[12] single expert report, paragraph 411.[13] mother’s trial affidavit paragraph 20 (m) and 20 (n).[14] mother’s trial affidavit paragraph 20(i).[15] mother’s trial affidavit paragraph 14.[16] exhibit icl5.[17] exhibit m1.[18] single expert report, paragraph 190.[19] single expert report, paragraph 268. [20] ibid, paragraph 270. [21] ibid, paragraph 270.[22] ibid, paragraph 271.[23] ibid, paragraph 271.[24] ibid, paragraph 272 and 273.[25] ibid, paragraph 284. [26] single expert report, paragraph 245 and 246. [27] single expert report, paragraph 404. [28] single expert report, paragraph 286. [29] single expert report, paragraph 397.[30] single expert report, paragraph 413. [31] exhibit icl3.[32] exhibit icl4.[33] exhibit icl4.[34] father’s affidavit, paragraph 287.[35] exhibit icl16, page 168.[36] ibid, page 168 and page 169. [37] exhibit icl16 page 187. [38] exhibit icl15. [39] exhibit icl15.[40] ibid.[41] ibid. [42] exhibit icl 15. [43] exhibit icl 15, page 56. [44] single expert report, paragraph 284.[45] ibid. [46] single expert report, paragraph 297-304. [47] single expert report, paragraph 399-403. [48] single expert report, paragraph 248. [49] single expert report, paragraph 249.[50] single expert report, paragraph 421.[51] single expert report, paragraph 407.[52] single expert report, paragraph 229. [53] exhibit f4.[54] single expert report, paragraph 225.[55] single expert report, paragraph 239. [56] single expert report, paragraphs 451-453.[57] single expert report, paragraph 454. [58] single expert report paragraph 178.[59] exhibit f6.[60] single expert report, paragraph 410.[61] exhibit icl11. [62] single expert report, paragraph 412. [63] single expert report, paragraph 454.[64] exhibit f4. [65] exhibit icl1.[66] single expert report, paragraph 115.[67] single expert report, paragraph 129. [68] single expert report, paragraph 431. [69] exhibit m10. [70] single expert report, paragraph 420. [71] ibid, paragraph 212. [72] ibid, paragraph 437. [73] ibid, paragraph 438. [74] ibid, paragraph 439. [75] single expert report, paragraph 432. [76] ibid, paragraph 443. [77] ibid, paragraph 444. [78] single expert report, paragraph 205. [79] single expert report, paragraph 77.[80] single expert report, paragraph 432. [81] single expert report, paragraph 434. [82] single expert report, paragraph 313.