last updated: 29 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
tauro & tauro [2023] fedcfamc2f 1672
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  x (born in 2013), and (b) y (born in 2015),   y (born in 2015),  e children").
children’s care arrangements  in week 1, from the conclusion of school on thursday (or 3.30 pm on a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00 am on tuesday if monday is a non-school day), and (b) in week 2, from the conclusion of school on thursday (or 3.30 pm on a non-school day) until the commencement of school on friday (or 9.00 am on a non-school day).   in week 2, from the conclusion of school on thursday (or 3.30 pm on a non-school day) until the commencement of school on friday (or 9.00 am on a non-school day).   during the term 1, 2 and 3 school term holidays, with the father as follows: (i) in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, for the first half of the holidays, commencing from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term, (ii) in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, for the second half of the holidays, concluding at the commencement of school the following term,   in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, for the first half of the holidays, commencing from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term, (ii) in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, for the second half of the holidays, concluding at the commencement of school the following term,  ) in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, for the second half of the holidays, concluding at the commencement of school the following term,
with changeovers that do not take place at school to occur at 12 midday on the middle day of the holidays (and if there is no middle day, then the following day) and otherwise with the mother, and   during the long summer school holidays, with each parent on a “week-about” basis, commencing at the end of school on the last day of the school year and concluding at the start of school on the first day of the new school year: (i) in the 2023/2024 holidays and each alternate year thereafter, with the father in the first week (for seven consecutive nights) and each alternate week thereafter, and otherwise with the mother, and (ii) in the 2024/2025 holidays and each alternate year thereafter, with the father in the second week (for seven consecutive nights, commencing on the seventh day of the school holidays) and each alternate week thereafter, and otherwise with the mother,   in the 2023/2024 holidays and each alternate year thereafter, with the father in the first week (for seven consecutive nights) and each alternate week thereafter, and otherwise with the mother, and (ii) in the 2024/2025 holidays and each alternate year thereafter, with the father in the second week (for seven consecutive nights, commencing on the seventh day of the school holidays) and each alternate week thereafter, and otherwise with the mother,  ) in the 2024/2025 holidays and each alternate year thereafter, with the father in the second week (for seven consecutive nights, commencing on the seventh day of the school holidays) and each alternate week thereafter, and otherwise with the mother,
with all changeovers that do not take place at school to occur at 12 midday.   during christmas, as follows: (i) in even numbered years: with the mother from 12 midday on christmas eve until 12 midday on christmas day, and with the father from 12 midday on christmas day to 12 midday on boxing day, and (ii) in odd numbered years: with the father from 12 midday on christmas eve until 12 midday on christmas day, and with the mother from 12 midday on christmas day to 12 midday on boxing day, (b) the children spend time with the father on father’s day from 5.00 pm on the saturday immediately before father’s day until 5.00 pm on father’s day, if father’s day falls on a weekend the children would otherwise be living with the mother, (c) the children spend time with the mother on mother’s day from 5.00 pm on the saturday immediately before mother’s day until 5.00 pm on mother’s day, if mother’s day falls on a weekend the children would otherwise be spending time with the father, (d) on the children’s birthdays, the children spend time with the parent whom the children are not otherwise living/spending time with pursuant to these orders as follows: (i) if the birthday/s falls on a weekend or non-school day, from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) if the birthday/s falls on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, (e) on the father and mother’s birthday, the children spend time with the parent whose birthday it is, if they are not otherwise living/ spending time with that parent on the birthday: (i) when the birthday falls on a weekend or non-school, day from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) when the birthday falls on a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, and (f) at such further and/or other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.   in even numbered years: with the mother from 12 midday on christmas eve until 12 midday on christmas day, and with the father from 12 midday on christmas day to 12 midday on boxing day, and (ii) in odd numbered years: with the father from 12 midday on christmas eve until 12 midday on christmas day, and with the mother from 12 midday on christmas day to 12 midday on boxing day,  ) in odd numbered years: with the father from 12 midday on christmas eve until 12 midday on christmas day, and with the mother from 12 midday on christmas day to 12 midday on boxing day,   the children spend time with the father on father’s day from 5.00 pm on the saturday immediately before father’s day until 5.00 pm on father’s day, if father’s day falls on a weekend the children would otherwise be living with the mother, (c) the children spend time with the mother on mother’s day from 5.00 pm on the saturday immediately before mother’s day until 5.00 pm on mother’s day, if mother’s day falls on a weekend the children would otherwise be spending time with the father, (d) on the children’s birthdays, the children spend time with the parent whom the children are not otherwise living/spending time with pursuant to these orders as follows: (i) if the birthday/s falls on a weekend or non-school day, from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) if the birthday/s falls on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, (e) on the father and mother’s birthday, the children spend time with the parent whose birthday it is, if they are not otherwise living/ spending time with that parent on the birthday: (i) when the birthday falls on a weekend or non-school, day from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) when the birthday falls on a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, and (f) at such further and/or other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.   the children spend time with the mother on mother’s day from 5.00 pm on the saturday immediately before mother’s day until 5.00 pm on mother’s day, if mother’s day falls on a weekend the children would otherwise be spending time with the father, (d) on the children’s birthdays, the children spend time with the parent whom the children are not otherwise living/spending time with pursuant to these orders as follows: (i) if the birthday/s falls on a weekend or non-school day, from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) if the birthday/s falls on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, (e) on the father and mother’s birthday, the children spend time with the parent whose birthday it is, if they are not otherwise living/ spending time with that parent on the birthday: (i) when the birthday falls on a weekend or non-school, day from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) when the birthday falls on a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, and (f) at such further and/or other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.   on the children’s birthdays, the children spend time with the parent whom the children are not otherwise living/spending time with pursuant to these orders as follows: (i) if the birthday/s falls on a weekend or non-school day, from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) if the birthday/s falls on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, (e) on the father and mother’s birthday, the children spend time with the parent whose birthday it is, if they are not otherwise living/ spending time with that parent on the birthday: (i) when the birthday falls on a weekend or non-school, day from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) when the birthday falls on a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, and (f) at such further and/or other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.   if the birthday/s falls on a weekend or non-school day, from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) if the birthday/s falls on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm,  ) if the birthday/s falls on a school day, from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm,   on the father and mother’s birthday, the children spend time with the parent whose birthday it is, if they are not otherwise living/ spending time with that parent on the birthday: (i) when the birthday falls on a weekend or non-school, day from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) when the birthday falls on a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, and (f) at such further and/or other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.   when the birthday falls on a weekend or non-school, day from 1.00 pm until 6.00 pm, and (ii) when the birthday falls on a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, and  ) when the birthday falls on a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm, and   at such further and/or other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.
communication  every third night the children are in their care, with calls to be placed between 7.00 pm and 7.30 pm it being noted there is no expectation the children will speak for 30 minutes on each occasion, only for as long as they feel comfortable, (b) at such further or other times as the parties may agree in writing, and (c) at all other reasonable times requested by the children.   at such further or other times as the parties may agree in writing, and (c) at all other reasonable times requested by the children.   at all other reasonable times requested by the children.
changeover  to and from school where practicable, and (b) where changeovers do not take place at school each parent (or their agent) collect the children from the other’s home at the commencement of the children’s time with them.   where changeovers do not take place at school each parent (or their agent) collect the children from the other’s home at the commencement of the children’s time with them.
injunctions  making any derogatory comments about the other parent and/or his or her relatives, and (b) from commenting, discussing or referring to any part of family law communications, negotiations or proceedings,   from commenting, discussing or referring to any part of family law communications, negotiations or proceedings,
to or in the presence of or within the hearing of the children and from allowing any other person to do so.
sharing of and access to information
provision of court documents
obligations, consequences of contravention and assistance with orders
reasons for judgment
judge a. humphreys:
introduction
the issues  the amount of time the children should spend with the father, (b) the frequency and arrangements for telephone and video communication between the children and the father, (c) if an injunction restraining the father’s alcohol consumption is appropriate for the welfare of the children? (d) if an order should be made requiring the parties to attend family therapy, and (e) if an order should be made that the parties continue to attend upon their treating psychologists and for each party to be authorised to obtain information from the other’s psychologist, as has been the case under interim orders.   the frequency and arrangements for telephone and video communication between the children and the father, (c) if an injunction restraining the father’s alcohol consumption is appropriate for the welfare of the children? (d) if an order should be made requiring the parties to attend family therapy, and (e) if an order should be made that the parties continue to attend upon their treating psychologists and for each party to be authorised to obtain information from the other’s psychologist, as has been the case under interim orders.   if an injunction restraining the father’s alcohol consumption is appropriate for the welfare of the children? (d) if an order should be made requiring the parties to attend family therapy, and (e) if an order should be made that the parties continue to attend upon their treating psychologists and for each party to be authorised to obtain information from the other’s psychologist, as has been the case under interim orders.   if an order should be made requiring the parties to attend family therapy, and (e) if an order should be made that the parties continue to attend upon their treating psychologists and for each party to be authorised to obtain information from the other’s psychologist, as has been the case under interim orders.   if an order should be made that the parties continue to attend upon their treating psychologists and for each party to be authorised to obtain information from the other’s psychologist, as has been the case under interim orders.   an assessment of risk, where the mother alleges the father’s untreated mental health, alcohol use and his diabetes place the children at risk of harm, (b) how any identified risks to the children can be ameliorated, (c) consideration of the father’s parenting capacity in the context of his mental health and alcohol use, and (d) an assessment of the parties’ capacity to cooperatively co-parent to the extent required to support an equal shared care arrangement.   how any identified risks to the children can be ameliorated, (c) consideration of the father’s parenting capacity in the context of his mental health and alcohol use, and (d) an assessment of the parties’ capacity to cooperatively co-parent to the extent required to support an equal shared care arrangement.   consideration of the father’s parenting capacity in the context of his mental health and alcohol use, and (d) an assessment of the parties’ capacity to cooperatively co-parent to the extent required to support an equal shared care arrangement.   an assessment of the parties’ capacity to cooperatively co-parent to the extent required to support an equal shared care arrangement.
background & procedural history
a) that there is little to conclude that the children are at an unacceptable risk in the care of either parent, however, should the court have further concern regarding the respondent mother’s claims regarding family violence and the applicant father’s alcohol use, the court may need to decide appropriate measures, b) the father should abstain from alcohol use for at least 24 hours prior to providing care for the children, c) that, there is a stronger clinical argument for the children to remain in the primary care of their mother, d) any changes or increase in time with the father should be gradual, e) [the father], would benefit from psychological support to support his wellbeing, and f) that both parents are consistent with the recommended psychological interventions between households as suggested by [x]’s treating psychologist.
the parties’ current circumstances
the children’s current circumstances
the final hearing
the evidence  in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject‑matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
general observations
the father
the mother
ms e
family report writer
that, while it is currently in the best interests of the children to remain in their mother’s primary care, the court may consider an increase in the children’s time with the father in the new year pending improvements in the co-parenting relationship, and the father seeking support for his mental health and parenting skills
legal principles
objects and principles  the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
best interests of children
primary considerations  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents
the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence  .] the father’s long-standing issues concerning the abuse of alcohol, his poor mental health which pre-existed the relationship, his ongoing need for support for his mental health and to improve his well-being and develop further stress management strategies, and the past incidents of alcohol fuelled family violence perpetrated by the father towards the mother in the presence of the children at times, impacts on the father’s parenting capacity and judgement at times which places the children at risk.  .] the court may wish to consider a graded increase to shared-care arrangements in 2024. this would allow more time for the co-parenting relationship to improve, [the father] to make gains in his parenting skills, seek support for his mental health and the children and [the father] to further consolidate their relationships. given that the father is seeking a 50/50 arrangement, this is likely to present some practical challenges in addition to an increase in parenting stress for [the father]. in light of the father’s historical difficulties with stress management, it is imperative that he seek consistent support to develop appropriate coping strategies should the children be in his care in an equal shared-care arrangement. the court is welcome to re-refer the parties for a review of the progression of the children’s time with the father in early-mid 2024.
allegations of family violence
perpetrated by the father
... instances on a “daily basis, put downs, belittled, eggshells, the anger. anything i did was wrong – it didn’t matter what i did, decisions to do with the kids, constantly living in state of blame – became a norm of absorbing all that. physical intimidation...he never punched me, but he definitely intimidated me physically and stepped in front of me when he was drunk, stand over me...i was physically shaking...
...the relationship was a fraught and unhappy one. we argued frequently. as deposed, i admit that i raised my voice at her on occasion which i accept was wrong. although she has denied same, she would frequently ‘lose it’ and yell and scream. this persisted through the relationship and was one of the reasons she continued to seek answers resulting in a diagnosis of [a medical condition] late in the relationship.
the children were at times exposed to family violence namely verbal arguments between the parents during the relationships. the father has admitted his involvement in this whereas the mother alleges the father was the perpetrator and denies any responsibility.
perpetrated by the mother / co-violence
in regard to [the father’s] claims ... that during the relationship i suffered from “ anger management” , i was “often” verbally abusive towards him and often while the children were present, i deny such claims. such claims are not true. it was unusual for me to yell during the course of the relationship. ... i do not suffer from anger management issues. i would describe myself as calm, self-contained, polite and amiable. while my mood was impacted by [a medical condition] from time to time, i say that this usually led to me being teary, withdrawn and of low mood as opposed to angry and verbally abusive as claimed by [the father]. i admit i was irritable from time to time.
findings in relation to verbal abuse
father’s alcohol consumption
incident in 2012 e father] also stated that previous marital conflict had led to [his] conduct which resulted in his siter being “hurt”. [the father] stated that: “[the mother] had called me like 500 times...which led to a massive argument...this is where my sister got hurt...couple of days later i was on the top of a building...” [the father] acknowledged he was intoxicated during this incident and there was an escalation of aggression between the former couple, however, denied he had physically injured his sister beyond her being “[sore]”. [the father] was vague around the details regarding how his sister was hurt. it is noted [the father’s] narrative did not acknowledge wrongdoing on his part.
although i deny [the mother’s] version of events, i acknowledge i acted inappropriately on this occasion. i admit [the mother] and i engaged in a verbal argument at [ms d]’s home. we were verbally abusive to each other and acted inappropriately. [ms d] told us both to leave then tried to physically move me backwards out of the house to diffuse the argument. [the mother] followed me and we continued shouting at each other. i admit that [ms d] fell and hurt herself. this was purely an accident. i deny that she sustained ‘[injuries’] or i ‘squashed’ her. i deny being in a ‘drunken state’ although i had consumed alcohol in excess of what was normal for me. we had attended the [h venue]. [ms d] and i have a close and loving relationship. i apologised to her and she forgave me. i am remorseful for this and have learned from it.
senior counsel: [...] and you were drunk weren’t you? father: i’d said i had been drinking– senior counsel: oh look you’ve been picked up so many times on that it’s tiresome. father: okay. senior counsel: you say in your affidavit i deny being in a drunken state, of course you were drunk, or is that what you do when you’re not drunk? which is it, your choice? father: we had an argument, i went there, we had an argument and it was emotional, it was very emotional for both of us– senior counsel: no, i’m talking about whether you were drunk or not, not about the argument. father: sorry. senior counsel: i’m not talking about the argument, i’m taking about, once again, i’ve asked you this question and i know a thousand, well not a thousand, maybe five times – were you or were you not drunk in your view on that occasion? father: i said i’ve been, it’s a hard one to answer and the fact i know i’d been drinking, i didn’t think– senior counsel: ok well that’s your answer ‘it’s a hard one to answer’, okay because it appeared from what you earlier said, from when you were trying to pretend – when you were trying to convince the court – that you weren’t after your car keys, that you were going to take a cab or walk home, so you must have thought you were drunk. father: well i knew i wouldn’t be able to drive because i had been drinking, yes. senior counsel: thank you, okay.   had previously given evidence “i had consumed alcohol in excess of what was normal for me”, (b) had informed the family report writer he “was intoxicated during this incident”, and (c) acknowledged drinking to the extent he knew he would not be able to drive.   had informed the family report writer he “was intoxicated during this incident”, and (c) acknowledged drinking to the extent he knew he would not be able to drive.   acknowledged drinking to the extent he knew he would not be able to drive.
incident while driving with ms d in 2017
last weekend he got drunk and was with his sister with whom he has a close relationship. he began threatening her and was on the bonnet of her car in a rage such that she had to call the police. he would agree that he is an ugly drunk and that this behaviour can never happen again. i believe there have been similar instances in the past.
threat to take his life in 2021 e father] stated that he had experienced previous suicidal ideation, which he attributed to relationship stress (“thought about ending my life because of the pressure of the relationship”, that he had “put [an object] on my neck...sat there...i was bawling...i heard the kids...i admit it...i lost it a bit...i was yelling...i can’t do this anymore). ...
this occurred after i came home from [a sports match]. although i admit i had had some drinks with my friends i was not drunk. we had another argument as we often did. this was towards the end of a long period of unhappiness in our marriage. our marriage was ‘dead’. as previously deposed [the mother] was verbally abusive and at times controlling. there were other times she ignored me completely for extended periods. this was one of those occasions. i felt overwhelmed. the incident was a cry for help. this was an isolated incident. the children did not see this incident. it has never been repeated and never will be. i am much happier. as previously deposed the constant conflict during our relationship did not assist and both [the mother] and i are much happier since separation.  e father] stated that he spoke with his [gp] following the incident in 2021, who suggested antidepressant medication. [the father] stated that he wanted to explore social support, exercise and self-care strategies instead. [the father] stated that he is currently supported by a life coach, “[ms d]” [surname unknown], and has attended four sessions thus far, that the sessions are monthly but was unable to provide further details regarding therapy goals.
father’s failure to call ms d
... the unexplained failure by a party to call a witness may in appropriate circumstances support an inference that the uncalled evidence would not have assisted the party's case. ... the failure to call a witness may also permit the court to draw, with greater confidence, any inference unfavourable to the party that failed to call the witness, if that uncalled witness appears to be in a position to cast light on whether the inference should be drawn... the rule in jones v dunkel permits an inference, not that evidence not called by a party would have been adverse to the party, but that it would not have assisted the party. ...
other incidents involving alcohol
phone call with the children –february 2022
“well she’s changed”(about me) after the children told him they had eaten treats with sugar and he said to [y] (in reference to my mother giving him $25 for his birthday) “what, your nan couldn’t even be bothered going and getting you a present? well that was really big of her. wow, what a nan”. he then continued along those lines of belittling my mum. the children became uneasy at hearing their father’s comments.
father’s attitude towards his drinking
i refer to [the mother’s] allegations about my alcohol consumption specifically at paragraphs 30 – 50 and elsewhere in her affidavit. as deposed, i have completed three hair follicle tests provided voluntarily that show i do not consume alcohol to excess. since separation in january 2022 (19 months) there have been no incidents of concern while the children are in my care. the single incident of concern as alleged by [the other] is a phone call i made to the children in february 2022 while they were in her care. i admit that i had consumed alcohol but deny that i was intoxicated. in any case, since separation i drink less and drink less frequently. this has had health benefits for me. i have complied with the complete ban on alcohol consumption when the children are with me and 24 hours prior, and drink less at other times.  .] i deny drinking to this level [...] and deny the incidents described.
regarding concerns raised by [the mother] regarding alcohol misuse, [the father] acknowledged these claims, however, similarly, attributed this to marital discord and that he is now a “different person”, [the father] stated, “if i have the kids i don’t drink”. [the father] appeared to acknowledge that alcohol use had previously led to emotional dysregulation. [the father] stated that he has not sought support for his alcohol use difficulties.
the hair sample submitted is moderately damaged and therefore the hair etg level may underestimate the subject’s consumption. a damaged hair may have a lower etg than that established for the estimated consumption.
father’s mental health
i do not have any chronic or acute mental health conditions. i have been forthcoming about my mental health. i am appropriately supported and will continue to seek support in future as required.
i will adopt the recommendations proposed [in the family report] to obtain professional support in the interim to prioritise the children’s needs. by doing so i will engage a psychologist to assist in regulating stress or anxieties that have been associated with the separation and assist in managing this, if issues to arise in the future.
the parties shall authorise their psychologist to provide all information sought by the other party and/or their legal representative regarding their diagnosis, prognosis, treatment plan and adherence to treatment.  .] this engagement appears limited, inconsistent, and he does not have any future appointments scheduled. i am concerned regarding his level of genuine engagement in seeking support for his mental health, and he appears to minimise difficulties with stress management, his health, and substance use.
what, if any, risk of harm does the father pose to the children?
in terms of ongoing risk, i am not convinced that there is an acute or unacceptable risk to either party (or children) arising from the difficult relationship that has existed between them in the past. furthermore, is noted that whilst [the mother] holds concerns for the children’s wellbeing in their father’s care, she is somewhat comfortable for arrangements to be on a 4/10 basis.   they occurred at periodic intervals over 10 years, often several years apart, and (b) whilst there is no evidence before me of recent incidents of concern (post-february 2022), the father’ consumption of alcohol has been the subject of interim injunctions since june 2022.   whilst there is no evidence before me of recent incidents of concern (post-february 2022), the father’ consumption of alcohol has been the subject of interim injunctions since june 2022.   minimised his behaviour on each of the above occasions (and in respect of other aspects of his behaviour while under the influence of alcohol), (b) refused to readily acknowledge the extent of his drinking, and (c) failed to acknowledge and take responsibility for the impact on his family of his behaviour.   refused to readily acknowledge the extent of his drinking, and (c) failed to acknowledge and take responsibility for the impact on his family of his behaviour.   failed to acknowledge and take responsibility for the impact on his family of his behaviour.
how can the identified risk be ameliorated?
additional considerations
the nature of the children’s relationships with each of their parents and other significant persons in their lives  x’s description in the family report of her relationship with the father as “limited” prior the parties separating. she explained her memory that “dad used to go to work. didn’t spend much time with him...”, and (b) the mother’s unchallenged evidence of the father’s long work hours and of the stress the father was under at work, which was consistent with subpoenaed medical records put to him.   the mother’s unchallenged evidence of the father’s long work hours and of the stress the father was under at work, which was consistent with subpoenaed medical records put to him.  .] [x] described being “closer to dad” and that they are “excited to see him every week. now we know him quite well and feel comfortable around him and sharing our feelings. i’m grateful i had the strength to do that because i would never have gotten to know him”. [y] agreed [...]
it should be noted that it would be impossible for the parent-child relationships to mirror one another due to differences in parenting styles. [the mother] has been the ‘routine’ parent, tasked with the daily care of the children. whilst [the father] has been required to undertake this role at times, due to his limited time with the children and his previous role as the family breadwinner, he will likely engage in ‘fun’ activities to maximise the quality of time with the children. furthermore, it appears that [the father] adopts a permissive parenting style and is less risk averse with his approach to parenting expectations and limit setting: this has likely caused the children to perceive him in a more favourable light than that of their mother, who appears more reserved and likely to place limits on their engagement in certain activities. this is a key contextual difference that will impact the children’s relationship with each parent.
the extent to which the children’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in long-term decision making in relation to the children, to spend time and to communicate with the children
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as their maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give those views  y said: “sometimes when i’m at mum’s, i want to spend more time with dad”, and (b) x said: “i feel better now. last year i was at mum’s more than dad. i didn’t really like it. now it’s more equal. i got closer to dad than i’ve ever been before”. she reported that she was happy with the current arrangements: “not too much time with one or the other...last year i used to feel sad”.   x said: “i feel better now. last year i was at mum’s more than dad. i didn’t really like it. now it’s more equal. i got closer to dad than i’ve ever been before”. she reported that she was happy with the current arrangements: “not too much time with one or the other...last year i used to feel sad”.
when asked if either child would change anything, both replied, “no”, [x] stated, “i’m really happy with how my life is right now... i personally think it’s been great to spend time with both mum and dad...no, i wouldn’t change anything”. y expressed disappointment that “sometimes [the father] doesn’t come to our basketball training”. regarding future contact with their father, [y] stated that he would be open to time increasing with this father in 2024. [x] expressed desire for consistency in 2023 and “no more change this year”. when asked if she would be open to spending more time with her father in 2024, [x] replied: “depending...don’t know how it would [look] like next year”.  .] that their preferences should not be determinative as the court decides upon final parenting arrangements. as noted previously, children under the age of 13 or 14 years tend to make decisions in a predictably underdeveloped way. they focus on short-term over long-term outcomes, they prioritise notions of fairness and equality (rather than how things may actually work themselves), they often fail to gather all the relevant information and integrate this in a robust manner, they can be incentivised, and they can focus material outcomes over relational ones. at 8 and 9 years of age, [y] and [x] are not developmentally capable of reasoning through the longer-term implications of any given care arrangement. they are also children who have become stuck in a complex co-parenting situation which has likely impacted their feelings regarding their time with each parent.
the extent to which each of the children’s parents have fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain the children
the likely effect of a change in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect of a separation from a parent or other significant persons in their lives
the practical difficulty and expense associated with the children spending time and communicating with a parent, and whether that difficulty substantially affects the children’s right to maintaining personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of the children’s parents and any other significant person to provide for their needs, including their emotional and intellectual needs / attitude to the children, and to the responsibility of parenthood demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
mother’s mental health
father’s diabetes  she left the children in the father’s care for extended periods prior to separation, (b) she has not opposed the children spending unsupervised time with the father after separation, and (c) her own proposal is for the children to spend four nights with the father during school term and seven nights at a time during school holidays, unsupervised.   she has not opposed the children spending unsupervised time with the father after separation, and (c) her own proposal is for the children to spend four nights with the father during school term and seven nights at a time during school holidays, unsupervised.   her own proposal is for the children to spend four nights with the father during school term and seven nights at a time during school holidays, unsupervised.
parties’ capacity to co-parent & protect the children from conflict
it appears that the children are cognisant of the strain between their parents. [x], in particular, has internalised these anxieties and has taken on a parentified role in mediating the challenges between the parties. both children are aware that situation between their parents is conflictual, and they appear to have become weaponised in the acrimony.
as previously recommended, it is critical that the parties maintain consistency in their parenting approaches, behavioural expectations, consequences, boundaries, and rules between each household. for many children, the experience of family instability and unstable relationships with their parents can result in poor mental health outcomes, a failure to meet their developmental potential, and unhealthy adult relationships. these are not inevitable outcomes for the children, although they are far more common in circumstances where there is no unity or collaboration between separated parents. while it is unlikely that co-parenting will ever be reciprocal and amiable between these parents, it is critical that the children are not involved in parenting affairs and family law matters such as the division of time between households. it is a fair summation that the parents’ dysfunctional relationship has negatively impacted the children’s wellbeing, and the quality of their relationships with each parent. [...] [...] children who are overexposed to parental conflict and unable to maintain a healthy relationships with both parents will likely experience poorer social and emotional outcomes, and this will be to the detriment of their development. the court may wish to consider an injunction restraining the parties from discussing issues of a more adult nature, such as parenting arrangements, family law litigation, and sharing of or discussing this report with the children.
i took [the mother’s] concerns about [x] seriously and agreed to her receiving psychology support although the school wellbeing officer ... indicated that this was not required. [the school wellbeing officer] told me that [x]’s reluctance to go to school was not assisted by [the mother’s] conduct of carrying her to the office and that it was [the mother] who struggled to let her go. she told me that my method of getting [x] into school was the correct approach.
i engaged with and followed the recommendations of the school wellbeing officer with respect to [x]. i have not ‘blamed’ [the mother] for [x]’s anxieties. i have said she may have at times exacerbated them. ...
the parents’ capacity to promote a positive relationship with the other parent
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and their parents, and any other characteristics of the children the court thinks relevant
if the children are aboriginal or torres strait islander children
any family violence involving the children or a member of their family, and if a family violence order applies or has applied, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
any other relevant fact or circumstance   when the father was cross-examined, it became apparent that when the father deposed to seeing mr o at the shops, in fact mr o had been waiting at the shops approximately 80 to 100 metres from the children’s school at the end of the school day, (b) the father’s email to the mother described mr o initially driving past him and x, then sitting on a seat outside a shop when they returned from collecting y, before walking with them as they crossed the road and entered the car, (c) the father’s email to the mother stated mr o “said hi to me out of the window... he said something like great to see you.” when cross-examined however, the father gave evidence mr o said from his car, “you’re lucky your daughter’s with you, you cunt”. when asked if x would have heard that, the father answered in a deflective manner, “she was walking to my left”, (d) when cross-examined, the father admitted mr o had attended at his family home where he spoke with the father’s aunt who has a medical condition. he revealed the father’s aunt provided mr o with the mother’s phone number, (e) the mother deposed mr o’s 16 year old son had sent a message to the father with a photo of x asking how she would feel if she knew her dad was a homewrecker. this evidence was not challenged, (f) the father acknowledged in cross-examination that he had also received a message from mr o’s 16 year old son, in june 2023, reading “2 x 2 you cunt”. he gave evidence he had reported this message to the police but the police had been unable to identify which of mr o’s children had sent the message. the father admitted he did not inform the mother about this directly, only via her lawyers, and (g) the father agreed it would be terrifying for a parent, knowing mr o knew where the children attended school in light of the above.   the father’s email to the mother described mr o initially driving past him and x, then sitting on a seat outside a shop when they returned from collecting y, before walking with them as they crossed the road and entered the car, (c) the father’s email to the mother stated mr o “said hi to me out of the window... he said something like great to see you.” when cross-examined however, the father gave evidence mr o said from his car, “you’re lucky your daughter’s with you, you cunt”. when asked if x would have heard that, the father answered in a deflective manner, “she was walking to my left”, (d) when cross-examined, the father admitted mr o had attended at his family home where he spoke with the father’s aunt who has a medical condition. he revealed the father’s aunt provided mr o with the mother’s phone number, (e) the mother deposed mr o’s 16 year old son had sent a message to the father with a photo of x asking how she would feel if she knew her dad was a homewrecker. this evidence was not challenged, (f) the father acknowledged in cross-examination that he had also received a message from mr o’s 16 year old son, in june 2023, reading “2 x 2 you cunt”. he gave evidence he had reported this message to the police but the police had been unable to identify which of mr o’s children had sent the message. the father admitted he did not inform the mother about this directly, only via her lawyers, and (g) the father agreed it would be terrifying for a parent, knowing mr o knew where the children attended school in light of the above.   the father’s email to the mother stated mr o “said hi to me out of the window... he said something like great to see you.” when cross-examined however, the father gave evidence mr o said from his car, “you’re lucky your daughter’s with you, you cunt”. when asked if x would have heard that, the father answered in a deflective manner, “she was walking to my left”, (d) when cross-examined, the father admitted mr o had attended at his family home where he spoke with the father’s aunt who has a medical condition. he revealed the father’s aunt provided mr o with the mother’s phone number, (e) the mother deposed mr o’s 16 year old son had sent a message to the father with a photo of x asking how she would feel if she knew her dad was a homewrecker. this evidence was not challenged, (f) the father acknowledged in cross-examination that he had also received a message from mr o’s 16 year old son, in june 2023, reading “2 x 2 you cunt”. he gave evidence he had reported this message to the police but the police had been unable to identify which of mr o’s children had sent the message. the father admitted he did not inform the mother about this directly, only via her lawyers, and (g) the father agreed it would be terrifying for a parent, knowing mr o knew where the children attended school in light of the above.   when cross-examined, the father admitted mr o had attended at his family home where he spoke with the father’s aunt who has a medical condition. he revealed the father’s aunt provided mr o with the mother’s phone number, (e) the mother deposed mr o’s 16 year old son had sent a message to the father with a photo of x asking how she would feel if she knew her dad was a homewrecker. this evidence was not challenged, (f) the father acknowledged in cross-examination that he had also received a message from mr o’s 16 year old son, in june 2023, reading “2 x 2 you cunt”. he gave evidence he had reported this message to the police but the police had been unable to identify which of mr o’s children had sent the message. the father admitted he did not inform the mother about this directly, only via her lawyers, and (g) the father agreed it would be terrifying for a parent, knowing mr o knew where the children attended school in light of the above.   the mother deposed mr o’s 16 year old son had sent a message to the father with a photo of x asking how she would feel if she knew her dad was a homewrecker. this evidence was not challenged, (f) the father acknowledged in cross-examination that he had also received a message from mr o’s 16 year old son, in june 2023, reading “2 x 2 you cunt”. he gave evidence he had reported this message to the police but the police had been unable to identify which of mr o’s children had sent the message. the father admitted he did not inform the mother about this directly, only via her lawyers, and (g) the father agreed it would be terrifying for a parent, knowing mr o knew where the children attended school in light of the above.   the father acknowledged in cross-examination that he had also received a message from mr o’s 16 year old son, in june 2023, reading “2 x 2 you cunt”. he gave evidence he had reported this message to the police but the police had been unable to identify which of mr o’s children had sent the message. the father admitted he did not inform the mother about this directly, only via her lawyers, and (g) the father agreed it would be terrifying for a parent, knowing mr o knew where the children attended school in light of the above.   the father agreed it would be terrifying for a parent, knowing mr o knew where the children attended school in light of the above.
parental responsibility
children’s care arrangements
consideration of equal time
“five nights is a stretch. there was a big difference between four to five, not so much from three to four...the children are quite destabilised by the amount of time, inconsistencies. [mr tauro] doesn’t co-parent, we don’t co-parent. co-parenting relationship is very dysfunctional. i have huge concerns about what he says to them. and if the kids are to spend seven nights, i do not trust his insight into what’s best for them, into that amount of time doing what you need to do. and his capacity, alcohol is a concern”.
given the recency in changes to the parenting arrangements in december 2022, it is my view that a week-about arrangement for [x] and [y] would mean significant change and adjustment for [the father] and the children at this time. it is promising that the children and their father have been able to forge a closer relationship and i hope that this can continue with the current arrangements. ... should the court consider an increase in the children’s time with their father, it is important that this is in the “context of improved coparenting, that the time allocation is feasible for [the father] with his work and extracurricular commitments, and it would be important that the parents have clear communication about the children’s routines and boundaries in each home to maintain stability and avoid confusion for the children” and that “a graded approach” would be best. it is necessary to consider the impacts of cumulative change for these children in the past few years. [...] as it stands, the parties have been unable to establish a functional co-parenting relationship. rather, it appears that there have been some issues where both parties have clearly adopted different parenting approaches, which has caused the children confusion, apprehension, and instability. these are not optimal conditions for the children to commence an even shared care arrangement between homes. my concern is that this will likely present further co-parenting challenges that will ultimately be to the detriment of the children’s wellbeing and development. the children require a seamless transition between homes, where the parties have established consistent conditions, rules, and expectations to provide a sense of emotional safely and stability. with all the above considered, the court may wish to consider a graded increase to shared-care arrangements in 2024. this would allow more time for the co-parenting relationship to improve, [mr tauro] to make gains in his parenting skills, seek support for his mental health and for the children and [mr tauro] to further consolidate their relationships. given that the father is seeking a 50/50 arrangement, this is likely to present some practical challenges in addition to an increase in parenting stress for [the father]. in light of the father’s historical difficulties with stress management, it is imperative that he seek consistent support to develop appropriate coping strategies should the children be in his care in an equal shared-care arrangement.   the emphasis given by the family report writer on avoiding further change for the children, (b) the father’s failure to readily acknowledge his prior mental health issues and difficulties with alcohol and to seek appropriate supports in respect of those issues. i am concerned about the potential impact on the children of increasing their time spent with the father, with a corresponding increase on the stress that is inevitably experienced as a working parent, when those issues have not been acknowledged or addressed by the father as recommended by the family report writer, (c) the differences identified by the family report writer and from the parties’ evidence in the in the parties’ parenting styles, which will not provide consistency across their two homes, (d) notwithstanding significant improvements in the parties’ communication and co-parenting relationship, there remains ongoing difficulties in that relationship, (e) as the family report writer observed, the parties’ differing perceptions of their co-parenting relationship is also problematic, (f) the lack of evidence to demonstrate the required improvement in the father’s attitudes towards parenting and his parenting capacity, including evidence of meaningful engagement in counselling and improved insight into his prior conduct on the mother and children and his role in conflict between the parties, (g) evidence of the father continuing to blame the mother for difficulties in their co-parenting relationship, (h) the lack of trust between the parties as evident from their interactions around the conduct of mr o, and (i) the lack of evidence adduced by the father to support the flexibility required in his employment to share the children’s care equally compared with the mother’s evidence that she works only school hours and is available to continue to care for the children before and after school, as she has been doing.   the father’s failure to readily acknowledge his prior mental health issues and difficulties with alcohol and to seek appropriate supports in respect of those issues. i am concerned about the potential impact on the children of increasing their time spent with the father, with a corresponding increase on the stress that is inevitably experienced as a working parent, when those issues have not been acknowledged or addressed by the father as recommended by the family report writer, (c) the differences identified by the family report writer and from the parties’ evidence in the in the parties’ parenting styles, which will not provide consistency across their two homes, (d) notwithstanding significant improvements in the parties’ communication and co-parenting relationship, there remains ongoing difficulties in that relationship, (e) as the family report writer observed, the parties’ differing perceptions of their co-parenting relationship is also problematic, (f) the lack of evidence to demonstrate the required improvement in the father’s attitudes towards parenting and his parenting capacity, including evidence of meaningful engagement in counselling and improved insight into his prior conduct on the mother and children and his role in conflict between the parties, (g) evidence of the father continuing to blame the mother for difficulties in their co-parenting relationship, (h) the lack of trust between the parties as evident from their interactions around the conduct of mr o, and (i) the lack of evidence adduced by the father to support the flexibility required in his employment to share the children’s care equally compared with the mother’s evidence that she works only school hours and is available to continue to care for the children before and after school, as she has been doing.   the differences identified by the family report writer and from the parties’ evidence in the in the parties’ parenting styles, which will not provide consistency across their two homes, (d) notwithstanding significant improvements in the parties’ communication and co-parenting relationship, there remains ongoing difficulties in that relationship, (e) as the family report writer observed, the parties’ differing perceptions of their co-parenting relationship is also problematic, (f) the lack of evidence to demonstrate the required improvement in the father’s attitudes towards parenting and his parenting capacity, including evidence of meaningful engagement in counselling and improved insight into his prior conduct on the mother and children and his role in conflict between the parties, (g) evidence of the father continuing to blame the mother for difficulties in their co-parenting relationship, (h) the lack of trust between the parties as evident from their interactions around the conduct of mr o, and (i) the lack of evidence adduced by the father to support the flexibility required in his employment to share the children’s care equally compared with the mother’s evidence that she works only school hours and is available to continue to care for the children before and after school, as she has been doing.   notwithstanding significant improvements in the parties’ communication and co-parenting relationship, there remains ongoing difficulties in that relationship, (e) as the family report writer observed, the parties’ differing perceptions of their co-parenting relationship is also problematic, (f) the lack of evidence to demonstrate the required improvement in the father’s attitudes towards parenting and his parenting capacity, including evidence of meaningful engagement in counselling and improved insight into his prior conduct on the mother and children and his role in conflict between the parties, (g) evidence of the father continuing to blame the mother for difficulties in their co-parenting relationship, (h) the lack of trust between the parties as evident from their interactions around the conduct of mr o, and (i) the lack of evidence adduced by the father to support the flexibility required in his employment to share the children’s care equally compared with the mother’s evidence that she works only school hours and is available to continue to care for the children before and after school, as she has been doing.   as the family report writer observed, the parties’ differing perceptions of their co-parenting relationship is also problematic, (f) the lack of evidence to demonstrate the required improvement in the father’s attitudes towards parenting and his parenting capacity, including evidence of meaningful engagement in counselling and improved insight into his prior conduct on the mother and children and his role in conflict between the parties, (g) evidence of the father continuing to blame the mother for difficulties in their co-parenting relationship, (h) the lack of trust between the parties as evident from their interactions around the conduct of mr o, and (i) the lack of evidence adduced by the father to support the flexibility required in his employment to share the children’s care equally compared with the mother’s evidence that she works only school hours and is available to continue to care for the children before and after school, as she has been doing.   the lack of evidence to demonstrate the required improvement in the father’s attitudes towards parenting and his parenting capacity, including evidence of meaningful engagement in counselling and improved insight into his prior conduct on the mother and children and his role in conflict between the parties, (g) evidence of the father continuing to blame the mother for difficulties in their co-parenting relationship, (h) the lack of trust between the parties as evident from their interactions around the conduct of mr o, and (i) the lack of evidence adduced by the father to support the flexibility required in his employment to share the children’s care equally compared with the mother’s evidence that she works only school hours and is available to continue to care for the children before and after school, as she has been doing.   evidence of the father continuing to blame the mother for difficulties in their co-parenting relationship, (h) the lack of trust between the parties as evident from their interactions around the conduct of mr o, and (i) the lack of evidence adduced by the father to support the flexibility required in his employment to share the children’s care equally compared with the mother’s evidence that she works only school hours and is available to continue to care for the children before and after school, as she has been doing.   the lack of trust between the parties as evident from their interactions around the conduct of mr o, and (i) the lack of evidence adduced by the father to support the flexibility required in his employment to share the children’s care equally compared with the mother’s evidence that she works only school hours and is available to continue to care for the children before and after school, as she has been doing.   the lack of evidence adduced by the father to support the flexibility required in his employment to share the children’s care equally compared with the mother’s evidence that she works only school hours and is available to continue to care for the children before and after school, as she has been doing.   the father described to the family report writer adapting his current work routine and schedule to care for the children, stating his place of employment is flexible in supporting this, (b) the mother disputed this. she deposed that during the parties’ relationship the father was engaged in the same role and that it was a demanding professional role. she said he was required to leave home between 6:00 am and 7:00 am and returned home anywhere from between 5:00 pm and 7:00 pm, (c) the father’s work has previously been a cause of significant stress to him, as confirmed in subpoenaed medical records, (d) the mother referred to the father’s contract of employment from 2017 (pursuant to which he worked the long hours she described in her affidavit) and a letter from his work colleague, mr q produced by way of disclosure, confirming he remains employed on a full-time basis and that his “current role permits flexibility within the organisation and his ordinary hours (38 hours per week) may differ week to week”, (e) the mother also pointed to the initial family report, where the children reported being cared for by extended family members when spending time with the father, and (f) whilst the father gave evidence in his trial affidavit that he has flexibility in his employment to enable him to care for the children on an equal shared care basis, he did not provide details of that flexibility or of how he would meet that level of care for the children. in his affidavit in reply, he gave evidence that since he started in his role, his team has acquired an additional four team members but that his contract had not been updated to reflect this.   the mother disputed this. she deposed that during the parties’ relationship the father was engaged in the same role and that it was a demanding professional role. she said he was required to leave home between 6:00 am and 7:00 am and returned home anywhere from between 5:00 pm and 7:00 pm, (c) the father’s work has previously been a cause of significant stress to him, as confirmed in subpoenaed medical records, (d) the mother referred to the father’s contract of employment from 2017 (pursuant to which he worked the long hours she described in her affidavit) and a letter from his work colleague, mr q produced by way of disclosure, confirming he remains employed on a full-time basis and that his “current role permits flexibility within the organisation and his ordinary hours (38 hours per week) may differ week to week”, (e) the mother also pointed to the initial family report, where the children reported being cared for by extended family members when spending time with the father, and (f) whilst the father gave evidence in his trial affidavit that he has flexibility in his employment to enable him to care for the children on an equal shared care basis, he did not provide details of that flexibility or of how he would meet that level of care for the children. in his affidavit in reply, he gave evidence that since he started in his role, his team has acquired an additional four team members but that his contract had not been updated to reflect this.   the father’s work has previously been a cause of significant stress to him, as confirmed in subpoenaed medical records, (d) the mother referred to the father’s contract of employment from 2017 (pursuant to which he worked the long hours she described in her affidavit) and a letter from his work colleague, mr q produced by way of disclosure, confirming he remains employed on a full-time basis and that his “current role permits flexibility within the organisation and his ordinary hours (38 hours per week) may differ week to week”, (e) the mother also pointed to the initial family report, where the children reported being cared for by extended family members when spending time with the father, and (f) whilst the father gave evidence in his trial affidavit that he has flexibility in his employment to enable him to care for the children on an equal shared care basis, he did not provide details of that flexibility or of how he would meet that level of care for the children. in his affidavit in reply, he gave evidence that since he started in his role, his team has acquired an additional four team members but that his contract had not been updated to reflect this.   the mother referred to the father’s contract of employment from 2017 (pursuant to which he worked the long hours she described in her affidavit) and a letter from his work colleague, mr q produced by way of disclosure, confirming he remains employed on a full-time basis and that his “current role permits flexibility within the organisation and his ordinary hours (38 hours per week) may differ week to week”, (e) the mother also pointed to the initial family report, where the children reported being cared for by extended family members when spending time with the father, and (f) whilst the father gave evidence in his trial affidavit that he has flexibility in his employment to enable him to care for the children on an equal shared care basis, he did not provide details of that flexibility or of how he would meet that level of care for the children. in his affidavit in reply, he gave evidence that since he started in his role, his team has acquired an additional four team members but that his contract had not been updated to reflect this.   the mother also pointed to the initial family report, where the children reported being cared for by extended family members when spending time with the father, and (f) whilst the father gave evidence in his trial affidavit that he has flexibility in his employment to enable him to care for the children on an equal shared care basis, he did not provide details of that flexibility or of how he would meet that level of care for the children. in his affidavit in reply, he gave evidence that since he started in his role, his team has acquired an additional four team members but that his contract had not been updated to reflect this.   whilst the father gave evidence in his trial affidavit that he has flexibility in his employment to enable him to care for the children on an equal shared care basis, he did not provide details of that flexibility or of how he would meet that level of care for the children. in his affidavit in reply, he gave evidence that since he started in his role, his team has acquired an additional four team members but that his contract had not been updated to reflect this.
consideration of substantial and significant time  the time the child spends with the parent includes both:   days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:   the child's daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.
other orders
school holidays
telephone and video communication
first option to care for the children
resumption of time each term
family therapy
individual therapy
provision of documents
conclusion
associate: dated: 21 december 2023
dated: 21 december 2023
[1] a jointly tendered document, marked as exhibit “j1”.[2] as summarised by the family report writer in the family report dated 1 june 2023[3] blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 at [30]. [4] [2019] hca 21 at [8].[5] [2009] famcafc 92.[6] [2007] famca 520 at [26].[7] [2011] hca 11 at [63]–[64].[8] [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298.[9] annexure -2 to his own affidavit filed on 13 july 2022.[10] annexure t-2.[11] annexure t-1 to the father’s trial affidavit.[12] annexure t-ba, to the father’s affidavit in reply.