last updated: 25 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hoa & tan [2024] fedcfamc2f 2
orders
the court orders that:  instruct a real estate agent to conduct a sales and marketing campaign for the property and thereafter the auction of the property including signing any agency agreement or authority for any reasonable disbursement for the sales and marketing campaign, authorise the auction of the property, negotiate with any prospective purchaser at any auction and authorise the acceptance of a sale price, and authorise such other action as may be required to effect the sale of the property, (b) sign any request to discharge the mortgage registered over the property and give authority to discharge the same, (c) sign any contract for the sale of the property as advised by a conveyancing practitioner appointed, (d) sign any memorandum of transfer for the suburb c property in favour of the purchaser, (e) sign any other document include pexa authorisation form required of the parties in order to give effect to the sale of the suburb c property, (f) authorise the payment of funds in satisfaction of the mortgage debt secured over the title to the property and any rates and charges with respect to the property upon the settlement of the sale, (g) authorise the payment of fees and disbursements to the real estate agent and conveyancing practitioner engaged with respect to the sale of the property, (h) the suburb c property shall be sold for not less than $2,500,000 or such amount as agreed to between the parties. (i) do any other act or thing necessary in order to effect the sale of the suburb c property.   sign any request to discharge the mortgage registered over the property and give authority to discharge the same, (c) sign any contract for the sale of the property as advised by a conveyancing practitioner appointed, (d) sign any memorandum of transfer for the suburb c property in favour of the purchaser, (e) sign any other document include pexa authorisation form required of the parties in order to give effect to the sale of the suburb c property, (f) authorise the payment of funds in satisfaction of the mortgage debt secured over the title to the property and any rates and charges with respect to the property upon the settlement of the sale, (g) authorise the payment of fees and disbursements to the real estate agent and conveyancing practitioner engaged with respect to the sale of the property, (h) the suburb c property shall be sold for not less than $2,500,000 or such amount as agreed to between the parties. (i) do any other act or thing necessary in order to effect the sale of the suburb c property.   sign any contract for the sale of the property as advised by a conveyancing practitioner appointed, (d) sign any memorandum of transfer for the suburb c property in favour of the purchaser, (e) sign any other document include pexa authorisation form required of the parties in order to give effect to the sale of the suburb c property, (f) authorise the payment of funds in satisfaction of the mortgage debt secured over the title to the property and any rates and charges with respect to the property upon the settlement of the sale, (g) authorise the payment of fees and disbursements to the real estate agent and conveyancing practitioner engaged with respect to the sale of the property, (h) the suburb c property shall be sold for not less than $2,500,000 or such amount as agreed to between the parties. (i) do any other act or thing necessary in order to effect the sale of the suburb c property.   sign any memorandum of transfer for the suburb c property in favour of the purchaser, (e) sign any other document include pexa authorisation form required of the parties in order to give effect to the sale of the suburb c property, (f) authorise the payment of funds in satisfaction of the mortgage debt secured over the title to the property and any rates and charges with respect to the property upon the settlement of the sale, (g) authorise the payment of fees and disbursements to the real estate agent and conveyancing practitioner engaged with respect to the sale of the property, (h) the suburb c property shall be sold for not less than $2,500,000 or such amount as agreed to between the parties. (i) do any other act or thing necessary in order to effect the sale of the suburb c property.   sign any other document include pexa authorisation form required of the parties in order to give effect to the sale of the suburb c property, (f) authorise the payment of funds in satisfaction of the mortgage debt secured over the title to the property and any rates and charges with respect to the property upon the settlement of the sale, (g) authorise the payment of fees and disbursements to the real estate agent and conveyancing practitioner engaged with respect to the sale of the property, (h) the suburb c property shall be sold for not less than $2,500,000 or such amount as agreed to between the parties. (i) do any other act or thing necessary in order to effect the sale of the suburb c property.   authorise the payment of funds in satisfaction of the mortgage debt secured over the title to the property and any rates and charges with respect to the property upon the settlement of the sale, (g) authorise the payment of fees and disbursements to the real estate agent and conveyancing practitioner engaged with respect to the sale of the property, (h) the suburb c property shall be sold for not less than $2,500,000 or such amount as agreed to between the parties. (i) do any other act or thing necessary in order to effect the sale of the suburb c property.   authorise the payment of fees and disbursements to the real estate agent and conveyancing practitioner engaged with respect to the sale of the property, (h) the suburb c property shall be sold for not less than $2,500,000 or such amount as agreed to between the parties. (i) do any other act or thing necessary in order to effect the sale of the suburb c property.   the suburb c property shall be sold for not less than $2,500,000 or such amount as agreed to between the parties. (i) do any other act or thing necessary in order to effect the sale of the suburb c property.   do any other act or thing necessary in order to effect the sale of the suburb c property.   in payment of agent’s commission, advertising expenses and legal expenses of sale, (b) in payment of all amounts necessary to discharge outstanding council and water rates and utilities in respect of the said property and any other adjustments as required pursuant to the usual contract for sale, (c) in discharge of the mortgage encumbrances presently secured over the said property in favour of the australia and new zealand banking group, and (d) the balance to be held on trust by the respondent wife’s solicitors pending the resolution of these proceedings.   in payment of all amounts necessary to discharge outstanding council and water rates and utilities in respect of the said property and any other adjustments as required pursuant to the usual contract for sale, (c) in discharge of the mortgage encumbrances presently secured over the said property in favour of the australia and new zealand banking group, and (d) the balance to be held on trust by the respondent wife’s solicitors pending the resolution of these proceedings.   in discharge of the mortgage encumbrances presently secured over the said property in favour of the australia and new zealand banking group, and (d) the balance to be held on trust by the respondent wife’s solicitors pending the resolution of these proceedings.   the balance to be held on trust by the respondent wife’s solicitors pending the resolution of these proceedings.   a response to the wife’s application for final orders filed 24 january 2023 setting out with precision the final orders he seeks, (b) a full and complete financial statement, (c) any affidavit or affidavits upon which he seeks to rely, (d) an undertaking as to disclosure in accordance with rule 6.02 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), and (e) any other document required by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).   a full and complete financial statement, (c) any affidavit or affidavits upon which he seeks to rely, (d) an undertaking as to disclosure in accordance with rule 6.02 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), and (e) any other document required by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).   any affidavit or affidavits upon which he seeks to rely, (d) an undertaking as to disclosure in accordance with rule 6.02 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), and (e) any other document required by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).   an undertaking as to disclosure in accordance with rule 6.02 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), and (e) any other document required by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).   any other document required by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).
reasons for judgment
judge stewart  that the former matrimonial home in suburb c in the state of new south wales was to be sold, (b) the husband was to be paid a sum of $70,000 from a particular account, (c) the husband was to vacate the home within 42 days (which he has not done), (d) the wife was to be the trustee on the sale of the former matrimonial home, (e) once the former matrimonial home had been sold, the wife was to discharge the $520,500 mortgage secured over the former matrimonial home and then the wife was to retain the proceeds of sale, (f) the husband was to retain a property registered in his name in country d, and (g) the property proceedings were finalised.   the husband was to be paid a sum of $70,000 from a particular account, (c) the husband was to vacate the home within 42 days (which he has not done), (d) the wife was to be the trustee on the sale of the former matrimonial home, (e) once the former matrimonial home had been sold, the wife was to discharge the $520,500 mortgage secured over the former matrimonial home and then the wife was to retain the proceeds of sale, (f) the husband was to retain a property registered in his name in country d, and (g) the property proceedings were finalised.   the husband was to vacate the home within 42 days (which he has not done), (d) the wife was to be the trustee on the sale of the former matrimonial home, (e) once the former matrimonial home had been sold, the wife was to discharge the $520,500 mortgage secured over the former matrimonial home and then the wife was to retain the proceeds of sale, (f) the husband was to retain a property registered in his name in country d, and (g) the property proceedings were finalised.   the wife was to be the trustee on the sale of the former matrimonial home, (e) once the former matrimonial home had been sold, the wife was to discharge the $520,500 mortgage secured over the former matrimonial home and then the wife was to retain the proceeds of sale, (f) the husband was to retain a property registered in his name in country d, and (g) the property proceedings were finalised.   once the former matrimonial home had been sold, the wife was to discharge the $520,500 mortgage secured over the former matrimonial home and then the wife was to retain the proceeds of sale, (f) the husband was to retain a property registered in his name in country d, and (g) the property proceedings were finalised.   the husband was to retain a property registered in his name in country d, and (g) the property proceedings were finalised.   the property proceedings were finalised.
in the event that the respondent husband does not file any documents in the proceedings and/or fails to appear before the court on the adjourned date, the matter will proceed in his absence and orders may be made on a final undefended basis.   the husband appeared in person and was assisted by an interpreter. (b) as he does in his affidavits filed in this proceeding, the husband told the senior judicial registrar that he and the wife (with the assistance of their adult son) wanted to reach an agreement, and that the wife told him she would withdraw her application. he said that the wife later told him on 10 august that she was told by her lawyer that the application cannot be withdrawn. the husband said that by that stage he had missed the filing date for his documents (which was erroneously said to be 7 august). the senior judicial registrar was advised by the solicitor for the wife that his client denied any agreement between the parties. the husband said that the agreement was such that part of the quid pro quo for the withdrawal of the application was that the husband would place $120,000 in a joint offset account (which in fact occurred). the husband indicated that money was “his two year savings”. the wife denied the husband put $120,000 in the joint offset account but agreed that he did place $70,000 in the account, the difference being that the wife claimed that $49,000 of the $119,000 deposited was sourced from the account itself prior to being deposited back into the account. (c) the husband was clearly opposed to the orders the wife sought and implicit in his assertion that there was an agreement between the parties that the wife was to withdraw the application was that this alleged agreement was the reason he had not filed documents. he asked that the proceedings be adjourned so he could attend to do so and consult a lawyer. the husband said that because the parties had reached agreement on 25 july 2023, he had not had time to file his documents. the husband said that he felt he had been deliberately misled by the wife as to an agreement, causing him to miss the deadline to file documents. (d) in respect of the monies transferred into the parties’ offset account, the legal representative for the wife advised the court that he was instructed by his client that the husband took $49,000 from the joint offset account first, he then deposited the same $49,000 back into the joint offset account and then deposited a further $70,000 into the same account, the source of which is not revealed. implicit in that submission is a concession by the wife that further monies were deposited, but there does not appear to be an explanation provided on that day as to why the monies were deposited by the husband, at least from the wife’s point of view. (e) the senior judicial registrar advised the husband that the matter was to proceed on the wife’s application. the senior judicial registrar advised the husband that he should not have relied on discussions between he and the wife that the proceedings would be withdrawn in the absence of a formal notice of discontinuance. (f) discussions then turned to the husband’s position that he should receive half of the proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home. in the asset pool contended by the wife, there was the further property in the husband’s name in city e, and the senior judicial registrar pointed out that it would be unlikely that the husband would receive half of the net proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home after sale. at that point, the husband put the ownership of the city e property squarely in contention, stating that the city e property belonged “not only” to him, but also to his family. reference was made by the legal representative for the wife to her affidavit filed 9 may 2023 stating the property was purchased in or around 2014 “under his own name”, and to annexure “e” to that affidavit (which is a translation of a title document from country d showing the city e property is in the husband’s name). the senior judicial registrar referred to what was asserted to be a valuation report on the city e property contained in the later affidavit filed by the wife on 19 june 2023 at annexure “e”. that document either valued or appraised the city e property as having a value of 4,500,000 as at 22 may 2023. (g) the senior judicial registrar determined not to adjourn the proceedings. the matter was then determined on the substantive issues, particularly the two major assets being the former matrimonial home and the city e property. the senior judicial registrar was referred to “the balance sheet” and was told that the value of the two real properties “has been established in the wife’s affidavit” (19 june 2023). (h) as will become relevant later in these reasons the senior judicial registrar advised the legal representative for the wife that she would “let mr hoa [the husband] make submissions”. the senior judicial registrar later turned to the husband, asking him whether he “wanted to say anything in response to the submissions of mr. fung [the legal representative for the wife] had made.”   as he does in his affidavits filed in this proceeding, the husband told the senior judicial registrar that he and the wife (with the assistance of their adult son) wanted to reach an agreement, and that the wife told him she would withdraw her application. he said that the wife later told him on 10 august that she was told by her lawyer that the application cannot be withdrawn. the husband said that by that stage he had missed the filing date for his documents (which was erroneously said to be 7 august). the senior judicial registrar was advised by the solicitor for the wife that his client denied any agreement between the parties. the husband said that the agreement was such that part of the quid pro quo for the withdrawal of the application was that the husband would place $120,000 in a joint offset account (which in fact occurred). the husband indicated that money was “his two year savings”. the wife denied the husband put $120,000 in the joint offset account but agreed that he did place $70,000 in the account, the difference being that the wife claimed that $49,000 of the $119,000 deposited was sourced from the account itself prior to being deposited back into the account. (c) the husband was clearly opposed to the orders the wife sought and implicit in his assertion that there was an agreement between the parties that the wife was to withdraw the application was that this alleged agreement was the reason he had not filed documents. he asked that the proceedings be adjourned so he could attend to do so and consult a lawyer. the husband said that because the parties had reached agreement on 25 july 2023, he had not had time to file his documents. the husband said that he felt he had been deliberately misled by the wife as to an agreement, causing him to miss the deadline to file documents. (d) in respect of the monies transferred into the parties’ offset account, the legal representative for the wife advised the court that he was instructed by his client that the husband took $49,000 from the joint offset account first, he then deposited the same $49,000 back into the joint offset account and then deposited a further $70,000 into the same account, the source of which is not revealed. implicit in that submission is a concession by the wife that further monies were deposited, but there does not appear to be an explanation provided on that day as to why the monies were deposited by the husband, at least from the wife’s point of view. (e) the senior judicial registrar advised the husband that the matter was to proceed on the wife’s application. the senior judicial registrar advised the husband that he should not have relied on discussions between he and the wife that the proceedings would be withdrawn in the absence of a formal notice of discontinuance. (f) discussions then turned to the husband’s position that he should receive half of the proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home. in the asset pool contended by the wife, there was the further property in the husband’s name in city e, and the senior judicial registrar pointed out that it would be unlikely that the husband would receive half of the net proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home after sale. at that point, the husband put the ownership of the city e property squarely in contention, stating that the city e property belonged “not only” to him, but also to his family. reference was made by the legal representative for the wife to her affidavit filed 9 may 2023 stating the property was purchased in or around 2014 “under his own name”, and to annexure “e” to that affidavit (which is a translation of a title document from country d showing the city e property is in the husband’s name). the senior judicial registrar referred to what was asserted to be a valuation report on the city e property contained in the later affidavit filed by the wife on 19 june 2023 at annexure “e”. that document either valued or appraised the city e property as having a value of 4,500,000 as at 22 may 2023. (g) the senior judicial registrar determined not to adjourn the proceedings. the matter was then determined on the substantive issues, particularly the two major assets being the former matrimonial home and the city e property. the senior judicial registrar was referred to “the balance sheet” and was told that the value of the two real properties “has been established in the wife’s affidavit” (19 june 2023). (h) as will become relevant later in these reasons the senior judicial registrar advised the legal representative for the wife that she would “let mr hoa [the husband] make submissions”. the senior judicial registrar later turned to the husband, asking him whether he “wanted to say anything in response to the submissions of mr. fung [the legal representative for the wife] had made.”   the husband was clearly opposed to the orders the wife sought and implicit in his assertion that there was an agreement between the parties that the wife was to withdraw the application was that this alleged agreement was the reason he had not filed documents. he asked that the proceedings be adjourned so he could attend to do so and consult a lawyer. the husband said that because the parties had reached agreement on 25 july 2023, he had not had time to file his documents. the husband said that he felt he had been deliberately misled by the wife as to an agreement, causing him to miss the deadline to file documents. (d) in respect of the monies transferred into the parties’ offset account, the legal representative for the wife advised the court that he was instructed by his client that the husband took $49,000 from the joint offset account first, he then deposited the same $49,000 back into the joint offset account and then deposited a further $70,000 into the same account, the source of which is not revealed. implicit in that submission is a concession by the wife that further monies were deposited, but there does not appear to be an explanation provided on that day as to why the monies were deposited by the husband, at least from the wife’s point of view. (e) the senior judicial registrar advised the husband that the matter was to proceed on the wife’s application. the senior judicial registrar advised the husband that he should not have relied on discussions between he and the wife that the proceedings would be withdrawn in the absence of a formal notice of discontinuance. (f) discussions then turned to the husband’s position that he should receive half of the proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home. in the asset pool contended by the wife, there was the further property in the husband’s name in city e, and the senior judicial registrar pointed out that it would be unlikely that the husband would receive half of the net proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home after sale. at that point, the husband put the ownership of the city e property squarely in contention, stating that the city e property belonged “not only” to him, but also to his family. reference was made by the legal representative for the wife to her affidavit filed 9 may 2023 stating the property was purchased in or around 2014 “under his own name”, and to annexure “e” to that affidavit (which is a translation of a title document from country d showing the city e property is in the husband’s name). the senior judicial registrar referred to what was asserted to be a valuation report on the city e property contained in the later affidavit filed by the wife on 19 june 2023 at annexure “e”. that document either valued or appraised the city e property as having a value of 4,500,000 as at 22 may 2023. (g) the senior judicial registrar determined not to adjourn the proceedings. the matter was then determined on the substantive issues, particularly the two major assets being the former matrimonial home and the city e property. the senior judicial registrar was referred to “the balance sheet” and was told that the value of the two real properties “has been established in the wife’s affidavit” (19 june 2023). (h) as will become relevant later in these reasons the senior judicial registrar advised the legal representative for the wife that she would “let mr hoa [the husband] make submissions”. the senior judicial registrar later turned to the husband, asking him whether he “wanted to say anything in response to the submissions of mr. fung [the legal representative for the wife] had made.”   in respect of the monies transferred into the parties’ offset account, the legal representative for the wife advised the court that he was instructed by his client that the husband took $49,000 from the joint offset account first, he then deposited the same $49,000 back into the joint offset account and then deposited a further $70,000 into the same account, the source of which is not revealed. implicit in that submission is a concession by the wife that further monies were deposited, but there does not appear to be an explanation provided on that day as to why the monies were deposited by the husband, at least from the wife’s point of view. (e) the senior judicial registrar advised the husband that the matter was to proceed on the wife’s application. the senior judicial registrar advised the husband that he should not have relied on discussions between he and the wife that the proceedings would be withdrawn in the absence of a formal notice of discontinuance. (f) discussions then turned to the husband’s position that he should receive half of the proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home. in the asset pool contended by the wife, there was the further property in the husband’s name in city e, and the senior judicial registrar pointed out that it would be unlikely that the husband would receive half of the net proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home after sale. at that point, the husband put the ownership of the city e property squarely in contention, stating that the city e property belonged “not only” to him, but also to his family. reference was made by the legal representative for the wife to her affidavit filed 9 may 2023 stating the property was purchased in or around 2014 “under his own name”, and to annexure “e” to that affidavit (which is a translation of a title document from country d showing the city e property is in the husband’s name). the senior judicial registrar referred to what was asserted to be a valuation report on the city e property contained in the later affidavit filed by the wife on 19 june 2023 at annexure “e”. that document either valued or appraised the city e property as having a value of 4,500,000 as at 22 may 2023. (g) the senior judicial registrar determined not to adjourn the proceedings. the matter was then determined on the substantive issues, particularly the two major assets being the former matrimonial home and the city e property. the senior judicial registrar was referred to “the balance sheet” and was told that the value of the two real properties “has been established in the wife’s affidavit” (19 june 2023). (h) as will become relevant later in these reasons the senior judicial registrar advised the legal representative for the wife that she would “let mr hoa [the husband] make submissions”. the senior judicial registrar later turned to the husband, asking him whether he “wanted to say anything in response to the submissions of mr. fung [the legal representative for the wife] had made.”   the senior judicial registrar advised the husband that the matter was to proceed on the wife’s application. the senior judicial registrar advised the husband that he should not have relied on discussions between he and the wife that the proceedings would be withdrawn in the absence of a formal notice of discontinuance. (f) discussions then turned to the husband’s position that he should receive half of the proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home. in the asset pool contended by the wife, there was the further property in the husband’s name in city e, and the senior judicial registrar pointed out that it would be unlikely that the husband would receive half of the net proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home after sale. at that point, the husband put the ownership of the city e property squarely in contention, stating that the city e property belonged “not only” to him, but also to his family. reference was made by the legal representative for the wife to her affidavit filed 9 may 2023 stating the property was purchased in or around 2014 “under his own name”, and to annexure “e” to that affidavit (which is a translation of a title document from country d showing the city e property is in the husband’s name). the senior judicial registrar referred to what was asserted to be a valuation report on the city e property contained in the later affidavit filed by the wife on 19 june 2023 at annexure “e”. that document either valued or appraised the city e property as having a value of 4,500,000 as at 22 may 2023. (g) the senior judicial registrar determined not to adjourn the proceedings. the matter was then determined on the substantive issues, particularly the two major assets being the former matrimonial home and the city e property. the senior judicial registrar was referred to “the balance sheet” and was told that the value of the two real properties “has been established in the wife’s affidavit” (19 june 2023). (h) as will become relevant later in these reasons the senior judicial registrar advised the legal representative for the wife that she would “let mr hoa [the husband] make submissions”. the senior judicial registrar later turned to the husband, asking him whether he “wanted to say anything in response to the submissions of mr. fung [the legal representative for the wife] had made.”   discussions then turned to the husband’s position that he should receive half of the proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home. in the asset pool contended by the wife, there was the further property in the husband’s name in city e, and the senior judicial registrar pointed out that it would be unlikely that the husband would receive half of the net proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home after sale. at that point, the husband put the ownership of the city e property squarely in contention, stating that the city e property belonged “not only” to him, but also to his family. reference was made by the legal representative for the wife to her affidavit filed 9 may 2023 stating the property was purchased in or around 2014 “under his own name”, and to annexure “e” to that affidavit (which is a translation of a title document from country d showing the city e property is in the husband’s name). the senior judicial registrar referred to what was asserted to be a valuation report on the city e property contained in the later affidavit filed by the wife on 19 june 2023 at annexure “e”. that document either valued or appraised the city e property as having a value of 4,500,000 as at 22 may 2023. (g) the senior judicial registrar determined not to adjourn the proceedings. the matter was then determined on the substantive issues, particularly the two major assets being the former matrimonial home and the city e property. the senior judicial registrar was referred to “the balance sheet” and was told that the value of the two real properties “has been established in the wife’s affidavit” (19 june 2023). (h) as will become relevant later in these reasons the senior judicial registrar advised the legal representative for the wife that she would “let mr hoa [the husband] make submissions”. the senior judicial registrar later turned to the husband, asking him whether he “wanted to say anything in response to the submissions of mr. fung [the legal representative for the wife] had made.”   the senior judicial registrar determined not to adjourn the proceedings. the matter was then determined on the substantive issues, particularly the two major assets being the former matrimonial home and the city e property. the senior judicial registrar was referred to “the balance sheet” and was told that the value of the two real properties “has been established in the wife’s affidavit” (19 june 2023). (h) as will become relevant later in these reasons the senior judicial registrar advised the legal representative for the wife that she would “let mr hoa [the husband] make submissions”. the senior judicial registrar later turned to the husband, asking him whether he “wanted to say anything in response to the submissions of mr. fung [the legal representative for the wife] had made.”   as will become relevant later in these reasons the senior judicial registrar advised the legal representative for the wife that she would “let mr hoa [the husband] make submissions”. the senior judicial registrar later turned to the husband, asking him whether he “wanted to say anything in response to the submissions of mr. fung [the legal representative for the wife] had made.”
the grant of an extension of time under this rule is not automatic. the object of the rule is to ensure that those rules which fix times for doing acts do not become instruments of injustice. the discretion to extend time is given for the sole purpose of enabling the court or justice to do justice between the parties: see hughes v national trustees executors & agency co of australasia ltd. [1978] vicrp 27, [1978] vr 257 at 262. this means that the discretion can only be exercised in favour of an applicant upon proof that strict compliance with the rules will work an injustice upon the applicant. in order to determine whether the rules will work an injustice, it is necessary to have regard to the history of the proceedings, the conduct of the parties, the nature of the litigation, and the consequences for the parties of the grant or refusal of the application for extension of time: see avery v no 2 public service appeal board [1973] 2 nzlr 86 at 92, jess v scott [1986] fca 365, (1986) 12 fcr 187 at 194-5, [1986] fca 365, 70 alr 185. when the application is for an extension of time in which to file an appeal, it is always necessary to consider the prospects of the applicant succeeding in the appeal: see burns v grigg [1967] vicrp 113, [1967] vr 871, at 872, hughes, at 263-4, mitchelson v mitchelson (1979) 24 alr 522 at 524. it is also necessary to bear in mind in such an application that, upon the expiry of the time for appealing, the respondent has “a vested right to retain the judgment” unless the application is granted: vilenius v heinegar (1962) 36 aljr 200 at 201. it follows that, before the applicant can succeed in this application, there must be material upon which i can be satisfied that to refuse the application would constitute an injustice.   has the husband adequately addressed his 7 week delay in filing the review? (b) does the husband raise a substantial issue in the substantive review application? (c) the husband’s overall conduct in the proceedings. (d) will there be hardship or injustice to the wife if an extension of time for review is granted and, if so, can such hardship or injustice be compensated by a costs order? (e) the consequences to the husband of failing to allow the extension of time for review, in particular considering whether the result to the husband by dent of the senior judicial registrar’s decision is manifestly unfair due to matters the husband has now put before the court and, having regard to those matters, whether the result is plainly wrong.   does the husband raise a substantial issue in the substantive review application? (c) the husband’s overall conduct in the proceedings. (d) will there be hardship or injustice to the wife if an extension of time for review is granted and, if so, can such hardship or injustice be compensated by a costs order? (e) the consequences to the husband of failing to allow the extension of time for review, in particular considering whether the result to the husband by dent of the senior judicial registrar’s decision is manifestly unfair due to matters the husband has now put before the court and, having regard to those matters, whether the result is plainly wrong.   the husband’s overall conduct in the proceedings. (d) will there be hardship or injustice to the wife if an extension of time for review is granted and, if so, can such hardship or injustice be compensated by a costs order? (e) the consequences to the husband of failing to allow the extension of time for review, in particular considering whether the result to the husband by dent of the senior judicial registrar’s decision is manifestly unfair due to matters the husband has now put before the court and, having regard to those matters, whether the result is plainly wrong.   will there be hardship or injustice to the wife if an extension of time for review is granted and, if so, can such hardship or injustice be compensated by a costs order? (e) the consequences to the husband of failing to allow the extension of time for review, in particular considering whether the result to the husband by dent of the senior judicial registrar’s decision is manifestly unfair due to matters the husband has now put before the court and, having regard to those matters, whether the result is plainly wrong.   the consequences to the husband of failing to allow the extension of time for review, in particular considering whether the result to the husband by dent of the senior judicial registrar’s decision is manifestly unfair due to matters the husband has now put before the court and, having regard to those matters, whether the result is plainly wrong.   he was in disbelief after the decision and at that point decided to seek legal advice regarding review, (b) he engaged his solicitors on 8 september 2023 (which put him one day outside of the 21 day review period), (c) after a “few days”, the husband’s solicitors had access to the court file, reviewed the material, and ordered a transcript, which was received on 18 september 2023. the husband also said that his solicitors had not received reasons from the senior judicial registrar for the decision, which they needed to assess the prospects of success on review. apparently, requests were made to chambers for the settled reasons between 6 and 30 october 2023. the settled written reasons appear to have been provided to the husband’s solicitors on 27 november 2023.   he engaged his solicitors on 8 september 2023 (which put him one day outside of the 21 day review period), (c) after a “few days”, the husband’s solicitors had access to the court file, reviewed the material, and ordered a transcript, which was received on 18 september 2023. the husband also said that his solicitors had not received reasons from the senior judicial registrar for the decision, which they needed to assess the prospects of success on review. apparently, requests were made to chambers for the settled reasons between 6 and 30 october 2023. the settled written reasons appear to have been provided to the husband’s solicitors on 27 november 2023.   after a “few days”, the husband’s solicitors had access to the court file, reviewed the material, and ordered a transcript, which was received on 18 september 2023. the husband also said that his solicitors had not received reasons from the senior judicial registrar for the decision, which they needed to assess the prospects of success on review. apparently, requests were made to chambers for the settled reasons between 6 and 30 october 2023. the settled written reasons appear to have been provided to the husband’s solicitors on 27 november 2023.   the acquisition of the city e property was funded by money sourced from the husband’s parents. (b) as a result of how the purchase of the city e property was funded from an inheritance received from the husband’s parents, and his siblings potentially have a claim against the husband for a share in the city e property. (c) the husband disputes the value of the city e property asserting its value at 3,000,000 rather than 4,500,000 making a difference of aud $300,000 in the assets to be retained by him (the parties agreed at the hearing to an approximate exchange rate of 5 per $1 aud). (d) the husband disputes the asserted valuation of the former matrimonial home stating that it is worth $2,500,000 and not $2,075,000 – a difference of $425,000. (e) the husband asserts that the wife has recently received an inheritance, which she has not disclosed.   as a result of how the purchase of the city e property was funded from an inheritance received from the husband’s parents, and his siblings potentially have a claim against the husband for a share in the city e property. (c) the husband disputes the value of the city e property asserting its value at 3,000,000 rather than 4,500,000 making a difference of aud $300,000 in the assets to be retained by him (the parties agreed at the hearing to an approximate exchange rate of 5 per $1 aud). (d) the husband disputes the asserted valuation of the former matrimonial home stating that it is worth $2,500,000 and not $2,075,000 – a difference of $425,000. (e) the husband asserts that the wife has recently received an inheritance, which she has not disclosed.   the husband disputes the value of the city e property asserting its value at 3,000,000 rather than 4,500,000 making a difference of aud $300,000 in the assets to be retained by him (the parties agreed at the hearing to an approximate exchange rate of 5 per $1 aud). (d) the husband disputes the asserted valuation of the former matrimonial home stating that it is worth $2,500,000 and not $2,075,000 – a difference of $425,000. (e) the husband asserts that the wife has recently received an inheritance, which she has not disclosed.   the husband disputes the asserted valuation of the former matrimonial home stating that it is worth $2,500,000 and not $2,075,000 – a difference of $425,000. (e) the husband asserts that the wife has recently received an inheritance, which she has not disclosed.   the husband asserts that the wife has recently received an inheritance, which she has not disclosed.
orders on default ... (2) if a respondent is in default, the court may: (a) order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or   order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or   give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.
his honour also referred to the obligation to advise a self-represented litigant of “the manner in which the trial is to proceed, the order of calling witnesses and the right which he or she has to cross examine the witnesses” (see re f: litigants in person guidelines [2001] famca 348, (2001) flc 93-072 at [253]).   the parties would reconcile and the husband would move back into the main house, (b) the husband would resume paying the mortgage on the former matrimonial home (which he had not been paying for some months), (c) the parties would attend the anz bank to ensure that withdrawals from the mortgage offset account would require each of their signatures, (d) the husband would (reluctantly) pay the wife’s legal expenses of around $20,000, and (e) the proceedings would be discontinued or dismissed.   the husband would resume paying the mortgage on the former matrimonial home (which he had not been paying for some months), (c) the parties would attend the anz bank to ensure that withdrawals from the mortgage offset account would require each of their signatures, (d) the husband would (reluctantly) pay the wife’s legal expenses of around $20,000, and (e) the proceedings would be discontinued or dismissed.   the parties would attend the anz bank to ensure that withdrawals from the mortgage offset account would require each of their signatures, (d) the husband would (reluctantly) pay the wife’s legal expenses of around $20,000, and (e) the proceedings would be discontinued or dismissed.   the husband would (reluctantly) pay the wife’s legal expenses of around $20,000, and (e) the proceedings would be discontinued or dismissed.   the proceedings would be discontinued or dismissed.  d] 2023 20:31 a: mum said the solicitor advised that it cannot be withdrawn now, the final hearing will be next week. but we don't have to comply with it. mum suggested we do not comply with the order. [mid] 2023 20:36 b: once they hold the hearing, we'll have to pay the fees [mid] 2023 20:43 a: mum asked me to tell you, she will leave once the money is ready, she doesn't care b: call me back asap b: call duration 12:21
the former matrimonial home (valuation $2,075,000 less mortgage of $520,560)
$1,554,440
city e property
$970,000
joint offset account
$123,434
wife’s motor vehicle
$38,000
wife’s cash, jewellery and chattels (see wife’s balance sheet filed 10 july, 2023)
$12,885
husband’s motor vehicle
$19,000
total:
$2,717,759
noting that there were unknown items in the construction of the asset pool, but using the known asset pool above, the net result of the orders made by senior judicial registrar (without taking selling costs of the former matrimonial home into account) was a 61% apportionment to the wife and a 39% apportionment to the husband of matrimonial property.
associate: dated: 9 january 2024
dated: 9 january 2024