last updated: 31 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bhandari & garrett [2024] fedcfamc2f 11
orders
the court orders that:  an option be and is hereby granted to the respondent husband to purchase the applicant wife’s right title and interest in the suburb c property. (b) the respondent husband must advise the applicant wife in writing within 30 days of the date of these orders whether he wishes to exercise the option granted under order 2(a) hereof. (c) if the respondent husband notifies the applicant wife in accordance with order 2(b) hereof that he wishes to exercise the option granted under order 2(a) hereof, then: (i) within 90 days of the date of these orders (“the due date”), the respondent husband shall pay to the applicant wife amounting to 50% of the equity in the suburb c property (“the suburb c purchase payment”), which shall be calculated as follows: ($1,600,000 less the quantum of the national australia bank mortgage secured against the suburb c property on the date of the suburb c purchase payment) divided by 2. (ii) contemporaneously with the suburb c purchase payment: the parties must do all things and sign all documents necessary to discharge the mortgage on the suburb c property (national australia bank account number ...63) and release the applicant wife from her personal covenants in respect of that mortgage and from any guarantee by the applicant wife in relation to that mortgage, the respondent husband shall be solely responsible for the moneys required to discharge the current mortgage on the suburb c property, and the respondent husband shall indemnify the applicant wife against all future payments and liabilities pursuant to the current mortgage as well as all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings with respect to the suburb c property of whatsoever nature and kind. (iii) if the whole of the suburb c purchase payment has not been made by the due date, then the parties shall do all acts and things required to sell the suburb c property and, to that end, order 3 hereof shall apply. (d) if the respondent husband either notifies the applicant wife that he does not wish to exercise the option granted under order 2(a) hereof, or if the respondent husband fails to make the notification required by order 2(b) hereof, then the suburb c property shall be listed for sale in accordance with order 3 hereof.   the respondent husband must advise the applicant wife in writing within 30 days of the date of these orders whether he wishes to exercise the option granted under order 2(a) hereof. (c) if the respondent husband notifies the applicant wife in accordance with order 2(b) hereof that he wishes to exercise the option granted under order 2(a) hereof, then: (i) within 90 days of the date of these orders (“the due date”), the respondent husband shall pay to the applicant wife amounting to 50% of the equity in the suburb c property (“the suburb c purchase payment”), which shall be calculated as follows: ($1,600,000 less the quantum of the national australia bank mortgage secured against the suburb c property on the date of the suburb c purchase payment) divided by 2. (ii) contemporaneously with the suburb c purchase payment: the parties must do all things and sign all documents necessary to discharge the mortgage on the suburb c property (national australia bank account number ...63) and release the applicant wife from her personal covenants in respect of that mortgage and from any guarantee by the applicant wife in relation to that mortgage, the respondent husband shall be solely responsible for the moneys required to discharge the current mortgage on the suburb c property, and the respondent husband shall indemnify the applicant wife against all future payments and liabilities pursuant to the current mortgage as well as all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings with respect to the suburb c property of whatsoever nature and kind. (iii) if the whole of the suburb c purchase payment has not been made by the due date, then the parties shall do all acts and things required to sell the suburb c property and, to that end, order 3 hereof shall apply. (d) if the respondent husband either notifies the applicant wife that he does not wish to exercise the option granted under order 2(a) hereof, or if the respondent husband fails to make the notification required by order 2(b) hereof, then the suburb c property shall be listed for sale in accordance with order 3 hereof.   if the respondent husband notifies the applicant wife in accordance with order 2(b) hereof that he wishes to exercise the option granted under order 2(a) hereof, then: (i) within 90 days of the date of these orders (“the due date”), the respondent husband shall pay to the applicant wife amounting to 50% of the equity in the suburb c property (“the suburb c purchase payment”), which shall be calculated as follows: ($1,600,000 less the quantum of the national australia bank mortgage secured against the suburb c property on the date of the suburb c purchase payment) divided by 2. (ii) contemporaneously with the suburb c purchase payment: the parties must do all things and sign all documents necessary to discharge the mortgage on the suburb c property (national australia bank account number ...63) and release the applicant wife from her personal covenants in respect of that mortgage and from any guarantee by the applicant wife in relation to that mortgage, the respondent husband shall be solely responsible for the moneys required to discharge the current mortgage on the suburb c property, and the respondent husband shall indemnify the applicant wife against all future payments and liabilities pursuant to the current mortgage as well as all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings with respect to the suburb c property of whatsoever nature and kind. (iii) if the whole of the suburb c purchase payment has not been made by the due date, then the parties shall do all acts and things required to sell the suburb c property and, to that end, order 3 hereof shall apply. (d) if the respondent husband either notifies the applicant wife that he does not wish to exercise the option granted under order 2(a) hereof, or if the respondent husband fails to make the notification required by order 2(b) hereof, then the suburb c property shall be listed for sale in accordance with order 3 hereof.   within 90 days of the date of these orders (“the due date”), the respondent husband shall pay to the applicant wife amounting to 50% of the equity in the suburb c property (“the suburb c purchase payment”), which shall be calculated as follows: ($1,600,000 less the quantum of the national australia bank mortgage secured against the suburb c property on the date of the suburb c purchase payment) divided by 2. (ii) contemporaneously with the suburb c purchase payment: the parties must do all things and sign all documents necessary to discharge the mortgage on the suburb c property (national australia bank account number ...63) and release the applicant wife from her personal covenants in respect of that mortgage and from any guarantee by the applicant wife in relation to that mortgage, the respondent husband shall be solely responsible for the moneys required to discharge the current mortgage on the suburb c property, and the respondent husband shall indemnify the applicant wife against all future payments and liabilities pursuant to the current mortgage as well as all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings with respect to the suburb c property of whatsoever nature and kind. (iii) if the whole of the suburb c purchase payment has not been made by the due date, then the parties shall do all acts and things required to sell the suburb c property and, to that end, order 3 hereof shall apply.  ) contemporaneously with the suburb c purchase payment: the parties must do all things and sign all documents necessary to discharge the mortgage on the suburb c property (national australia bank account number ...63) and release the applicant wife from her personal covenants in respect of that mortgage and from any guarantee by the applicant wife in relation to that mortgage, the respondent husband shall be solely responsible for the moneys required to discharge the current mortgage on the suburb c property, and the respondent husband shall indemnify the applicant wife against all future payments and liabilities pursuant to the current mortgage as well as all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings with respect to the suburb c property of whatsoever nature and kind. (iii) if the whole of the suburb c purchase payment has not been made by the due date, then the parties shall do all acts and things required to sell the suburb c property and, to that end, order 3 hereof shall apply.  i) if the whole of the suburb c purchase payment has not been made by the due date, then the parties shall do all acts and things required to sell the suburb c property and, to that end, order 3 hereof shall apply.   if the respondent husband either notifies the applicant wife that he does not wish to exercise the option granted under order 2(a) hereof, or if the respondent husband fails to make the notification required by order 2(b) hereof, then the suburb c property shall be listed for sale in accordance with order 3 hereof.   the parties will appoint an agent as agreed in writing (and in default of agreement as to agent, then within twenty-one (21) days the applicant wife shall nominate three agents and the respondent husband shall select one of those agents) (“the agent”) to list for sale and sell the suburb c property by auction, the costs of such appointment and any costs of the sale to be paid by the parties in equal shares s and when such costs become due and payable, (b) the reserve price for the purpose of such auction will be as agreed by the parties in writing or, in the absence of agreement reached by fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the auction, as nominated as the fair market value by the agent, (c) if bidding at the auction does not reach the reserve price, the parties or such of them as attends the auction (whether in person, by telephone, or by their nominee) is entitled to negotiate with the highest bidders or any other interested person at the auction and effect a sale of the suburb c property at such price as the parties agree upon in writing and in default of agreement by the date of the auction at a price which is not lower than 5 percent below the reserve price, (d) if the suburb c property remains unsold following the auction, then the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to immediately list the home for sale by public auction again on a date to be nominated by the agent, and at such auction the reserve price will be 5 per cent lower than the previous auction (or such other amount as agreed between the parties in writing), (e) the parties will instruct d law firm to have the conduct of the sale, including preparing a sale contract, vendor’s statements and all other documents to effect the sale and settlement of the suburb c property, and (f) upon settlement of the sale of the suburb c property, the applicant wife and respondent husband will forthwith cause the proceeds of sale to be applied as follows: (i) to meet the costs and expenses of the sale, including legal fees of the conveyance and real estate agent fees and commissions, (ii) to discharge the national australia bank mortgage, account number ...63, and (iii) to distribute the balance as follows: 50 per cent to the applicant wife, and 50 per cent to the respondent husband.   the reserve price for the purpose of such auction will be as agreed by the parties in writing or, in the absence of agreement reached by fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the auction, as nominated as the fair market value by the agent, (c) if bidding at the auction does not reach the reserve price, the parties or such of them as attends the auction (whether in person, by telephone, or by their nominee) is entitled to negotiate with the highest bidders or any other interested person at the auction and effect a sale of the suburb c property at such price as the parties agree upon in writing and in default of agreement by the date of the auction at a price which is not lower than 5 percent below the reserve price, (d) if the suburb c property remains unsold following the auction, then the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to immediately list the home for sale by public auction again on a date to be nominated by the agent, and at such auction the reserve price will be 5 per cent lower than the previous auction (or such other amount as agreed between the parties in writing), (e) the parties will instruct d law firm to have the conduct of the sale, including preparing a sale contract, vendor’s statements and all other documents to effect the sale and settlement of the suburb c property, and (f) upon settlement of the sale of the suburb c property, the applicant wife and respondent husband will forthwith cause the proceeds of sale to be applied as follows: (i) to meet the costs and expenses of the sale, including legal fees of the conveyance and real estate agent fees and commissions, (ii) to discharge the national australia bank mortgage, account number ...63, and (iii) to distribute the balance as follows: 50 per cent to the applicant wife, and 50 per cent to the respondent husband.   if bidding at the auction does not reach the reserve price, the parties or such of them as attends the auction (whether in person, by telephone, or by their nominee) is entitled to negotiate with the highest bidders or any other interested person at the auction and effect a sale of the suburb c property at such price as the parties agree upon in writing and in default of agreement by the date of the auction at a price which is not lower than 5 percent below the reserve price, (d) if the suburb c property remains unsold following the auction, then the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to immediately list the home for sale by public auction again on a date to be nominated by the agent, and at such auction the reserve price will be 5 per cent lower than the previous auction (or such other amount as agreed between the parties in writing), (e) the parties will instruct d law firm to have the conduct of the sale, including preparing a sale contract, vendor’s statements and all other documents to effect the sale and settlement of the suburb c property, and (f) upon settlement of the sale of the suburb c property, the applicant wife and respondent husband will forthwith cause the proceeds of sale to be applied as follows: (i) to meet the costs and expenses of the sale, including legal fees of the conveyance and real estate agent fees and commissions, (ii) to discharge the national australia bank mortgage, account number ...63, and (iii) to distribute the balance as follows: 50 per cent to the applicant wife, and 50 per cent to the respondent husband.   if the suburb c property remains unsold following the auction, then the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to immediately list the home for sale by public auction again on a date to be nominated by the agent, and at such auction the reserve price will be 5 per cent lower than the previous auction (or such other amount as agreed between the parties in writing), (e) the parties will instruct d law firm to have the conduct of the sale, including preparing a sale contract, vendor’s statements and all other documents to effect the sale and settlement of the suburb c property, and (f) upon settlement of the sale of the suburb c property, the applicant wife and respondent husband will forthwith cause the proceeds of sale to be applied as follows: (i) to meet the costs and expenses of the sale, including legal fees of the conveyance and real estate agent fees and commissions, (ii) to discharge the national australia bank mortgage, account number ...63, and (iii) to distribute the balance as follows: 50 per cent to the applicant wife, and 50 per cent to the respondent husband.   the parties will instruct d law firm to have the conduct of the sale, including preparing a sale contract, vendor’s statements and all other documents to effect the sale and settlement of the suburb c property, and (f) upon settlement of the sale of the suburb c property, the applicant wife and respondent husband will forthwith cause the proceeds of sale to be applied as follows: (i) to meet the costs and expenses of the sale, including legal fees of the conveyance and real estate agent fees and commissions, (ii) to discharge the national australia bank mortgage, account number ...63, and (iii) to distribute the balance as follows: 50 per cent to the applicant wife, and 50 per cent to the respondent husband.   upon settlement of the sale of the suburb c property, the applicant wife and respondent husband will forthwith cause the proceeds of sale to be applied as follows: (i) to meet the costs and expenses of the sale, including legal fees of the conveyance and real estate agent fees and commissions, (ii) to discharge the national australia bank mortgage, account number ...63, and (iii) to distribute the balance as follows: 50 per cent to the applicant wife, and 50 per cent to the respondent husband.   to meet the costs and expenses of the sale, including legal fees of the conveyance and real estate agent fees and commissions, (ii) to discharge the national australia bank mortgage, account number ...63, and (iii) to distribute the balance as follows: 50 per cent to the applicant wife, and 50 per cent to the respondent husband.  ) to discharge the national australia bank mortgage, account number ...63, and (iii) to distribute the balance as follows: 50 per cent to the applicant wife, and 50 per cent to the respondent husband.  i) to distribute the balance as follows: 50 per cent to the applicant wife, and 50 per cent to the respondent husband.   the respondent husband shall have exclusive use and occupation of the suburb c property, and (b) the respondent husband shall have sole responsibility for paying all mortgages, rates, taxes and similar costs concerning the suburb c property (as and when such fall due).   the respondent husband shall have sole responsibility for paying all mortgages, rates, taxes and similar costs concerning the suburb c property (as and when such fall due).   $21,254, (b) 50% of all interest received on the joint national australia bank account number ...58 since 4 may 2023 (being the date on which the parties filed the statement of agreed facts in this matter), and (c) 50% of all interest received on the respondent husband’s personal bank account since 4 may 2023.   50% of all interest received on the joint national australia bank account number ...58 since 4 may 2023 (being the date on which the parties filed the statement of agreed facts in this matter), and (c) 50% of all interest received on the respondent husband’s personal bank account since 4 may 2023.   50% of all interest received on the respondent husband’s personal bank account since 4 may 2023.   the respondent husband shall become solely entitled to all remaining moneys in the parties’ joint national australia bank account number ...58, (b) the respondent husband shall no longer be considered to hold any moneys on trust for the benefit of the applicant wife, and all moneys in his personal account shall be held solely for the respondent husband’s own benefit, (c) the applicant wife shall no longer be considered to hold the town e property on trust for the benefit of herself and the respondent husband, and the town e property shall be held solely for the applicant wife’s own benefit, and (d) the applicant wife shall no longer be considered to hold the suburb g property on trust for the benefit of herself and the respondent husband, and the suburb g property shall be held solely for the applicant wife’s own benefit.   the respondent husband shall no longer be considered to hold any moneys on trust for the benefit of the applicant wife, and all moneys in his personal account shall be held solely for the respondent husband’s own benefit, (c) the applicant wife shall no longer be considered to hold the town e property on trust for the benefit of herself and the respondent husband, and the town e property shall be held solely for the applicant wife’s own benefit, and (d) the applicant wife shall no longer be considered to hold the suburb g property on trust for the benefit of herself and the respondent husband, and the suburb g property shall be held solely for the applicant wife’s own benefit.   the applicant wife shall no longer be considered to hold the town e property on trust for the benefit of herself and the respondent husband, and the town e property shall be held solely for the applicant wife’s own benefit, and (d) the applicant wife shall no longer be considered to hold the suburb g property on trust for the benefit of herself and the respondent husband, and the suburb g property shall be held solely for the applicant wife’s own benefit.   the applicant wife shall no longer be considered to hold the suburb g property on trust for the benefit of herself and the respondent husband, and the suburb g property shall be held solely for the applicant wife’s own benefit.
reasons for judgment
judge stewart
introduction
application under section 78 of the act
the parties’ proposals:  a declaration (under section 78(1) of the act) that the parties hold the property known as b street, suburb c, victoria (“the suburb c property”) as joint tenants, (b) consequential orders (under section 78(2) of the act) that the husband have an option to purchase the wife’s interest in the suburb c property for 50% of the agreed value (that is, for $800,000, being 50% of $1.6 million), failing exercise of which option the suburb c property must be sold and the proceeds divided equally between the parties, (c) a declaration that the parties are joint owners of a particular national australia bank account, (d) consequential orders that $35,556.18 be paid out of that account to the wife, and the balance to the husband, (e) a declaration that the husband holds a further $50,000 on trust for the wife’s benefit, (f) consequential orders that the husband pay the wife that further $50,000, and (g) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by the current legal owners.   consequential orders (under section 78(2) of the act) that the husband have an option to purchase the wife’s interest in the suburb c property for 50% of the agreed value (that is, for $800,000, being 50% of $1.6 million), failing exercise of which option the suburb c property must be sold and the proceeds divided equally between the parties, (c) a declaration that the parties are joint owners of a particular national australia bank account, (d) consequential orders that $35,556.18 be paid out of that account to the wife, and the balance to the husband, (e) a declaration that the husband holds a further $50,000 on trust for the wife’s benefit, (f) consequential orders that the husband pay the wife that further $50,000, and (g) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by the current legal owners.   a declaration that the parties are joint owners of a particular national australia bank account, (d) consequential orders that $35,556.18 be paid out of that account to the wife, and the balance to the husband, (e) a declaration that the husband holds a further $50,000 on trust for the wife’s benefit, (f) consequential orders that the husband pay the wife that further $50,000, and (g) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by the current legal owners.   consequential orders that $35,556.18 be paid out of that account to the wife, and the balance to the husband, (e) a declaration that the husband holds a further $50,000 on trust for the wife’s benefit, (f) consequential orders that the husband pay the wife that further $50,000, and (g) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by the current legal owners.   a declaration that the husband holds a further $50,000 on trust for the wife’s benefit, (f) consequential orders that the husband pay the wife that further $50,000, and (g) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by the current legal owners.   consequential orders that the husband pay the wife that further $50,000, and (g) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by the current legal owners.   a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by the current legal owners.   a declaration that the parties hold the suburb c property on trust for the benefit of husband and the wife in a 62%-38% ratio, respectively, (b) consequential orders that the husband have an option to purchase the wife’s interest in the suburb c property for $608,000 (being 32% of the agreed value of $1.6 million), failing exercise of which option the suburb c property must be sold and the proceeds divided 62%-38% between the parties, (c) a declaration that the parties hold the national australia bank account jointly on trust for the benefit of the husband and the wife in a 62%-38% ratio, respectively, (d) consequential orders for the national australia bank account to be closed following discharge of the mortgage on the suburb c property, with the proceeds divided 62%-38% between the parties, (e) a declaration that the husband holds a further $38,000 on trust for the wife’s benefit, (f) declarations that the wife holds two properties in country f (the first at town e, and the second at suburb g – collectively “the country f properties”) on trust for the benefit of the husband and the wife in a 62%-38% ratio, respectively, (g) consequential orders that the wife have an option to purchase the husband’s interests in one or both of the country f properties at prices the husband asserts represent 62% of the fair value of each property, failing exercise of which option(s) one or both of the country f properties must be sold, with the proceeds divided between the parties 62%-38% in the husband’s favour, (h) further consequential orders that, if the country f properties are sold, then the wife’s share be increased by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, whereas if the wife buys the husband’s interests in the country f properties, then the purchase price be reduced by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, and (i) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by their current legal owners.   consequential orders that the husband have an option to purchase the wife’s interest in the suburb c property for $608,000 (being 32% of the agreed value of $1.6 million), failing exercise of which option the suburb c property must be sold and the proceeds divided 62%-38% between the parties, (c) a declaration that the parties hold the national australia bank account jointly on trust for the benefit of the husband and the wife in a 62%-38% ratio, respectively, (d) consequential orders for the national australia bank account to be closed following discharge of the mortgage on the suburb c property, with the proceeds divided 62%-38% between the parties, (e) a declaration that the husband holds a further $38,000 on trust for the wife’s benefit, (f) declarations that the wife holds two properties in country f (the first at town e, and the second at suburb g – collectively “the country f properties”) on trust for the benefit of the husband and the wife in a 62%-38% ratio, respectively, (g) consequential orders that the wife have an option to purchase the husband’s interests in one or both of the country f properties at prices the husband asserts represent 62% of the fair value of each property, failing exercise of which option(s) one or both of the country f properties must be sold, with the proceeds divided between the parties 62%-38% in the husband’s favour, (h) further consequential orders that, if the country f properties are sold, then the wife’s share be increased by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, whereas if the wife buys the husband’s interests in the country f properties, then the purchase price be reduced by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, and (i) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by their current legal owners.   a declaration that the parties hold the national australia bank account jointly on trust for the benefit of the husband and the wife in a 62%-38% ratio, respectively, (d) consequential orders for the national australia bank account to be closed following discharge of the mortgage on the suburb c property, with the proceeds divided 62%-38% between the parties, (e) a declaration that the husband holds a further $38,000 on trust for the wife’s benefit, (f) declarations that the wife holds two properties in country f (the first at town e, and the second at suburb g – collectively “the country f properties”) on trust for the benefit of the husband and the wife in a 62%-38% ratio, respectively, (g) consequential orders that the wife have an option to purchase the husband’s interests in one or both of the country f properties at prices the husband asserts represent 62% of the fair value of each property, failing exercise of which option(s) one or both of the country f properties must be sold, with the proceeds divided between the parties 62%-38% in the husband’s favour, (h) further consequential orders that, if the country f properties are sold, then the wife’s share be increased by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, whereas if the wife buys the husband’s interests in the country f properties, then the purchase price be reduced by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, and (i) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by their current legal owners.   consequential orders for the national australia bank account to be closed following discharge of the mortgage on the suburb c property, with the proceeds divided 62%-38% between the parties, (e) a declaration that the husband holds a further $38,000 on trust for the wife’s benefit, (f) declarations that the wife holds two properties in country f (the first at town e, and the second at suburb g – collectively “the country f properties”) on trust for the benefit of the husband and the wife in a 62%-38% ratio, respectively, (g) consequential orders that the wife have an option to purchase the husband’s interests in one or both of the country f properties at prices the husband asserts represent 62% of the fair value of each property, failing exercise of which option(s) one or both of the country f properties must be sold, with the proceeds divided between the parties 62%-38% in the husband’s favour, (h) further consequential orders that, if the country f properties are sold, then the wife’s share be increased by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, whereas if the wife buys the husband’s interests in the country f properties, then the purchase price be reduced by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, and (i) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by their current legal owners.   a declaration that the husband holds a further $38,000 on trust for the wife’s benefit, (f) declarations that the wife holds two properties in country f (the first at town e, and the second at suburb g – collectively “the country f properties”) on trust for the benefit of the husband and the wife in a 62%-38% ratio, respectively, (g) consequential orders that the wife have an option to purchase the husband’s interests in one or both of the country f properties at prices the husband asserts represent 62% of the fair value of each property, failing exercise of which option(s) one or both of the country f properties must be sold, with the proceeds divided between the parties 62%-38% in the husband’s favour, (h) further consequential orders that, if the country f properties are sold, then the wife’s share be increased by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, whereas if the wife buys the husband’s interests in the country f properties, then the purchase price be reduced by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, and (i) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by their current legal owners.   declarations that the wife holds two properties in country f (the first at town e, and the second at suburb g – collectively “the country f properties”) on trust for the benefit of the husband and the wife in a 62%-38% ratio, respectively, (g) consequential orders that the wife have an option to purchase the husband’s interests in one or both of the country f properties at prices the husband asserts represent 62% of the fair value of each property, failing exercise of which option(s) one or both of the country f properties must be sold, with the proceeds divided between the parties 62%-38% in the husband’s favour, (h) further consequential orders that, if the country f properties are sold, then the wife’s share be increased by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, whereas if the wife buys the husband’s interests in the country f properties, then the purchase price be reduced by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, and (i) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by their current legal owners.   consequential orders that the wife have an option to purchase the husband’s interests in one or both of the country f properties at prices the husband asserts represent 62% of the fair value of each property, failing exercise of which option(s) one or both of the country f properties must be sold, with the proceeds divided between the parties 62%-38% in the husband’s favour, (h) further consequential orders that, if the country f properties are sold, then the wife’s share be increased by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, whereas if the wife buys the husband’s interests in the country f properties, then the purchase price be reduced by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, and (i) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by their current legal owners.   further consequential orders that, if the country f properties are sold, then the wife’s share be increased by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, whereas if the wife buys the husband’s interests in the country f properties, then the purchase price be reduced by the $38,000 that the husband holds on trust for the wife, and (i) a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by their current legal owners.   a declaration that all other property not expressly dealt with in these orders (including choses in action and superannuation) are otherwise beneficially owned by their current legal owners.
agreed and disputed facts
initial contributions 6. the wife had no significant assets when the parties began living together, while the husband had approximately $26,784, his assets came from 1.4 million [country f currency] that he brought with him when he migrated to australia. neither party had any significant liabilities. the [h street] property 7. in 2004, one or both parties purchased the property known as [h street, suburb j], vic ([h street] property) property for $240,000. the deposit was paid using savings and a first home owners grant, and the balance was paid via mortgage finance. in 2011, the property was sold for [around $370,000], the net sale proceeds (amount unknown) were used to reduce the debt secured by the [k street] (see the next paragraph). gifts received from husband’s mother 8. during the parties’ relationship, the husband received a total of $10,785 in cash gifts from his mother. these gifts were received in 2004, 2006, and 2012, respectively, and were put towards the parties’ savings ($9,283) and the property known as [suburb g, country f] ([suburb g] property) ($1,053 – see paragraph 11) the [k street] property 9. in 2007, the parties purchased a parcel of land at [k street suburb j] ([k street] property) for $215,000. the deposit (amount unknown) was paid using their joint savings, and the balance of the purchase price was paid via mortgage. shortly after purchasing the land, they built a house on it. the building costs amounted to $240,000, and the parties relied on savings and debt to finance the project. 10. the [k street] property was sold in [early] 2013 for $725,000, and the net sale proceeds (amount unknown) were deposited into a joint account. thereafter, the parties moved to a rented property situated at [l street, suburb m] and occupied this property until their separation in july 2016. the [country f] properties 11. in 2011, the parties’ purchased the property known as [town e, country f] ([town e] property) for [around $30,000]. the purchase price was paid from the parties’ savings. this property has been occupied by the wife’s parents since it was purchased. the current value of the property is $63,886. 12. in 2012, the wife’s parents gifted her [around $6,000], being the sale proceeds of their former family home, and the husband’s mother gifted him [around $1,000]. these funds were put towards the purchase of the [suburb g] property. the total purchase price was [around $20,000]. the balance of the purchase price was paid from the parties’ savings. the current value of the property is $64,718. 13. both the [town e] property and the [suburb g] property were registered in the wife’s name because the husband was unable to include his name in the title due to a restriction in [country f]’s property investment laws. this restriction prohibited foreign citizens from becoming registered owners of real estate in [country f] unless they paid a 100% property tax. the wife is a citizen of [country f], whereas the husband is not. the [suburb c] property 14. in [late] 2013, the parties purchased the property known as [b street, suburb c] ([suburb c] property) for $840,285, including the stamp duty and closing costs. the parties contributed $204,285 towards the acquisition costs, and the balance of the purchase price was paid via mortgage. the property’s current value is $1,600,000. 15. they rented the property out to third parties from the time it was purchased until the husband moved into the property in july 2016. 16. after the husband moved to the [suburb c] property, he paid for improvements to the house. these included [improvements], which cost approximately $3,000, and installing [appliances] at a cost of $1,200. the joint accounts 17. the parties’ joint account at national australia bank, which was opened in [late] 2013 and to which their respective earnings were credited until the date of separation, was a requirement imposed by the bank for approval of the mortgage secured against the [suburb c] property. the purpose of the account was to facilitate monthly loan repayments by direct debit. other contributions 18. based on her tax returns and assessments, the wife’s aggregate earnings during the parties relationship were $500,826. 19. based on his tax returns, the husband’s aggregate earnings during the parties’ relationship were $797,407. 20. the parties were both employed during their relationship and performed domestic and parenting tasks in equal proportions. they pooled their incomes together to pay family expenses, and they were both employed full-time.   whether there was an intention or understanding that the husband should own a greater proportion of shared property to reflect his greater financial contribution, (b) whether (in the event i find i have jurisdiction to decide the matter) there was an intention that the country f properties should be joint property, even though they had to be legally owned exclusively by the wife, and (c) whether the primary purpose in the parties owning the suburb c property was solely advancing the family’s welfare (including through access to school districts) or was also a financial investment.   whether (in the event i find i have jurisdiction to decide the matter) there was an intention that the country f properties should be joint property, even though they had to be legally owned exclusively by the wife, and (c) whether the primary purpose in the parties owning the suburb c property was solely advancing the family’s welfare (including through access to school districts) or was also a financial investment.   whether the primary purpose in the parties owning the suburb c property was solely advancing the family’s welfare (including through access to school districts) or was also a financial investment.   each party paid half the mortgage payments on the suburb c property during the relationship, (b) once the husband began living in the suburb c property after separation, he was responsible for the full mortgage payments, in lieu of rent, (c) both of the parties’ full salaries went into their joint account, and they “both pooled [their] resources for... the common good” with an intention that both parties would benefit from the pooled moneys, (d) money for various investments in shares during the relationship was sourced from the parties’ joint savings (and i note that the husband’s unchallenged evidence in his affidavit is that the shares were sold and the proceeds returned to the joint bank account), (e) there was never any agreement or specific intention about particular proportions in which each party would benefit from their pooled resources, instead (in the husband’s words) “we both – we said, ‘okay. it’s our money’,” and there was never any discussion about which proportions of shared property each party owned, and (f) the husband did not have the wife’s permission to withdraw $180,000 from the joint account.   once the husband began living in the suburb c property after separation, he was responsible for the full mortgage payments, in lieu of rent, (c) both of the parties’ full salaries went into their joint account, and they “both pooled [their] resources for... the common good” with an intention that both parties would benefit from the pooled moneys, (d) money for various investments in shares during the relationship was sourced from the parties’ joint savings (and i note that the husband’s unchallenged evidence in his affidavit is that the shares were sold and the proceeds returned to the joint bank account), (e) there was never any agreement or specific intention about particular proportions in which each party would benefit from their pooled resources, instead (in the husband’s words) “we both – we said, ‘okay. it’s our money’,” and there was never any discussion about which proportions of shared property each party owned, and (f) the husband did not have the wife’s permission to withdraw $180,000 from the joint account.   both of the parties’ full salaries went into their joint account, and they “both pooled [their] resources for... the common good” with an intention that both parties would benefit from the pooled moneys, (d) money for various investments in shares during the relationship was sourced from the parties’ joint savings (and i note that the husband’s unchallenged evidence in his affidavit is that the shares were sold and the proceeds returned to the joint bank account), (e) there was never any agreement or specific intention about particular proportions in which each party would benefit from their pooled resources, instead (in the husband’s words) “we both – we said, ‘okay. it’s our money’,” and there was never any discussion about which proportions of shared property each party owned, and (f) the husband did not have the wife’s permission to withdraw $180,000 from the joint account.   money for various investments in shares during the relationship was sourced from the parties’ joint savings (and i note that the husband’s unchallenged evidence in his affidavit is that the shares were sold and the proceeds returned to the joint bank account), (e) there was never any agreement or specific intention about particular proportions in which each party would benefit from their pooled resources, instead (in the husband’s words) “we both – we said, ‘okay. it’s our money’,” and there was never any discussion about which proportions of shared property each party owned, and (f) the husband did not have the wife’s permission to withdraw $180,000 from the joint account.   there was never any agreement or specific intention about particular proportions in which each party would benefit from their pooled resources, instead (in the husband’s words) “we both – we said, ‘okay. it’s our money’,” and there was never any discussion about which proportions of shared property each party owned, and (f) the husband did not have the wife’s permission to withdraw $180,000 from the joint account.   the husband did not have the wife’s permission to withdraw $180,000 from the joint account.
factual findings
was there a shared intention that joint assets should be owned in unequal proportion?
was the suburb c property an investment property?
16. like the [country f] properties, [suburb c] property was also bought with the intention of earning capital gains and some rental income. my preference was to register the title of this property my name (as we did with [k street] property) so that we could get the maximum negative gearing tax deductions. however, the bank insisted that we register it as joint tenants instead.
...
21. the loan associated with the [suburb c] property was originally an interest only investment property loan. it was converted to a principal and interest loan in 2018. between july 2016 and march 2023, the bank debited $116,397 of interest to our joint account along with $103,295 of principal repayments.
32. the question of intention is entirely one of fact, and concerns the intention manifested by the person or persons who contributed funds towards the purchase of the property. in martin v martin [(1959) [1959] hca 62, 110 clr 297 at 304], it was observed that for the most part it can be assumed that proof of intention will be made out by the circumstances. reference was made [martin v martin [1959] hca 62, (1959) 110 clr 297 at 304) to what had been said by cussen j in davies v the national trustees executors and agency co of australasia ltd [[1912] vlr 397 at 403]:
“it is impossible to try to arrange into certain sets of categories certain facts, and say beforehand they will or will not become decisive or immaterial. the attention must be kept steadily fixed on the one fact in issue – what was at the time the intention of the purchaser or transferor? anything which is relevant to that issue is admissible.”
33. cussen j went on to say that evidence of that person’s thinking at the time might be accepted, although it would be received “with caution”. that circumstance does not arise for consideration in the present case. there is no direct evidence as to the intention of either ms or mr bosanac. the question is what inference is to be drawn from the available facts and in particular the history of the parties’ dealings with property.
does the court have jurisdiction to make findings regarding the country f properties?  ali & ali [2019] famca 1012 (especially at paragraphs [80]-[86]) (“ali”), and (b) the british south africa company v the companhia de moçambique [1893] uklawrpac 53, [1893] ac 602 (“moçambique”).   the british south africa company v the companhia de moçambique [1893] uklawrpac 53, [1893] ac 602 (“moçambique”).   subject to such restrictions and conditions (if any) as are contained in the regulations, the jurisdiction of the family court may be exercised in relation to persons or things outside australia and the territories.   subject to such restrictions and conditions (if any) in:   section 111aa of the family law act 1975, or (b) regulations made under that act, or (c) the rules of court made under this chapter,
the jurisdiction of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1) may be exercised in relation to person or things outside australia.
likewise, subsection 131(2) of the fcfcoa act provides that:   section 111aa of the family law act 1975 (b) regulations made under that act, or (c) the related federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) rules, as defined by that act,
the jurisdiction of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) may be exercised in relation to person or things outside australia.
the british south africa company v the companhia de moçambique [1893] uklawrpac 53, [1893] ac 602 n considering what jurisdiction our courts possess, and have claimed to exercise in relation to matters arising out of the country, the principles which have found general acceptance amongst civilised nations as defining the limits of jurisdiction are of great weight. it was admitted in the present case, on behalf of the respondents, that the court could not make a declaration of title, or grant an injunction to restrain trespasses, the respondents having in relation to these matters abandoned their appeal in the court below. but it is said that the court may inquire into the title, and, if the plaintiffs and not the defendants are found to have the better title, may award damages for the trespass committed. my lords, i find it difficult to see why this distinction should be drawn. it is said, because the courts have no power to enforce their judgment by any dealing with the land itself, with it is outside their territorial jurisdiction. but if they can determine the title to it and compel the payment of damages founded upon such determination, why should not they equally proceed in personam against a person who, in spite of that determination, insists on disturbing one who has been found by the court to be the owner of the property? ...it is quite true that in the exercise of the undoubted jurisdiction of the courts it may become necessary incidentally to investigate and determine the title to foreign lands, but it does not seem to me to follow that because such a question may incidentally arise and fall to be adjudicated upon, the courts possess, or that it is expedient that they should exercise, jurisdiction to try an action founded on a disputed claim of title to foreign lands.[1]
nor am i satisfied that either lord mansfield or story would have regarded an action of trespass to land as a suit for personal damages only, if the title to the land were in issue, and in order to determine whether there was a right to damages it was necessary for the court to adjudicate upon the conflicting claims of the parties to real estate. in both the cases before lord mansfield, as i understand them, no question of title to real property was in issue. the sole controversy was, whether the british officers sued were, under the circumstances, justified in interfering with the plaintiffs in the enjoyment of it.[2]
that is, lord mansfield could hear the relevant cases for trespass because all parties agreed on the title, and the question of lawful excuse for trespass was one that fell squarely within british courts’ jurisdiction and competency. lord herschell lc did not argue that british courts must be blind to foreign land holdings, nor that british courts could not hear any matters that depended on foreign title being established, only that the dispute regarding title itself was generally beyond british courts’ competency.
reliance was placed on the decisions of courts of equity, as shewing that our courts were ready, when no technical difficulty of venue stood in the way, to adjudicate on the title to lands situate abroad... whilst courts of equity have never claimed to act directly upon land situate abroad, they have purported to act upon the conscience of persons living here. in lord crawstown v. johnston [sic], sir r. p. arden, master of the rolls, said: “archer v. preston, lord arglasse v. muschamp, and lord kildare v. eustace, clearly shew that with regard to any contract made, or equity between persons in this country, respecting lands in a foreign country, particularly in the british dominions, this court will hold the same jurisdiction as if they were situate in england.”[3]
vattel distinguishes the questions which may properly be tried where defendant has his settled place of abode, but always subject to this, that if the matter relates to an estate in land or to a right annexed to such an estate, “in such a case, inasmuch as property of the kind is to be held according to the laws of the country where it is situated, as the right of granting it is vested in the ruler of the country, controversies relating to such property can only be decided in the state in which it depends.”[4]
ali & ali [2019] famca 1012
81. the difficulty for ms k is that the well-researched submissions of her solicitor, focus upon the operation of australian law whereas the property is in the united states. no evidence was provided to the court regarding the likely position under the law of the united states or, more specifically, the law of state j where the property is located. this is particularly relevant where, as noted, on 1 april 2010, a grant deed was entered into between the husband’s mother and the parties transferring the title of the state j property to the parties. no evidence has been presented as to the significance of that deed, which was voluntarily entered into by ms k with the benefit of legal advice. in particular, no evidence has been presented as to the operation of state j law including the extent to which the operation of such a deed can be displaced by principles with similar effect to those set out in the submissions of the solicitor for ms k.
82. further there is a well-established principle of private international law that it is not competent for this court to make enforceable orders in relation to real property under the jurisdiction of a foreign sovereign. british south africa co v companhia de mocambique [1893] uklawrpac 53, [1893] ac 602. 83. the operation of that principle, has however, been adapted in the context of family law proceedings. the full court in teo & guan [2015] famcafc 94 cited, with approval, passage from a limited paper by dr anthony dickey qc, ‘orders in respect of foreign property under section 79’ (1993) 67 australian law journal 538:
it may be objected that an order under s 79 cannot be made in respect of foreign property as this offends the common law jurisdictional bar on domestic courts adjudicating upon rights to foreign land as laid down in british south africa co v companhia de mocambique ([1893] ac 602). it now seems clear, however, that this jurisdictional limitation does not apply to proceedings under s 79, as the rule in the mocambique case concerns proceedings only to determine existing title to, or existing right to possession of, foreign land. proceedings under s 79 are of a different character. they concern rights arising from a matrimonial relationship, even though these rights may ultimately involve the disposition of foreign land. this point was made in respect of equivalent english proceedings by the court of appeal in hamlin v hamlin ([1986] fam 11 at 21). the family court may nonetheless always decline in the exercise of its discretion to make an order under s 79 in respect of foreign land. it may do so, for example, if the order cannot be enforced in the foreign jurisdiction. ... [emphasis in original text]
84. the final two sentences of that extract are significant. they go to the question of the court exercising discretion to make an order against a party in circumstances where that order might not be enforceable in the foreign jurisdiction. this point was also made by kent j in chen & tan [2012] famca 225, where his honour said at [18] that the ability of the family court to make an order against a party “in personam”:
...may be qualified to the extent that, having regard to the principle that a party ought not be ordered to do something illegal in the place it is to be done, when exercising jurisdiction in personam, courts ought be alive to avoiding the making of an order in relation to any assets located in a foreign country that might operate in direct conflict with the laws of that country. (citations omitted)
conclusion on jurisdiction
20. even if trusts were created under australian law and accepting that an australian court applies australian law in exercising in personam jurisdiction to adjust the property rights of parties in property located overseas (regardless of any rights acquired or vested in parties under foreign law) an australian court will avoid making an order in relation to assets in a foreign country that might operate in direct conflict with the laws of that country. (see, for example, michael wilson and partners ltd v robert colin nichols [2008] nswsc 1230 at [6]- [7] per brereton j).
inferentially, it seems clear that the law contemplates a situation under australian law where trusts can be created over property or properties in a foreign jurisdiction even if it is not possible to interfere with title ownership of relevant trust property or properties in the foreign jurisdiction.
was there a shared intention that the country f properties would be owned for the parties’ joint benefit?
13. both the [town e] property and the [suburb g] property were registered in the wife’s name because the husband was unable to include his name in the title due to a restriction in [country f]’s property investment laws.
that is a causal statement. paragraph [13] presents the country f legal restrictions as the driving (and seemingly only) reason why the husband’s name was not included on the legal title to the country f properties. presenting the causal statement in this way creates an implication that, had it been possible for the husband’s name to be registered on the legal title to the country f properties, it would have been, which in turn suggests an intention for shared ownership of the country f properties.
conclusion   the suburb c property with an agreed value of $1,600,000 and subject to a mortgage of $528,955 (net equity $1,071,045), which is in the joint names of the parties, (b) $71,112 in the nab mortgage offset account in the joint names of the parties, (c) $100,000 in the husband's bank account (being the monies unilaterally quarantined by him), (d) the town e property in the wife's sole name with a value of $63,866, and (e) the suburb g property in the wife's sole name with a value of $64,718.   $71,112 in the nab mortgage offset account in the joint names of the parties, (c) $100,000 in the husband's bank account (being the monies unilaterally quarantined by him), (d) the town e property in the wife's sole name with a value of $63,866, and (e) the suburb g property in the wife's sole name with a value of $64,718.   $100,000 in the husband's bank account (being the monies unilaterally quarantined by him), (d) the town e property in the wife's sole name with a value of $63,866, and (e) the suburb g property in the wife's sole name with a value of $64,718.   the town e property in the wife's sole name with a value of $63,866, and (e) the suburb g property in the wife's sole name with a value of $64,718.   the suburb g property in the wife's sole name with a value of $64,718.
declaration of interests in property (1) in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to existing title or rights in respect of property, the court may declare the title or rights, if any, that a party has in respect of the property. (2) where a court makes a declaration under subsection (1), it may make consequential orders to give effect to the declaration, including orders as to sale or partition and interim or permanent orders as to possession.   the parties each have an equitable interest in the suburb c property as to 50%, (b) the husband has an equitable interest in the two country f properties as to 50% of each, (c) the wife has an equitable interest in the $100,000 held by the husband as to 50%, and (d) the parties each have a 50% interest in the joint offset account.   the husband has an equitable interest in the two country f properties as to 50% of each, (c) the wife has an equitable interest in the $100,000 held by the husband as to 50%, and (d) the parties each have a 50% interest in the joint offset account.   the wife has an equitable interest in the $100,000 held by the husband as to 50%, and (d) the parties each have a 50% interest in the joint offset account.   the parties each have a 50% interest in the joint offset account.
associate: dated: 11 january 2024
dated: 11 january 2024
[1] the british south africa company v the companhia de moçambique [1893] uklawrpac 53; [1893] ac 602, 624-6 (“moçambique”).[2] moçambique 624.[3] moçambique 626.[4] moçambique 631, quoting story’s conflict of laws at s. 553.