last updated: 25 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mertz & mertz (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 53
orders
until further order, the court orders that:
living and time arrangements  on thursday 18 january 2024 and each alternate thursday thereafter from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school friday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day). (b) on friday 26 january 2024 and each alternate friday thereafter from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school the following monday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day. (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties and confirmed in writing.   on friday 26 january 2024 and each alternate friday thereafter from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school the following monday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day. (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties and confirmed in writing.   at such other times as agreed between the parties and confirmed in writing.   z is to spend time with the mother in accordance with his wishes, and (b) at the times agreed between the parties and confirmed in writing.   at the times agreed between the parties and confirmed in writing.
easter 2024  with the mother from the conclusion of school on easter thursday (or 3:00pm if a non- school day) until 10:00am on easter sunday, (b) with the father from 10:00am easter sunday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 8:00am if a non-school day),   with the father from 10:00am easter sunday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 8:00am if a non-school day),
children’s birthdays  with the parent who does not have care of the children on each of their respective birthdays: (i) in the event of a school day, from the conclusion of school until 4:30pm, (ii) in the event of a non-school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm,   in the event of a school day, from the conclusion of school until 4:30pm, (ii) in the event of a non-school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm,  ) in the event of a non-school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm,
for mother’s day  with the mother from 4:00pm on the saturday immediately preceding mother’s day until 4:00pm that day
for father’s day  with the father from 4:00pm on the saturday immediately preceding father’s day until 4:00pm that day.
handoverst
electronic communications
communication between the parents
extracurricular activities  not to unilaterally cancel any extant extracurricular activity that the child/ren is/are presently involved in, (b) not to enrol the child/ren in any new extracurricular activity that the child/ren is/are not presently involved in.   not to enrol the child/ren in any new extracurricular activity that the child/ren is/are not presently involved in.
restraints  collecting the children from school or any other locations save and except for in compliance with the time spending orders or with the written consent of the other party, (b) attending at the other's home without the express written consent of the other save and except for in compliance with these orders, (c) denigrating the other in the presence of the children or in the children's school grounds, discussing legal matters and having adult conversations with any of the children, (d) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so, (e) consuming alcohol to excess and/or any illicit substance in the presence of any of the children or whilst they are in his or her care or prior to the children coming into their care, (f) posting images of any or all of the children on social media or permitting the use of their images or voices on social media, without the other party’s express consent, (g) communicating with the other party other than via the our family wizard application except in the case of a genuine emergency, (h) physically disciplining or verbally abusing the children or from allowing any other person to do so.   attending at the other's home without the express written consent of the other save and except for in compliance with these orders, (c) denigrating the other in the presence of the children or in the children's school grounds, discussing legal matters and having adult conversations with any of the children, (d) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so, (e) consuming alcohol to excess and/or any illicit substance in the presence of any of the children or whilst they are in his or her care or prior to the children coming into their care, (f) posting images of any or all of the children on social media or permitting the use of their images or voices on social media, without the other party’s express consent, (g) communicating with the other party other than via the our family wizard application except in the case of a genuine emergency, (h) physically disciplining or verbally abusing the children or from allowing any other person to do so.   denigrating the other in the presence of the children or in the children's school grounds, discussing legal matters and having adult conversations with any of the children, (d) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so, (e) consuming alcohol to excess and/or any illicit substance in the presence of any of the children or whilst they are in his or her care or prior to the children coming into their care, (f) posting images of any or all of the children on social media or permitting the use of their images or voices on social media, without the other party’s express consent, (g) communicating with the other party other than via the our family wizard application except in the case of a genuine emergency, (h) physically disciplining or verbally abusing the children or from allowing any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so, (e) consuming alcohol to excess and/or any illicit substance in the presence of any of the children or whilst they are in his or her care or prior to the children coming into their care, (f) posting images of any or all of the children on social media or permitting the use of their images or voices on social media, without the other party’s express consent, (g) communicating with the other party other than via the our family wizard application except in the case of a genuine emergency, (h) physically disciplining or verbally abusing the children or from allowing any other person to do so.   consuming alcohol to excess and/or any illicit substance in the presence of any of the children or whilst they are in his or her care or prior to the children coming into their care, (f) posting images of any or all of the children on social media or permitting the use of their images or voices on social media, without the other party’s express consent, (g) communicating with the other party other than via the our family wizard application except in the case of a genuine emergency, (h) physically disciplining or verbally abusing the children or from allowing any other person to do so.   posting images of any or all of the children on social media or permitting the use of their images or voices on social media, without the other party’s express consent, (g) communicating with the other party other than via the our family wizard application except in the case of a genuine emergency, (h) physically disciplining or verbally abusing the children or from allowing any other person to do so.   communicating with the other party other than via the our family wizard application except in the case of a genuine emergency, (h) physically disciplining or verbally abusing the children or from allowing any other person to do so.   physically disciplining or verbally abusing the children or from allowing any other person to do so.
counselling  to enable z to forthwith attend upon ms d for individual counselling and for the purposes of reunification therapy between z and the mother with a report to be published with respect to the progress of same upon z attending not less than four (4) sessions with ms d. (b) for the children to attend upon ms d for psychological support and to communicate with ms d at her discretion and to provide ms d with a copy of ms c’s family report, any affidavits filed by the parties in these proceedings requested by ms d and a copy of any written reasons for judgment on 18 january 2024.   for the children to attend upon ms d for psychological support and to communicate with ms d at her discretion and to provide ms d with a copy of ms c’s family report, any affidavits filed by the parties in these proceedings requested by ms d and a copy of any written reasons for judgment on 18 january 2024.
independent children’s lawyer
procedural
the court notes that:
and it is further noted that:
reasons for judgment
judge mansfield
introduction
background & procedural history to date
material  family assessment report by ms c and dated 18 december 2023.   affidavit of mr mertz filed 22 december 2023, (3) affidavit of mr mertz filed 3 january 2024, and (4) outline of case document filed 11 january 2024.   affidavit of mr mertz filed 3 january 2024, and (4) outline of case document filed 11 january 2024.   outline of case document filed 11 january 2024.   affidavit of ms mertz filed 3 january 2024, (6) affidavit of ms mertz filed 15 january 2024, (7) outline of case document filed 15 january 2024.   affidavit of ms mertz filed 15 january 2024, (7) outline of case document filed 15 january 2024.   outline of case document filed 15 january 2024.
the family assessment report  the expert could not have been able to consider all of the material produced in this complex case and a proper reconciliation of it would reveal that the mother’s case simply must be preferred over the father’s, (b) coercive and controlling behaviour is nuanced and the father has the ability to present in one way to the expert but act in another to the mother such that he was able to elicit unreliable opinions from the expert.   coercive and controlling behaviour is nuanced and the father has the ability to present in one way to the expert but act in another to the mother such that he was able to elicit unreliable opinions from the expert.
issues  what interim orders best maintain and promote a meaningful relationship between each of the children and both of their parents. (b) what interim orders are necessary to protect the children from psychological or emotional harm including their exposure to conflict. (c) what weight is to be given to the views and wishes of the children as recorded by the expert. (d) what is the likely effect of any changes on the children including separation of z from x and y. (e) does either parent have an incapacity to provide for all of the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs. (f) what impact do the allegations of family violence have on an interim basis and what impact do the intervention order proceedings have. (g) what orders are least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   what interim orders are necessary to protect the children from psychological or emotional harm including their exposure to conflict. (c) what weight is to be given to the views and wishes of the children as recorded by the expert. (d) what is the likely effect of any changes on the children including separation of z from x and y. (e) does either parent have an incapacity to provide for all of the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs. (f) what impact do the allegations of family violence have on an interim basis and what impact do the intervention order proceedings have. (g) what orders are least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   what weight is to be given to the views and wishes of the children as recorded by the expert. (d) what is the likely effect of any changes on the children including separation of z from x and y. (e) does either parent have an incapacity to provide for all of the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs. (f) what impact do the allegations of family violence have on an interim basis and what impact do the intervention order proceedings have. (g) what orders are least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   what is the likely effect of any changes on the children including separation of z from x and y. (e) does either parent have an incapacity to provide for all of the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs. (f) what impact do the allegations of family violence have on an interim basis and what impact do the intervention order proceedings have. (g) what orders are least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   does either parent have an incapacity to provide for all of the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs. (f) what impact do the allegations of family violence have on an interim basis and what impact do the intervention order proceedings have. (g) what orders are least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   what impact do the allegations of family violence have on an interim basis and what impact do the intervention order proceedings have. (g) what orders are least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   what orders are least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.
relevant law ] the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) provide that, being an application for review, this hearing proceed as a hearing de novo. [12] the orders that i am to make are parenting orders. as such i am to have the child’s best interests as my paramount consideration pursuant to section 60ca of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”). in determining those best interests, i am to reference the parties’ proposals and the probative evidence to the numerous mandatory considerations set out at section 60cc(2) and (3) of the act, against the background and context of section 60b, which sets out the objects and principles as follows:   the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by:  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.  the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests):  children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). ] additionally, being as it is at an interim stage of the matter, i am guided by the well-established authority in goode & goode (2006) flc 93-286 , which observes that interim parenting applications are an abridged process where the scope of enquiry is restricted and the court often cannot make findings of credit on disputed fact, rendering agreed facts, current circumstances and proposals and prior care arrangements as significant. [14] i informed the parties during the hearing and for their benefit i will repeat it, i am not bound to decide between their two proposals. rather, i am bound by the act to determine the best interests for the child as my paramount consideration, and i will make orders which align with those interests, regardless of any proposals.
48. it should also be said that in parenting proceedings as in all civil litigation, it will be the issues that are joined that will dictate which s 60cc factors are relevant. by their nature, interim proceedings should be confined to those issues which, in the best interests of the children, require determination prior to a proper determination at trial... 49. ... there is a risk that in discussing every s 60cc factor, the judicial officer may lose sight of the forest for the trees. it is also important to stress here that the requirement to “consider” each factor does not mean each must be discussed, especially where the evidence leads inexorably to a particular conclusion: scvg & kld [2014] famcafc 42, (2014) flc 93-582. 50. when it is obvious that the findings made as to some of the s 60cc factors will be determinative of the child’s best interests on an interim basis, it is a sterile and unnecessary exercise to address other factors. moreover, it will be a sterile exercise to determine whether or not particular facts are disputed if they are relevant only to one of the non-determinative s 60cc considerations. properly understood, we do not interpret what was said in goode as meaning that in an interim case, each and every fact must be characterised as disputed or not, and that each s 60cc factor must be traversed where it is obvious on the facts and issues joined that there are only one or two decisive factors.
determination of issues & best interests of the children
what interim orders best maintain and promote a meaningful relationship between each of the children and both of their parents – section 60cc(2)(a)  the father has demonstrated a commitment to maintaining and promoting the children’s relationships with their mother as something that is important and beneficial to the children, (b) the mother has not been able to demonstrate a recognition of the importance of a beneficial relationship between the children and both of their parents. the mother seems focussed on a contest and pursuing arrangements that elevate the children’s relationship with her as superior and more important to that of the father.   the mother has not been able to demonstrate a recognition of the importance of a beneficial relationship between the children and both of their parents. the mother seems focussed on a contest and pursuing arrangements that elevate the children’s relationship with her as superior and more important to that of the father.
what interim orders are necessary to protect the children from psychological or emotional harm including their exposure to conflict – section 60cc(2)(b)  his mental health vulnerabilities, and (b) his consumption of alcohol to excess and illicit drugs use.   his consumption of alcohol to excess and illicit drugs use.   their exposure to the conflict between the parents, and (b) the conflict between z and the mother, and (c) x and y’s exposure to the conflict between z and the mother.   the conflict between z and the mother, and (c) x and y’s exposure to the conflict between z and the mother.   x and y’s exposure to the conflict between z and the mother.
194. [z] reported that since his hospitalisation, he had not spoken to anyone about what had occurred and his feelings. [z] claimed that [x] and [y] were unaware about his experiences as they were not present and his parents had not sought to talk to him about what had occurred. [z] went on to tearily report that whilst he continued to think about the incident, he believed his family had forgotten about what had happened as they had not talked about it since. such comments were concerning to the writer as it suggested that neither parent had sought to support [z] since this time or prioritised his emotional health.
what weight is to be given to the views and wishes of the children as recorded by the expert – section 60cc(3)(a).
what is the likely effect of any changes on the children including separation of z from x and y – section 60cc(3)(d).
does either parent have an incapacity to provide for all of the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs – section 60cc(3)(f).
what impact do the allegations of family violence have on an interim basis and what impact do the intervention order proceedings have – section 60cc(3)(j) and (k).  the mother has been subject to verbally abusive and controlling behaviours before and after separation, (b) the father has threatened to self-harm, (c) the father surveils and controls the mother by attending the children’s extracurricular events outside of their time with him and by providing z with a mobile phone, and (d) the father transferred title to the vehicle the mother drives out of his name and into her name without notice which caused the mother problems when renewing the registration.   the father has threatened to self-harm, (c) the father surveils and controls the mother by attending the children’s extracurricular events outside of their time with him and by providing z with a mobile phone, and (d) the father transferred title to the vehicle the mother drives out of his name and into her name without notice which caused the mother problems when renewing the registration.   the father surveils and controls the mother by attending the children’s extracurricular events outside of their time with him and by providing z with a mobile phone, and (d) the father transferred title to the vehicle the mother drives out of his name and into her name without notice which caused the mother problems when renewing the registration.   the father transferred title to the vehicle the mother drives out of his name and into her name without notice which caused the mother problems when renewing the registration.
whilst the issue of family violence remained a matter for the court to assess, the writer noted that based on the descriptions of the children, it appeared that when there had been parental conflict, [ms mertz] was allegedly often louder and more reactive whereas [mr mertz] was calmer and chose to disengage...
what orders are least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings – section 60cc(3)(l).
the orders  where z is living with the father, x and y should no longer be exposed to the conflict as between z and the mother which is the father’s primary concern in seeking to change their residence. (b) x and y are otherwise relatively settled and content in the mother’s care and there is no need to impose significant change upon x and y when the risk has been ameliorated. (c) i am concerned that there is a risk that the mother may not promote their relationship with the father, or seek to project her views of the father onto x and y, but the substantial and significant time provided for x and y to spend with the father will assist in off-setting that. it is a matter that will require greater consideration at final hearing. (d) the regime is as recommended by the expert.   x and y are otherwise relatively settled and content in the mother’s care and there is no need to impose significant change upon x and y when the risk has been ameliorated. (c) i am concerned that there is a risk that the mother may not promote their relationship with the father, or seek to project her views of the father onto x and y, but the substantial and significant time provided for x and y to spend with the father will assist in off-setting that. it is a matter that will require greater consideration at final hearing. (d) the regime is as recommended by the expert.   i am concerned that there is a risk that the mother may not promote their relationship with the father, or seek to project her views of the father onto x and y, but the substantial and significant time provided for x and y to spend with the father will assist in off-setting that. it is a matter that will require greater consideration at final hearing. (d) the regime is as recommended by the expert.   the regime is as recommended by the expert.   i find that z is at grave risk of serious psychological and emotional harm if he is forced, and likely physically forced, out of the care of the father and into the care of the mother in the present circumstances. (b) the mother’s inability to accept that the previous orders were patently not working and dangerous, in preference to her denigration and blaming of the father, is of concern. the mother had no proposal in evidence or submissions as to how she would manage a repeat of what happened on the last three occasions that z refused to remain in the mother’s care. the mother seemed content to simply let the effect of a recovery order take its course including if it meant police manhandling z into her care and the father being forced to lock z out of his house on pain of breach or perhaps even criminal charge. (c) i am satisfied that the father has and will continue to make efforts to restore the relationship between z and the mother despite the mother’s unabated denigration of him personally. (d) it is in line with what was recommended by the expert as far as it can be in light of the significant deterioration in the relationship since the report was prepared. (e) it is in line with z’s clearly expressed views and wishes.   the mother’s inability to accept that the previous orders were patently not working and dangerous, in preference to her denigration and blaming of the father, is of concern. the mother had no proposal in evidence or submissions as to how she would manage a repeat of what happened on the last three occasions that z refused to remain in the mother’s care. the mother seemed content to simply let the effect of a recovery order take its course including if it meant police manhandling z into her care and the father being forced to lock z out of his house on pain of breach or perhaps even criminal charge. (c) i am satisfied that the father has and will continue to make efforts to restore the relationship between z and the mother despite the mother’s unabated denigration of him personally. (d) it is in line with what was recommended by the expert as far as it can be in light of the significant deterioration in the relationship since the report was prepared. (e) it is in line with z’s clearly expressed views and wishes.   i am satisfied that the father has and will continue to make efforts to restore the relationship between z and the mother despite the mother’s unabated denigration of him personally. (d) it is in line with what was recommended by the expert as far as it can be in light of the significant deterioration in the relationship since the report was prepared. (e) it is in line with z’s clearly expressed views and wishes.   it is in line with what was recommended by the expert as far as it can be in light of the significant deterioration in the relationship since the report was prepared. (e) it is in line with z’s clearly expressed views and wishes.   it is in line with z’s clearly expressed views and wishes.   order 18(f) where the mother sought the inclusion of “public media.” noting the father’s employment and the reality that there is a possibility, however small, that the children’s image may appear accidently on “public media” in the context of the father labouring under the threat of criminal charges, i decline to include “public media.” (b) i decline to include an order with respect to “activating any tracking device.” the circumstances around the father obtaining a mobile phone for z are in my view consistent with the welfare of z and are not at all about the father attempting to insidiously track the mother. activating a “tracking device,” whatever that may mean, may be precisely what would be required in the event z were to absent himself from the care of either parent as he has done in the past. further, z will be living with the father. there is no other evidence that the father seeks to electronically track the mother.   i decline to include an order with respect to “activating any tracking device.” the circumstances around the father obtaining a mobile phone for z are in my view consistent with the welfare of z and are not at all about the father attempting to insidiously track the mother. activating a “tracking device,” whatever that may mean, may be precisely what would be required in the event z were to absent himself from the care of either parent as he has done in the past. further, z will be living with the father. there is no other evidence that the father seeks to electronically track the mother.   there is an apparently intractable conflict between the parents, (b) (presently) a child is alienated from one of the parents, (c) a child of mature years is expressing strong views, the giving of effect to which would involve changing a long standing living arrangement, (d) (presently) the siblings are split.   (presently) a child is alienated from one of the parents, (c) a child of mature years is expressing strong views, the giving of effect to which would involve changing a long standing living arrangement, (d) (presently) the siblings are split.   a child of mature years is expressing strong views, the giving of effect to which would involve changing a long standing living arrangement, (d) (presently) the siblings are split.   (presently) the siblings are split.
associate: dated: 23 january 2024
dated: 23 january 2024