last updated: 23 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
haidar & jardin [2024] fedcfamc2f 65
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
x’s care arrangements  during school term periods: (i) each alternate weekend, from 5:00 pm on friday until 7:30 am on monday or until 5:00 pm on monday if monday is a public holiday, and (ii) in the event that the father obtains accommodation within 120 kms of town b, each intervening week from the conclusion of school on wednesday until the commencement of school on friday, (iii) in the event the father obtains temporary accommodation (such as an hotel or short term rental) in the greater city d area, for up to one week each term, coinciding with and incorporating with the time x would ordinarily spend with the father pursuant to this order, provided the father gives the mother at least 21 days’ notice in writing and takes x to his extra-curricular activities, (b) during all school term holidays, for the first half of the holidays in odd numbered years and the second half of the school holidays in even numbered years, (c) for half of the long summer holiday period on a “week about” basis (in alternate weeks), commencing with the parent who would have had the care of x on the first weekend of the holidays pursuant to order 4(a)(i) if not for the holidays, and (d) at such further or other times as agreed between the parties.   each alternate weekend, from 5:00 pm on friday until 7:30 am on monday or until 5:00 pm on monday if monday is a public holiday, and (ii) in the event that the father obtains accommodation within 120 kms of town b, each intervening week from the conclusion of school on wednesday until the commencement of school on friday, (iii) in the event the father obtains temporary accommodation (such as an hotel or short term rental) in the greater city d area, for up to one week each term, coinciding with and incorporating with the time x would ordinarily spend with the father pursuant to this order, provided the father gives the mother at least 21 days’ notice in writing and takes x to his extra-curricular activities,  ) in the event that the father obtains accommodation within 120 kms of town b, each intervening week from the conclusion of school on wednesday until the commencement of school on friday, (iii) in the event the father obtains temporary accommodation (such as an hotel or short term rental) in the greater city d area, for up to one week each term, coinciding with and incorporating with the time x would ordinarily spend with the father pursuant to this order, provided the father gives the mother at least 21 days’ notice in writing and takes x to his extra-curricular activities,  i) in the event the father obtains temporary accommodation (such as an hotel or short term rental) in the greater city d area, for up to one week each term, coinciding with and incorporating with the time x would ordinarily spend with the father pursuant to this order, provided the father gives the mother at least 21 days’ notice in writing and takes x to his extra-curricular activities,   during all school term holidays, for the first half of the holidays in odd numbered years and the second half of the school holidays in even numbered years, (c) for half of the long summer holiday period on a “week about” basis (in alternate weeks), commencing with the parent who would have had the care of x on the first weekend of the holidays pursuant to order 4(a)(i) if not for the holidays, and (d) at such further or other times as agreed between the parties.   for half of the long summer holiday period on a “week about” basis (in alternate weeks), commencing with the parent who would have had the care of x on the first weekend of the holidays pursuant to order 4(a)(i) if not for the holidays, and (d) at such further or other times as agreed between the parties.   at such further or other times as agreed between the parties.   on father’s day weekend from 5:00 pm friday until 7:30 am on monday, and (b) from 10:00 am on christmas eve until 12:00 noon on christmas day in even numbered years and from 12:00 noon on christmas day until 5:00 pm on boxing day in odd numbered years.   from 10:00 am on christmas eve until 12:00 noon on christmas day in even numbered years and from 12:00 noon on christmas day until 5:00 pm on boxing day in odd numbered years.   on mother’s day weekend from 5:00 pm on friday until 7:30 am on monday, and (b) from 12:00 noon on christmas day until 5:00 pm on boxing day in even numbered years and from 10:00 am on christmas eve until 12:00 noon on christmas day in odd numbered years.   from 12:00 noon on christmas day until 5:00 pm on boxing day in even numbered years and from 10:00 am on christmas eve until 12:00 noon on christmas day in odd numbered years.   each term holiday period is deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of required school attendance, (b) each term holiday period is deemed to conclude at the commencement of the first day of required school attendance in the new school term, and (c) the midpoint will be 5:00 pm on the middle day of the holiday period and in the event there is an odd number of nights, x spend an additional night with the mother in odd numbered years and an additional night with the father in even numbered years.   each term holiday period is deemed to conclude at the commencement of the first day of required school attendance in the new school term, and (c) the midpoint will be 5:00 pm on the middle day of the holiday period and in the event there is an odd number of nights, x spend an additional night with the mother in odd numbered years and an additional night with the father in even numbered years.   the midpoint will be 5:00 pm on the middle day of the holiday period and in the event there is an odd number of nights, x spend an additional night with the mother in odd numbered years and an additional night with the father in even numbered years.   each long summer holiday period is deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of required school attendance of the relevant school year, (b) each summer holiday period is deemed to conclude at the commencement of the first day of school required attendance in the following school year, and (c) changeover occur at 5:00 pm each friday.   each summer holiday period is deemed to conclude at the commencement of the first day of school required attendance in the following school year, and (c) changeover occur at 5:00 pm each friday.   changeover occur at 5:00 pm each friday.
communication with parents
changeover  upon the father’s election and with at least 24 hours prior notice to the mother in writing, changeover take place to and from x’s school when x is attending school, at the conclusion and/or commencement of school as applicable rather than the times provided in orders 4(a)(i), (b) in the event that the father remains living in suburb l, all changeovers otherwise occur at hungry jacks in e street, suburb f, and (c) in the event the father obtains accommodation closer to x’s school, all changeovers otherwise occur at a midway point between the father's residence and x’s school.   in the event that the father remains living in suburb l, all changeovers otherwise occur at hungry jacks in e street, suburb f, and (c) in the event the father obtains accommodation closer to x’s school, all changeovers otherwise occur at a midway point between the father's residence and x’s school.   in the event the father obtains accommodation closer to x’s school, all changeovers otherwise occur at a midway point between the father's residence and x’s school.
attendance at events
exchange of / access to information
passport
interstate and international travel  no less than 30 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide the other parent with an itinerary for the trip, including arrival and departure details, and (b) the travelling parent provide the other parent with a means of communicating with x by telephone or video when they are overseas.   the travelling parent provide the other parent with a means of communicating with x by telephone or video when they are overseas.   any suspension of the other parent’s time with x be limited to 14 days each calendar year, (b) notice of suspension must be provided to the non-travelling parent, no less than 60 days prior to the proposed suspension and travel must not conflict with any prearranged travel by the other parent, (c) make-up time will be provided to the non-travelling parent with such time to take place within the same holiday period if possible or otherwise in the following holiday period, (d) no less than 30 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide the other parent with an itinerary for the trip, including arrival and departure details, and (e) the travelling parent provide the other parent with a means of communicating with x by telephone or video when they are overseas or interstate.   notice of suspension must be provided to the non-travelling parent, no less than 60 days prior to the proposed suspension and travel must not conflict with any prearranged travel by the other parent, (c) make-up time will be provided to the non-travelling parent with such time to take place within the same holiday period if possible or otherwise in the following holiday period, (d) no less than 30 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide the other parent with an itinerary for the trip, including arrival and departure details, and (e) the travelling parent provide the other parent with a means of communicating with x by telephone or video when they are overseas or interstate.   make-up time will be provided to the non-travelling parent with such time to take place within the same holiday period if possible or otherwise in the following holiday period, (d) no less than 30 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide the other parent with an itinerary for the trip, including arrival and departure details, and (e) the travelling parent provide the other parent with a means of communicating with x by telephone or video when they are overseas or interstate.   no less than 30 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide the other parent with an itinerary for the trip, including arrival and departure details, and (e) the travelling parent provide the other parent with a means of communicating with x by telephone or video when they are overseas or interstate.   the travelling parent provide the other parent with a means of communicating with x by telephone or video when they are overseas or interstate.
school enrolment
obligations, consequences of contravention and assistance with orders
procedural
it is noted that publication of this judgment by this court under a pseudonym has been approved pursuant to s 121(9)(g) of the family law act 1975 (cth).
reasons for judgment
judge a. humphreys:
introduction
the issues  should x live in town b or suburb c? (b) depending on where x lives, what time should he spend with the father? (c) if x lives in town b, should an order be made providing for the school he is to attend? if so, is it in x’s best interests to attend g school, city d or another school? (d) are the other parenting orders agreed upon by the parties in x’s best interests?   depending on where x lives, what time should he spend with the father? (c) if x lives in town b, should an order be made providing for the school he is to attend? if so, is it in x’s best interests to attend g school, city d or another school? (d) are the other parenting orders agreed upon by the parties in x’s best interests?   if x lives in town b, should an order be made providing for the school he is to attend? if so, is it in x’s best interests to attend g school, city d or another school? (d) are the other parenting orders agreed upon by the parties in x’s best interests?   are the other parenting orders agreed upon by the parties in x’s best interests?
background
6.1 in the first week of a fortnightly period, from the conclusion of school on wednesday (or 10:00am in the event of a non-school day or curriculum day) until the commencement of school on friday (or 5:00pm in the event of a non-school day or curriculum day), and 6.2 in the second week of a fortnightly period, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 10:00am in the event of a non-school day or curriculum day) until the commencement of school on monday (or 5:00pm in the event of a non-school day or curriculum day).
... [the mother] and [mr j] could move to the city, halfway between your children’s schools, allowing them to maintain regular, consistent, quality time with their other parents and keep a stable home life. this would be an hour's commute for both of you, which seems like a reasonable compromise and would put [x]’s wellbeing and best interests above your own.   x’s enrolment at c school, commencing in term 1 2023, (b) x to spend time with the father during school term periods, each alternate week from the conclusion of school on wednesday to the commencement of school on friday and in intervening weeks, from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday, and (c) x to spend half of each school holiday period and time on special occasions with each of his parents.   x to spend time with the father during school term periods, each alternate week from the conclusion of school on wednesday to the commencement of school on friday and in intervening weeks, from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday, and (c) x to spend half of each school holiday period and time on special occasions with each of his parents.   x to spend half of each school holiday period and time on special occasions with each of his parents.   if the court determines x is to remain living in proximity to c school, possible options for x to spend five nights each fortnight with the father during school term periods and equal time with the parties during school holidays. she recommended it would be important that these arrangements facilitate x spending time with his step-siblings, (b) if the court decides x can relocate to town b and the father remains living in suburb l, x continue spending each alternate weekend with the father from after school on friday until sunday evening. she also recommended x spend additional time with the father during school holidays (up to 10 days during school term holidays and up to four weeks during the long summer school holidays) and up to a week at a time during school term periods if the father is able to obtain temporary accommodation (such as a hotel) near town b, (c) recommendations for changeover (at school or each parent’s home) and for regular communication between x and his parents, and (d) that the father engage in psychological therapy over a period of six months to gain greater insight into his emotional expression and how it may impact his relationships with others. dr w recommended his treatment include exploring his distrust of the mother and work on strategies for managing it in a way that promotes healthy co‑parenting and a positive relationship with x.   if the court decides x can relocate to town b and the father remains living in suburb l, x continue spending each alternate weekend with the father from after school on friday until sunday evening. she also recommended x spend additional time with the father during school holidays (up to 10 days during school term holidays and up to four weeks during the long summer school holidays) and up to a week at a time during school term periods if the father is able to obtain temporary accommodation (such as a hotel) near town b, (c) recommendations for changeover (at school or each parent’s home) and for regular communication between x and his parents, and (d) that the father engage in psychological therapy over a period of six months to gain greater insight into his emotional expression and how it may impact his relationships with others. dr w recommended his treatment include exploring his distrust of the mother and work on strategies for managing it in a way that promotes healthy co‑parenting and a positive relationship with x.   recommendations for changeover (at school or each parent’s home) and for regular communication between x and his parents, and (d) that the father engage in psychological therapy over a period of six months to gain greater insight into his emotional expression and how it may impact his relationships with others. dr w recommended his treatment include exploring his distrust of the mother and work on strategies for managing it in a way that promotes healthy co‑parenting and a positive relationship with x.   that the father engage in psychological therapy over a period of six months to gain greater insight into his emotional expression and how it may impact his relationships with others. dr w recommended his treatment include exploring his distrust of the mother and work on strategies for managing it in a way that promotes healthy co‑parenting and a positive relationship with x.
the current circumstances of the parties and their partners
the mother and mr j  in one week (following weekends x has been with her in town b), she usually returns to suburb c with x on sunday evening, but sometimes on monday morning, and stays there with him until friday morning. sometimes they travel to town b mid-week, for family birthdays for example. she usually returns to town b on friday mornings after dropping x to school, before he spends the weekend with the father. in these weeks, she usually spends up to five nights in suburb c. mr j usually joins the mother and x on monday (after his children have spent sunday night with him) and stays with them in suburb c until friday, as his children do not ordinarily spend mid-week time with him this week, (b) in the other week (following weekends x has spent with the father in suburb l), the mother and mr j usually travel from town b to suburb c on monday afternoon, to collect x from school. mr j stays with the mother and x in suburb c on monday and tuesday nights and he then returns to town b on wednesdays for his children to spend time with him there (wednesday and thursday nights) and stays until the weekend. when x is spending time with the father mid-week (wednesday and thursday nights), the mother sometimes stays overnight at her parents’ home in town o on wednesdays and/or thursdays but she “quite often” travels to stay overnight in town b. she then returns to town b with x after school on friday, for him to spend the weekend there with her, mr j and mr j’s children. in these weeks, she usually spends two or three nights in suburb c, (c) when pressed in cross-examination about the time she spends in suburb c mid-week without x, the mother said, appearing visibly upset, “i try not to be in [suburb c] because i’m alone there, it’s isolating”, and (d) the mother estimated she spends similar time in suburb c and town b during the week, during school periods, but that “it’s really hard, it’s very split.”   in the other week (following weekends x has spent with the father in suburb l), the mother and mr j usually travel from town b to suburb c on monday afternoon, to collect x from school. mr j stays with the mother and x in suburb c on monday and tuesday nights and he then returns to town b on wednesdays for his children to spend time with him there (wednesday and thursday nights) and stays until the weekend. when x is spending time with the father mid-week (wednesday and thursday nights), the mother sometimes stays overnight at her parents’ home in town o on wednesdays and/or thursdays but she “quite often” travels to stay overnight in town b. she then returns to town b with x after school on friday, for him to spend the weekend there with her, mr j and mr j’s children. in these weeks, she usually spends two or three nights in suburb c, (c) when pressed in cross-examination about the time she spends in suburb c mid-week without x, the mother said, appearing visibly upset, “i try not to be in [suburb c] because i’m alone there, it’s isolating”, and (d) the mother estimated she spends similar time in suburb c and town b during the week, during school periods, but that “it’s really hard, it’s very split.”   when pressed in cross-examination about the time she spends in suburb c mid-week without x, the mother said, appearing visibly upset, “i try not to be in [suburb c] because i’m alone there, it’s isolating”, and (d) the mother estimated she spends similar time in suburb c and town b during the week, during school periods, but that “it’s really hard, it’s very split.”   the mother estimated she spends similar time in suburb c and town b during the week, during school periods, but that “it’s really hard, it’s very split.”
the father and ms k  the father’s father and step-mother, who live in suburb q: fortnightly, (b) the father’s mother, who lives in suburb aa: weekly, (c) the father’s grandmother, who lives in suburb bb: occasionally, several times a year, (d) the father’s aunt, who lives in suburb bb: occasionally, several times a year, and (e) x’s cousins: occasionally.   the father’s mother, who lives in suburb aa: weekly, (c) the father’s grandmother, who lives in suburb bb: occasionally, several times a year, (d) the father’s aunt, who lives in suburb bb: occasionally, several times a year, and (e) x’s cousins: occasionally.   the father’s grandmother, who lives in suburb bb: occasionally, several times a year, (d) the father’s aunt, who lives in suburb bb: occasionally, several times a year, and (e) x’s cousins: occasionally.   the father’s aunt, who lives in suburb bb: occasionally, several times a year, and (e) x’s cousins: occasionally.   x’s cousins: occasionally.
x’s current circumstances
the final hearing
evidence
the mother
mr j
ms dd
ms cc
the father
counsel for the mother: do you give her any credit for helping build the relationship between you and [x]? father: i appreciate that she has not tried to poison the relationship. definitely. counsel: deal with my answer if you could. the question i’ve asked you. father: yes, i give her credit for that for sure. yep. counsel: is it hard? father: is what hard? counsel: is it hard to think about it and just say, look she’s been great. ... is it hard to give her credit for the fact you’ve got a great relationship with [x]? father: well, i don’t know why i’d give her credit for my relationship with [x]. i’d give credit to [x] and myself for my relationship with [x]. we’re the ones who built the relationship. ... i don’t credit other people for the relationships i have with third parties.   he maintained the mother had no basis to restrict x’s time with him after separation, based on concerns around his drug use and that she had made up evidence to support her intervention order application. he initially gave emphatic evidence when cross-examined that he “definitely wasn’t” using drugs after the parties separated. he was then cross-examined about his account to dr w that “since separation, his drug use had decreased, and [he] denied any drug use since late 2021.” when presented with the inconsistency in his evidence, he gave evidence he used illicit drugs once in late 2021. dr w consulted her notes during cross-examination and gave evidence there was no suggestion in her notes the father told her he had only used drugs once since separation. even if the father’s account of using drugs only once after separation is true (which i find unlikely given his account given to dr w), his initial denial of using drugs after separation when cross-examined was untruthful, and (b) when cross-examined about his ability to move closer to town b before m was born, the father initially asserted the mother had not made a request of him to move closer to town b when she first raised her wish to relocate with x. when he was presented with copy correspondence from the mother and her lawyers in september and october 2022, the father said he earlier “misspoke” and acknowledged the mother had proposed from the outset that he move closer to town b. he then insisted this was a “suggestion” rather than a “request” made by her.   when cross-examined about his ability to move closer to town b before m was born, the father initially asserted the mother had not made a request of him to move closer to town b when she first raised her wish to relocate with x. when he was presented with copy correspondence from the mother and her lawyers in september and october 2022, the father said he earlier “misspoke” and acknowledged the mother had proposed from the outset that he move closer to town b. he then insisted this was a “suggestion” rather than a “request” made by her.
ms k
family report writer  she had considered the father’s alternate proposal for x to live with him in suburb l (and spend only two nights per fortnight with the mother) when formulating her recommendations but had not included any analysis of that proposal in her report, (b) she had proceeded with her report on the basis it would be impracticable for x to continue spending time with the father five nights each fortnight and had not explored the possibility of the father moving closer to town b as proposed by the mother. she did so because the father said he “needed to remain close to [suburb l] due to his [and ms k’s] extended family and friends living nearby and the need to draw on them for support following the birth of their child.” she acknowledged when cross-examined the distinction being unable to move and unwilling to move was significant and would impact her recommendations. this was not explored in her report, (c) she was not aware of mr j’s orders, requiring mr j to have accommodation in town b for his children to spend time with him during school term periods, and (d) she did not in my view adequately explore in her report the impact on x of living across three homes with his parents. she had proceeded on the basis suburb c was x’s home with the mother and town b was equivalent to a holiday house for him, consistently with x describing the town b property as the “holiday house”, without addressing x’s alternate description that he lives in two homes with the mother, with different people living in each home. she did not take into account that town b was the place the mother considered to be her home, being the residence she and mr j share with their children. she did not address the practical difficulties of the mother and mr j maintaining two residences.   she had proceeded with her report on the basis it would be impracticable for x to continue spending time with the father five nights each fortnight and had not explored the possibility of the father moving closer to town b as proposed by the mother. she did so because the father said he “needed to remain close to [suburb l] due to his [and ms k’s] extended family and friends living nearby and the need to draw on them for support following the birth of their child.” she acknowledged when cross-examined the distinction being unable to move and unwilling to move was significant and would impact her recommendations. this was not explored in her report, (c) she was not aware of mr j’s orders, requiring mr j to have accommodation in town b for his children to spend time with him during school term periods, and (d) she did not in my view adequately explore in her report the impact on x of living across three homes with his parents. she had proceeded on the basis suburb c was x’s home with the mother and town b was equivalent to a holiday house for him, consistently with x describing the town b property as the “holiday house”, without addressing x’s alternate description that he lives in two homes with the mother, with different people living in each home. she did not take into account that town b was the place the mother considered to be her home, being the residence she and mr j share with their children. she did not address the practical difficulties of the mother and mr j maintaining two residences.   she was not aware of mr j’s orders, requiring mr j to have accommodation in town b for his children to spend time with him during school term periods, and (d) she did not in my view adequately explore in her report the impact on x of living across three homes with his parents. she had proceeded on the basis suburb c was x’s home with the mother and town b was equivalent to a holiday house for him, consistently with x describing the town b property as the “holiday house”, without addressing x’s alternate description that he lives in two homes with the mother, with different people living in each home. she did not take into account that town b was the place the mother considered to be her home, being the residence she and mr j share with their children. she did not address the practical difficulties of the mother and mr j maintaining two residences.   she did not in my view adequately explore in her report the impact on x of living across three homes with his parents. she had proceeded on the basis suburb c was x’s home with the mother and town b was equivalent to a holiday house for him, consistently with x describing the town b property as the “holiday house”, without addressing x’s alternate description that he lives in two homes with the mother, with different people living in each home. she did not take into account that town b was the place the mother considered to be her home, being the residence she and mr j share with their children. she did not address the practical difficulties of the mother and mr j maintaining two residences.
the law
...it would be preferable that such references to “permission” to relocate be avoided. the word has a tendency to distract attention from the jurisdiction actually being exercised. ... to treat the determination of the residence of the child, and the connected issue of custody, as dependent upon the giving or withholding of “permission” to a parent to relocate his or her residence may divert attention from the child’s welfare, to the competing needs and demands of the parents in conflict.
these rights, and the right of freedom of mobility of a parent, only defer to the paramount consideration of a child’s best interests where those interests would be so adversely affected as to justify such interference, and then the interference is legitimate only to the extent that it is necessary to avoid such adverse effects.
objects and principles  the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
best interests of children
primary considerations  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents
the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
this incident was used and exaggerated by [the mother] to tarnish my reputation and give the impression that i’m violent, which i’m not.
additional considerations
any views expressed by x and any factors (such as his maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give those views
the nature of x’s relationships with each of his parents and other significant persons in his life
the current evaluation suggests that [x]’s time with his father and halfsibling should be prioritised over time with his stepfather and stepsiblings. thus, it would be recommended that [x] continue to have at least five nights a fortnight with his father with the possibility of adding another night as he approaches secondary school. this, however, could not occur should [x] relocate to [town b].
the extent to which x’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in long-term decision making in relation to x, to spend time and to communicate with x
the extent to which x’s parents have fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain x ] implies that my relationship and time with my son could be exchanged for a dollar value/cost benefit. my time with [x] is invaluable, and no amount of money would make a reduction in our time together acceptable.
the likely effect of a change in x’s circumstances, including the likely effect of a separation from a parent or other significant persons in his life
the practical difficulty and expense associated with x spending time and communicating with a parent, and whether that difficulty substantially affects x’s right to maintaining personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
x living in suburb c
x living in town b
the capacity of x’s parents and any other significant person to provide for his needs, including his emotional and intellectual needs / attitude to x, and to the responsibility of parenthood demonstrated by each of x’s parents
mother’s parenting capacity and attitudes
... difficulties co-parenting and supporting [x]’s relationship with his father, being the most likely issues in the future. this risk is likely to increase if [the mother] moves to [town b] and prioritises the needs of her new relationship and family unit over [x]’s relationship with his father.
if we are successful... i hope [the father] will consider [moving closer to town b] ... because [x] needs his dad. he does. they have a great bond. while the three nights a fortnight, their bond wouldn’t be broken, five nights is better.
x’s school attendance
father’s parenting capacity and attitudes e father] denied that he had difficulty managing his anger, claiming that he would be lucky to get angry once a year. he acknowledged that he could become frustrated, but maintained that this only lasted five minutes and was then able to refocus on what he needed to do next. this was not reflected during current interview, where [the father] often presented as angry and/or frustrated about both current and past events.
exposure to conflict and denigration of the other parent can be a serious problem for children, as it can negatively impact their emotional well-being and their relationship with both parents. when one parent speaks negatively about the other parent, it can create feelings of confusion, anxiety, and loyalty conflicts in the child. it can also create a negative self-image in the child, as they may feel like they are being criticised indirectly through their association with the other parent. this can lead to low self-esteem and feelings of inadequacy.
co-parenting relationship
drug use
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of x and his parents, and any other characteristics of x the court thinks relevant
if x is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child
any family violence involving x or a member of his family, and if a family violence order applies or has applied, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
any other fact or circumstance that the court considers relevant
mother’s freedom to live where she pleases
parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they please as is compatible with their obligations pertaining to the children. only when the children’s welfare would be adversely affected must a parent’s right to freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the children’s best interests.
reasons for relocation
...the availability of family support including such things as reliable quality child care, financial assistance, and emotional support for a parent and a child, can be very important considerations in any parenting case particularly one involving relocation, and are all matters to be balanced and weighed when considering competing proposals. but those factors, or a lack of them, do not automatically support a finding that a party’s parenting capacity will be compromised particularly when they may be counterbalanced, at least in part, by other benefits, including the sharing of day to day care of a child.
impact on the mother  e mother] reported feelings of helplessness, hopelessness, anxiety and stress due to having to live between the two households. she disclosed that her sleep was also impacted by the living situation (in the form of both onset and mid-insomnia) at the time of her initial appointment. she also reported experiencing a loss of appetite at this time, which she attributed to the stress caused by changes to her living situation. [the mother] voiced that her main sources of support were primarily based in [town b], including her partner and two close friends. as a result of this, [the mother] reported that she was having increased feelings of isolation when she was living in [suburb c]. she advised that the commute between the two households was an additional stressor. [the mother] stated she drove up to 7 hours in a 24-hour period on some occasions, as a result of the commute. [the mother] described the commute time as impacting on time available for self-care, exercise and other positive coping strategies discussed in sessions. [the mother] reported that her current living situation added an element of organisational stress to everyday activities, such as cooking, as she was constantly alternating between the two locations and having to forward plan. furthermore, she reported that her current living situation was causing her ongoing financial and occupational stress.
it is hard running two houses and trying to be there for everyone and being away and isolated in the city when your husband is elsewhere and you don’t have any other supports there and you don’t have any friends. it’s hard. it’s hard leaving your husband, .... when you’ve gone from living in a house with your family and you can’t do that anymore.”
one of the objects of modern family law statutes ... is to enable parties to a broken relationship to start a new life for themselves, to control their own future destinies and, where desired, to form new relationships, free from unnecessary interference from a former spouse or partner or from a court. courts recognise that unwarranted interference in the life of a custodial parent may itself occasion bitterness towards the former spouse or partner which may be transmitted to the child or otherwise impinge on the happiness of the custodial (or residence) parent in a way likely to affect the welfare or best interests of the child. this said, the touchstone for the ultimate decision must remain the welfare or best interests of the child and not, as such, the wishes and interests of the parents.
impact on the father
possibility of the father’s relocation
when one parent (for whatever reason) wishes a child who is, or is to be, resident with that parent to move to a place distant from the other parent, it should not be assumed that that other parent cannot, or should not, contemplate moving to be near the child. there may be (and for all that is known, in this case there was) compelling reason for that other parent (here, the father) not to move, but it would ordinarily be expected that these reasons would be explored in evidence and the validity of any assumption that the other parent will not move would be examined. just as, in this case, the mother was asked what she would do, if she could not have the child reside with her in india, so too it might have been expected that the father would be asked what he would do, if the mother were to have the child reside with her in india. such questions should not be treated as mere forensic tests of parental devotion, to which only one answer is seen as being satisfactory proof of being a loving parent. rather, they are no more than a prelude to a deeper inquiry about where the best interests of the child may lie and what arrangements will best serve those interests. it is now recognised as self‑evidently true that, apart from some cases of abusive relationships, children benefit from the development of good relationships with both their parents. the right to know and be cared for by both parents and the right of contact on a regular basis with both parents are said to be principles underlying the objects of pt vii of the act. if effect is to be given to those principles, it must not be assumed that one parent (the father) cannot move and that the mother must, in every case, subordinate her ambitions and wishes, not to the needs of the child, but to the wishes of the father to pursue his life in a place of his choosing. it is the interests of the child which are paramount, not the interests or needs of the parents, let alone the interests of one of them. and gaudron j said:[33] ...it is noteworthy that in this case there was no consideration of the possibility that the father could return to india permanently to avail himself of frequent and regular contact with his daughter. the failure to explore that possibility ... seems to me to be explicable only on the basis of an assumption, inherently sexist, that a father’s choice as to where he lives is beyond challenge in a way that a mother’s is not.   he and ms k plan for his mother to care for m at least two days per week when ms k returns to work in the first half of 2024, (b) his father and stepmother may also care for m one day per week, (c) his support network of family and close friends live within a 25km radius of his home in suburb l, and (d) he submitted x travelling to and from school in town b from suburb f or suburb n (which the mother deposed takes one hour and 15 minutes each way) would be exhausting for x.   his father and stepmother may also care for m one day per week, (c) his support network of family and close friends live within a 25km radius of his home in suburb l, and (d) he submitted x travelling to and from school in town b from suburb f or suburb n (which the mother deposed takes one hour and 15 minutes each way) would be exhausting for x.   his support network of family and close friends live within a 25km radius of his home in suburb l, and (d) he submitted x travelling to and from school in town b from suburb f or suburb n (which the mother deposed takes one hour and 15 minutes each way) would be exhausting for x.   he submitted x travelling to and from school in town b from suburb f or suburb n (which the mother deposed takes one hour and 15 minutes each way) would be exhausting for x.   the father and ms k are renting in suburb l, so have flexibility in their accommodation, (b) i am not satisfied the support available to the father and ms k in suburb l will not be available to them if they move closer to melbourne – for example, suburb f or suburb n as proposed by the mother, being a drive of approximately 40 minutes from suburb l, (c) each of the father’s parents and his step-mother have driver’s licences and all have cars. whilst the father gave evidence they are in their 70s, he conceded his mother was 68, his father 71 and his step-father 72 and they are each fit and well enough to care for x, (d) when cross-examined in respect of his evidence it “would not be feasible” for his mother to drive an hour each way several times a week to care for m, he said only that his mother would “prefer not to”, (e) the father’s father regularly drives to city d to watch sports matches, (f) the father and ms k plan to engage m in paid childcare, at least two days per week, but no firm plans have yet been made. when cross-examined, the father gave evidence he could book a permanent spot for m if he chose to, geography does not pose a problem in respect of paid child care which could be organised in any location, and getting paid “childcare is quite easy”, (g) ms k confirmed she has not yet discussed dates to return to work but anticipates she will return to work sometime after early 2024. she has been looking at commercial child care arrangements for m, has applied for family day care, and is waiting to hear back from providers to discuss dates. whilst she expressed reservations about the father’s statement that paid childcare in any location “is quite easy”, she did not rule it out as an alternative for m, (h) ms k works in the cbd, and anticipates returning to work sometime in early to mid‑2024. she lived in suburb r before moving to live with the father. living in a suburb close to the cbd would place her closer to her place of employment, (i) the father did not adduce evidence of his financial position or submit that he and ms k could not afford accommodation closer to town b than suburb l, including a suburb close to the cbd, and (j) the father has previously enjoyed flexibility in his employment. in relation to his current employment, he deposed:   i am not satisfied the support available to the father and ms k in suburb l will not be available to them if they move closer to melbourne – for example, suburb f or suburb n as proposed by the mother, being a drive of approximately 40 minutes from suburb l, (c) each of the father’s parents and his step-mother have driver’s licences and all have cars. whilst the father gave evidence they are in their 70s, he conceded his mother was 68, his father 71 and his step-father 72 and they are each fit and well enough to care for x, (d) when cross-examined in respect of his evidence it “would not be feasible” for his mother to drive an hour each way several times a week to care for m, he said only that his mother would “prefer not to”, (e) the father’s father regularly drives to city d to watch sports matches, (f) the father and ms k plan to engage m in paid childcare, at least two days per week, but no firm plans have yet been made. when cross-examined, the father gave evidence he could book a permanent spot for m if he chose to, geography does not pose a problem in respect of paid child care which could be organised in any location, and getting paid “childcare is quite easy”, (g) ms k confirmed she has not yet discussed dates to return to work but anticipates she will return to work sometime after early 2024. she has been looking at commercial child care arrangements for m, has applied for family day care, and is waiting to hear back from providers to discuss dates. whilst she expressed reservations about the father’s statement that paid childcare in any location “is quite easy”, she did not rule it out as an alternative for m, (h) ms k works in the cbd, and anticipates returning to work sometime in early to mid‑2024. she lived in suburb r before moving to live with the father. living in a suburb close to the cbd would place her closer to her place of employment, (i) the father did not adduce evidence of his financial position or submit that he and ms k could not afford accommodation closer to town b than suburb l, including a suburb close to the cbd, and (j) the father has previously enjoyed flexibility in his employment. in relation to his current employment, he deposed:   each of the father’s parents and his step-mother have driver’s licences and all have cars. whilst the father gave evidence they are in their 70s, he conceded his mother was 68, his father 71 and his step-father 72 and they are each fit and well enough to care for x, (d) when cross-examined in respect of his evidence it “would not be feasible” for his mother to drive an hour each way several times a week to care for m, he said only that his mother would “prefer not to”, (e) the father’s father regularly drives to city d to watch sports matches, (f) the father and ms k plan to engage m in paid childcare, at least two days per week, but no firm plans have yet been made. when cross-examined, the father gave evidence he could book a permanent spot for m if he chose to, geography does not pose a problem in respect of paid child care which could be organised in any location, and getting paid “childcare is quite easy”, (g) ms k confirmed she has not yet discussed dates to return to work but anticipates she will return to work sometime after early 2024. she has been looking at commercial child care arrangements for m, has applied for family day care, and is waiting to hear back from providers to discuss dates. whilst she expressed reservations about the father’s statement that paid childcare in any location “is quite easy”, she did not rule it out as an alternative for m, (h) ms k works in the cbd, and anticipates returning to work sometime in early to mid‑2024. she lived in suburb r before moving to live with the father. living in a suburb close to the cbd would place her closer to her place of employment, (i) the father did not adduce evidence of his financial position or submit that he and ms k could not afford accommodation closer to town b than suburb l, including a suburb close to the cbd, and (j) the father has previously enjoyed flexibility in his employment. in relation to his current employment, he deposed:   when cross-examined in respect of his evidence it “would not be feasible” for his mother to drive an hour each way several times a week to care for m, he said only that his mother would “prefer not to”, (e) the father’s father regularly drives to city d to watch sports matches, (f) the father and ms k plan to engage m in paid childcare, at least two days per week, but no firm plans have yet been made. when cross-examined, the father gave evidence he could book a permanent spot for m if he chose to, geography does not pose a problem in respect of paid child care which could be organised in any location, and getting paid “childcare is quite easy”, (g) ms k confirmed she has not yet discussed dates to return to work but anticipates she will return to work sometime after early 2024. she has been looking at commercial child care arrangements for m, has applied for family day care, and is waiting to hear back from providers to discuss dates. whilst she expressed reservations about the father’s statement that paid childcare in any location “is quite easy”, she did not rule it out as an alternative for m, (h) ms k works in the cbd, and anticipates returning to work sometime in early to mid‑2024. she lived in suburb r before moving to live with the father. living in a suburb close to the cbd would place her closer to her place of employment, (i) the father did not adduce evidence of his financial position or submit that he and ms k could not afford accommodation closer to town b than suburb l, including a suburb close to the cbd, and (j) the father has previously enjoyed flexibility in his employment. in relation to his current employment, he deposed:   the father’s father regularly drives to city d to watch sports matches, (f) the father and ms k plan to engage m in paid childcare, at least two days per week, but no firm plans have yet been made. when cross-examined, the father gave evidence he could book a permanent spot for m if he chose to, geography does not pose a problem in respect of paid child care which could be organised in any location, and getting paid “childcare is quite easy”, (g) ms k confirmed she has not yet discussed dates to return to work but anticipates she will return to work sometime after early 2024. she has been looking at commercial child care arrangements for m, has applied for family day care, and is waiting to hear back from providers to discuss dates. whilst she expressed reservations about the father’s statement that paid childcare in any location “is quite easy”, she did not rule it out as an alternative for m, (h) ms k works in the cbd, and anticipates returning to work sometime in early to mid‑2024. she lived in suburb r before moving to live with the father. living in a suburb close to the cbd would place her closer to her place of employment, (i) the father did not adduce evidence of his financial position or submit that he and ms k could not afford accommodation closer to town b than suburb l, including a suburb close to the cbd, and (j) the father has previously enjoyed flexibility in his employment. in relation to his current employment, he deposed:   the father and ms k plan to engage m in paid childcare, at least two days per week, but no firm plans have yet been made. when cross-examined, the father gave evidence he could book a permanent spot for m if he chose to, geography does not pose a problem in respect of paid child care which could be organised in any location, and getting paid “childcare is quite easy”, (g) ms k confirmed she has not yet discussed dates to return to work but anticipates she will return to work sometime after early 2024. she has been looking at commercial child care arrangements for m, has applied for family day care, and is waiting to hear back from providers to discuss dates. whilst she expressed reservations about the father’s statement that paid childcare in any location “is quite easy”, she did not rule it out as an alternative for m, (h) ms k works in the cbd, and anticipates returning to work sometime in early to mid‑2024. she lived in suburb r before moving to live with the father. living in a suburb close to the cbd would place her closer to her place of employment, (i) the father did not adduce evidence of his financial position or submit that he and ms k could not afford accommodation closer to town b than suburb l, including a suburb close to the cbd, and (j) the father has previously enjoyed flexibility in his employment. in relation to his current employment, he deposed:   ms k confirmed she has not yet discussed dates to return to work but anticipates she will return to work sometime after early 2024. she has been looking at commercial child care arrangements for m, has applied for family day care, and is waiting to hear back from providers to discuss dates. whilst she expressed reservations about the father’s statement that paid childcare in any location “is quite easy”, she did not rule it out as an alternative for m, (h) ms k works in the cbd, and anticipates returning to work sometime in early to mid‑2024. she lived in suburb r before moving to live with the father. living in a suburb close to the cbd would place her closer to her place of employment, (i) the father did not adduce evidence of his financial position or submit that he and ms k could not afford accommodation closer to town b than suburb l, including a suburb close to the cbd, and (j) the father has previously enjoyed flexibility in his employment. in relation to his current employment, he deposed:   ms k works in the cbd, and anticipates returning to work sometime in early to mid‑2024. she lived in suburb r before moving to live with the father. living in a suburb close to the cbd would place her closer to her place of employment, (i) the father did not adduce evidence of his financial position or submit that he and ms k could not afford accommodation closer to town b than suburb l, including a suburb close to the cbd, and (j) the father has previously enjoyed flexibility in his employment. in relation to his current employment, he deposed:   the father did not adduce evidence of his financial position or submit that he and ms k could not afford accommodation closer to town b than suburb l, including a suburb close to the cbd, and (j) the father has previously enjoyed flexibility in his employment. in relation to his current employment, he deposed:   the father has previously enjoyed flexibility in his employment. in relation to his current employment, he deposed:  e mother] does not know the requirements of my current position. she has no knowledge to be able to assert that i have the ability and freedom to move closer to [town b].
however, he did not adduce any evidence about the requirements of his employment or flexibility (or lack of flexibility) in his work that would prevent him from being able to move closer to town b as proposed by the mother. he did not provide a copy of his employment contract, an affidavit or even a letter from his employer.
mr j applying to vary his parenting orders
parental responsibility
x’s care arrangements
... the options of the child spending “equal time” or “substantial and significant time” with each parent must be given separate and real consideration, notwithstanding that a relocation proposal may also have to be given subsequent consideration, with the advantages and disadvantages of that proposal then being balanced against the advantages and disadvantages of an “equal time” or “substantial and significant time” arrangement.
section 65daa(1) is expressed in imperative terms. it obliges the court to consider both the question whether it is in the best interests of the child to spend equal time with each of the parents (para (a)) and the question whether it is reasonably practicable that the child spend equal time with each of them (para (b)). it is only where both questions are answered in the affirmative that consideration may be given, under para (c), to the making of the order... a determination as a question of fact that it is reasonably practicable that equal time be spent with each parent is a statutory condition which must be fulfilled before the court has power to make a parenting order of that kind. it is a matter upon which power is conditioned much as it is where a jurisdictional fact must be proved to exist...
section 65daa(1) is concerned with the reality of the situation of the parents and the child, not whether it is desirable that there be equal time spent by the child with each parent. the presumption in s 61da(1) is not determinative of the questions arising under s 65daa(1). section 65daa(1)(b) requires a practical assessment of whether equal time parenting is feasible. since such parenting would only be possible in this case if both parents remained in mount isa, coker fm was obliged to consider the circumstances of the parties, more particularly those of the mother, in determining whether equal time parenting was reasonably practicable.   the time the child spends with the parent includes both:   days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:   the child's daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.
consideration of parties’ proposals  the mother and mr j can maintain a single family home in town b. this means: (i) the mother can live with her husband and have his support on a day-to-day basis, (ii) the mother will have the support of mr j’s brother and sister-in-law who also live in town b along with friends she has in town b. the mother, mr j and ms dd gave evidence of the benefits enjoyed by her (and x) of those relationships, including x’s relationships with their children, and (iii) they will be relieved from the significant financial burden of funding two homes,   the mother can live with her husband and have his support on a day-to-day basis, (ii) the mother will have the support of mr j’s brother and sister-in-law who also live in town b along with friends she has in town b. the mother, mr j and ms dd gave evidence of the benefits enjoyed by her (and x) of those relationships, including x’s relationships with their children, and (iii) they will be relieved from the significant financial burden of funding two homes,  ) the mother will have the support of mr j’s brother and sister-in-law who also live in town b along with friends she has in town b. the mother, mr j and ms dd gave evidence of the benefits enjoyed by her (and x) of those relationships, including x’s relationships with their children, and (iii) they will be relieved from the significant financial burden of funding two homes,  i) they will be relieved from the significant financial burden of funding two homes,
with corresponding benefits, flowing on to x,   the prospect of the mother’s future happiness is enhanced, with a corresponding flow on effect to x, (c) x will have two homes (one with each of his parents), rather than three homes as he currently does, providing him with greater stability and less disruption, (d) if x also attends school in town b, he will have school friends who live nearby to the home where he lives with the mother mid-week and on alternate weekends, and (e) depending on the school he attends, he may also attend the same school as his step-siblings.   x will have two homes (one with each of his parents), rather than three homes as he currently does, providing him with greater stability and less disruption, (d) if x also attends school in town b, he will have school friends who live nearby to the home where he lives with the mother mid-week and on alternate weekends, and (e) depending on the school he attends, he may also attend the same school as his step-siblings.   if x also attends school in town b, he will have school friends who live nearby to the home where he lives with the mother mid-week and on alternate weekends, and (e) depending on the school he attends, he may also attend the same school as his step-siblings.   depending on the school he attends, he may also attend the same school as his step-siblings.   most importantly, it would be not practicable for x to continue spending time mid‑week with the father, ms k and m, unless they obtain accommodation closer to town b, (b) x may also spend less time with his paternal relatives. however, there was no firm evidence he spends regular time with those relatives before and after school mid-week and even if that were the case, i am satisfied x’s relationships with those relatives can be maintained on alternate weekends, during school holidays and on special occasions, (c) it would be more difficult for the father to participate in xs’ regular school events and to be a part of his school community. however, aside from playing in the playground before and after school with x on occasions he takes him to and from school rather than ms k, the father did not give evidence in his trial affidavit of interacting with x’s school. the mother volunteered in cross-examination that he attended an assembly at which x received an award and at a school event. the father acknowledged he has not engaged in classroom or other activities as a parent volunteer during x’s first year of school, (d) it would be more difficult for the father to attend x’s extra-curricular activities. however, the father does not currently attend x’s extra-curricular activities and this year expressed a preference not to, (e) x will be required to change schools, after spending his first year of school at suburb c school. whilst the father advocated against x changing schools, his own application up until the final hearing was for x to move to l school. when cross-examined, dr w was not concerned about x changing schools given he has not experienced multiple changes in school, and (f) x will be required to travel approximately two hours to and from school on friday afternoon and early monday morning once a fortnight. if the father moves within 120 kilometres from town b, then x will travel up to approximately one hour and 15 minutes each way to spend time with the father, extending the travel he currently undertakes by up to approximately 15 to 30 minutes each way.   x may also spend less time with his paternal relatives. however, there was no firm evidence he spends regular time with those relatives before and after school mid-week and even if that were the case, i am satisfied x’s relationships with those relatives can be maintained on alternate weekends, during school holidays and on special occasions, (c) it would be more difficult for the father to participate in xs’ regular school events and to be a part of his school community. however, aside from playing in the playground before and after school with x on occasions he takes him to and from school rather than ms k, the father did not give evidence in his trial affidavit of interacting with x’s school. the mother volunteered in cross-examination that he attended an assembly at which x received an award and at a school event. the father acknowledged he has not engaged in classroom or other activities as a parent volunteer during x’s first year of school, (d) it would be more difficult for the father to attend x’s extra-curricular activities. however, the father does not currently attend x’s extra-curricular activities and this year expressed a preference not to, (e) x will be required to change schools, after spending his first year of school at suburb c school. whilst the father advocated against x changing schools, his own application up until the final hearing was for x to move to l school. when cross-examined, dr w was not concerned about x changing schools given he has not experienced multiple changes in school, and (f) x will be required to travel approximately two hours to and from school on friday afternoon and early monday morning once a fortnight. if the father moves within 120 kilometres from town b, then x will travel up to approximately one hour and 15 minutes each way to spend time with the father, extending the travel he currently undertakes by up to approximately 15 to 30 minutes each way.   it would be more difficult for the father to participate in xs’ regular school events and to be a part of his school community. however, aside from playing in the playground before and after school with x on occasions he takes him to and from school rather than ms k, the father did not give evidence in his trial affidavit of interacting with x’s school. the mother volunteered in cross-examination that he attended an assembly at which x received an award and at a school event. the father acknowledged he has not engaged in classroom or other activities as a parent volunteer during x’s first year of school, (d) it would be more difficult for the father to attend x’s extra-curricular activities. however, the father does not currently attend x’s extra-curricular activities and this year expressed a preference not to, (e) x will be required to change schools, after spending his first year of school at suburb c school. whilst the father advocated against x changing schools, his own application up until the final hearing was for x to move to l school. when cross-examined, dr w was not concerned about x changing schools given he has not experienced multiple changes in school, and (f) x will be required to travel approximately two hours to and from school on friday afternoon and early monday morning once a fortnight. if the father moves within 120 kilometres from town b, then x will travel up to approximately one hour and 15 minutes each way to spend time with the father, extending the travel he currently undertakes by up to approximately 15 to 30 minutes each way.   it would be more difficult for the father to attend x’s extra-curricular activities. however, the father does not currently attend x’s extra-curricular activities and this year expressed a preference not to, (e) x will be required to change schools, after spending his first year of school at suburb c school. whilst the father advocated against x changing schools, his own application up until the final hearing was for x to move to l school. when cross-examined, dr w was not concerned about x changing schools given he has not experienced multiple changes in school, and (f) x will be required to travel approximately two hours to and from school on friday afternoon and early monday morning once a fortnight. if the father moves within 120 kilometres from town b, then x will travel up to approximately one hour and 15 minutes each way to spend time with the father, extending the travel he currently undertakes by up to approximately 15 to 30 minutes each way.   x will be required to change schools, after spending his first year of school at suburb c school. whilst the father advocated against x changing schools, his own application up until the final hearing was for x to move to l school. when cross-examined, dr w was not concerned about x changing schools given he has not experienced multiple changes in school, and (f) x will be required to travel approximately two hours to and from school on friday afternoon and early monday morning once a fortnight. if the father moves within 120 kilometres from town b, then x will travel up to approximately one hour and 15 minutes each way to spend time with the father, extending the travel he currently undertakes by up to approximately 15 to 30 minutes each way.   x will be required to travel approximately two hours to and from school on friday afternoon and early monday morning once a fortnight. if the father moves within 120 kilometres from town b, then x will travel up to approximately one hour and 15 minutes each way to spend time with the father, extending the travel he currently undertakes by up to approximately 15 to 30 minutes each way.   in week one, from the conclusion of school on thursday (or 10.00 am if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on the following monday (of 5.00 pm on monday if a non-school day), and (b) in week two, from the conclusion of school on wednesday (or 10.00 am if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on friday (or 5.00 pm on friday if a non-school day).   in week two, from the conclusion of school on wednesday (or 10.00 am if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on friday (or 5.00 pm on friday if a non-school day).   x could continue to spend regular mid-week time (and potentially more mid-week time) with the father, during school term periods, (b) the father would have the opportunity to be involved in x’s daily routine on school days and to interact with his school and school community on days he takes him to and from school, (c) x would have the opportunity to spend more regular time with his half-brother, m, allowing their relationship to develop, (d) x would have the opportunity to spend time with his paternal relatives more regularly, if the father facilitated that during the time x spends with him mid-week, (e) x would continue to attend at c school where he has now spent his first year at school and is progressing well, and (f) x can more easily maintain his existing friendships in suburb c and suburb l.   the father would have the opportunity to be involved in x’s daily routine on school days and to interact with his school and school community on days he takes him to and from school, (c) x would have the opportunity to spend more regular time with his half-brother, m, allowing their relationship to develop, (d) x would have the opportunity to spend time with his paternal relatives more regularly, if the father facilitated that during the time x spends with him mid-week, (e) x would continue to attend at c school where he has now spent his first year at school and is progressing well, and (f) x can more easily maintain his existing friendships in suburb c and suburb l.   x would have the opportunity to spend more regular time with his half-brother, m, allowing their relationship to develop, (d) x would have the opportunity to spend time with his paternal relatives more regularly, if the father facilitated that during the time x spends with him mid-week, (e) x would continue to attend at c school where he has now spent his first year at school and is progressing well, and (f) x can more easily maintain his existing friendships in suburb c and suburb l.   x would have the opportunity to spend time with his paternal relatives more regularly, if the father facilitated that during the time x spends with him mid-week, (e) x would continue to attend at c school where he has now spent his first year at school and is progressing well, and (f) x can more easily maintain his existing friendships in suburb c and suburb l.   x would continue to attend at c school where he has now spent his first year at school and is progressing well, and (f) x can more easily maintain his existing friendships in suburb c and suburb l.   x can more easily maintain his existing friendships in suburb c and suburb l.   the mother will need to maintain two homes with mr j – one in suburb c for x to live with her during the week and one in town b for mr j’s children to spend time with him pursuant to the mr j orders. (b) x will live across three homes: (i) one in suburb c with the mother and mr j during the week when he is not spending time with the father, (ii) one in town b, with the mother, mr j and his children on alternate weekends and during school holidays. this is the location the mother now considers to be her home, and (iii) one with the father and his family in suburb l. (c) x will need to have belongings in each of his three homes or transport his belongings between each of his homes multiple times a week, (d) x will attend school in suburb c and he will not have school friends living nearby to either of the homes in which he lives on weekends, (e) each of the mother and mr j gave evidence they cannot afford to continue to meet the cost of two homes. if they are required to do so, securing lower cost accommodation, this will have a flow on effect to x, impacting the standard of accommodation in which he lives with the mother and the funds available to the mother to provide for x and the lifestyle she can offer for him as his primary carer, (f) aside from friends from the c school community and mr j when he stays in suburb c with them, the mother and x do not have family or supports in suburb c, (g) x is required to undertake lengthy travel to and from the father’s home in suburb l to attend school in suburb c – approximately 45 to 60 minutes, six times a fortnight if he continues to spend five nights with the father per fortnight or eight times per fortnight if he spends six nights with the father per fortnight as proposed by the father, and (h) the mother’s unhappiness and any negative impact on her wellbeing of being required to live in suburb c is likely to have an adverse impact on x given she is his primary carer.   x will live across three homes: (i) one in suburb c with the mother and mr j during the week when he is not spending time with the father, (ii) one in town b, with the mother, mr j and his children on alternate weekends and during school holidays. this is the location the mother now considers to be her home, and (iii) one with the father and his family in suburb l. (c) x will need to have belongings in each of his three homes or transport his belongings between each of his homes multiple times a week, (d) x will attend school in suburb c and he will not have school friends living nearby to either of the homes in which he lives on weekends, (e) each of the mother and mr j gave evidence they cannot afford to continue to meet the cost of two homes. if they are required to do so, securing lower cost accommodation, this will have a flow on effect to x, impacting the standard of accommodation in which he lives with the mother and the funds available to the mother to provide for x and the lifestyle she can offer for him as his primary carer, (f) aside from friends from the c school community and mr j when he stays in suburb c with them, the mother and x do not have family or supports in suburb c, (g) x is required to undertake lengthy travel to and from the father’s home in suburb l to attend school in suburb c – approximately 45 to 60 minutes, six times a fortnight if he continues to spend five nights with the father per fortnight or eight times per fortnight if he spends six nights with the father per fortnight as proposed by the father, and (h) the mother’s unhappiness and any negative impact on her wellbeing of being required to live in suburb c is likely to have an adverse impact on x given she is his primary carer.   one in suburb c with the mother and mr j during the week when he is not spending time with the father, (ii) one in town b, with the mother, mr j and his children on alternate weekends and during school holidays. this is the location the mother now considers to be her home, and (iii) one with the father and his family in suburb l.  ) one in town b, with the mother, mr j and his children on alternate weekends and during school holidays. this is the location the mother now considers to be her home, and (iii) one with the father and his family in suburb l.  i) one with the father and his family in suburb l.   x will need to have belongings in each of his three homes or transport his belongings between each of his homes multiple times a week, (d) x will attend school in suburb c and he will not have school friends living nearby to either of the homes in which he lives on weekends, (e) each of the mother and mr j gave evidence they cannot afford to continue to meet the cost of two homes. if they are required to do so, securing lower cost accommodation, this will have a flow on effect to x, impacting the standard of accommodation in which he lives with the mother and the funds available to the mother to provide for x and the lifestyle she can offer for him as his primary carer, (f) aside from friends from the c school community and mr j when he stays in suburb c with them, the mother and x do not have family or supports in suburb c, (g) x is required to undertake lengthy travel to and from the father’s home in suburb l to attend school in suburb c – approximately 45 to 60 minutes, six times a fortnight if he continues to spend five nights with the father per fortnight or eight times per fortnight if he spends six nights with the father per fortnight as proposed by the father, and (h) the mother’s unhappiness and any negative impact on her wellbeing of being required to live in suburb c is likely to have an adverse impact on x given she is his primary carer.   x will attend school in suburb c and he will not have school friends living nearby to either of the homes in which he lives on weekends, (e) each of the mother and mr j gave evidence they cannot afford to continue to meet the cost of two homes. if they are required to do so, securing lower cost accommodation, this will have a flow on effect to x, impacting the standard of accommodation in which he lives with the mother and the funds available to the mother to provide for x and the lifestyle she can offer for him as his primary carer, (f) aside from friends from the c school community and mr j when he stays in suburb c with them, the mother and x do not have family or supports in suburb c, (g) x is required to undertake lengthy travel to and from the father’s home in suburb l to attend school in suburb c – approximately 45 to 60 minutes, six times a fortnight if he continues to spend five nights with the father per fortnight or eight times per fortnight if he spends six nights with the father per fortnight as proposed by the father, and (h) the mother’s unhappiness and any negative impact on her wellbeing of being required to live in suburb c is likely to have an adverse impact on x given she is his primary carer.   each of the mother and mr j gave evidence they cannot afford to continue to meet the cost of two homes. if they are required to do so, securing lower cost accommodation, this will have a flow on effect to x, impacting the standard of accommodation in which he lives with the mother and the funds available to the mother to provide for x and the lifestyle she can offer for him as his primary carer, (f) aside from friends from the c school community and mr j when he stays in suburb c with them, the mother and x do not have family or supports in suburb c, (g) x is required to undertake lengthy travel to and from the father’s home in suburb l to attend school in suburb c – approximately 45 to 60 minutes, six times a fortnight if he continues to spend five nights with the father per fortnight or eight times per fortnight if he spends six nights with the father per fortnight as proposed by the father, and (h) the mother’s unhappiness and any negative impact on her wellbeing of being required to live in suburb c is likely to have an adverse impact on x given she is his primary carer.   aside from friends from the c school community and mr j when he stays in suburb c with them, the mother and x do not have family or supports in suburb c, (g) x is required to undertake lengthy travel to and from the father’s home in suburb l to attend school in suburb c – approximately 45 to 60 minutes, six times a fortnight if he continues to spend five nights with the father per fortnight or eight times per fortnight if he spends six nights with the father per fortnight as proposed by the father, and (h) the mother’s unhappiness and any negative impact on her wellbeing of being required to live in suburb c is likely to have an adverse impact on x given she is his primary carer.   x is required to undertake lengthy travel to and from the father’s home in suburb l to attend school in suburb c – approximately 45 to 60 minutes, six times a fortnight if he continues to spend five nights with the father per fortnight or eight times per fortnight if he spends six nights with the father per fortnight as proposed by the father, and (h) the mother’s unhappiness and any negative impact on her wellbeing of being required to live in suburb c is likely to have an adverse impact on x given she is his primary carer.   the mother’s unhappiness and any negative impact on her wellbeing of being required to live in suburb c is likely to have an adverse impact on x given she is his primary carer.
determination  the nature of x’s relationship with the mother as his primary care giver, (b) the nature of x’s relationship with the father, which i am confident is sufficiently strong to support a meaningful relationship being maintained if x lives in town b, even if the father does not move closer to town b to enable x to continue spending time with him mid-week, (c) the impracticability of the mother and mr j maintaining a home in each of suburb c and town b, (d) the benefit to x of living between two homes rather than three homes, including dr w’s evidence at the final hearing that it would “most certainly” be better for x to have two homes rather than three, (e) the impact of the mother’s current living arrangements on her wellbeing and the flow on effect on x, and (f) the positive attitude and commitment demonstrated by the mother in her evidence and proposals, to supporting x’s relationship with the father from town b,   the nature of x’s relationship with the father, which i am confident is sufficiently strong to support a meaningful relationship being maintained if x lives in town b, even if the father does not move closer to town b to enable x to continue spending time with him mid-week, (c) the impracticability of the mother and mr j maintaining a home in each of suburb c and town b, (d) the benefit to x of living between two homes rather than three homes, including dr w’s evidence at the final hearing that it would “most certainly” be better for x to have two homes rather than three, (e) the impact of the mother’s current living arrangements on her wellbeing and the flow on effect on x, and (f) the positive attitude and commitment demonstrated by the mother in her evidence and proposals, to supporting x’s relationship with the father from town b,   the impracticability of the mother and mr j maintaining a home in each of suburb c and town b, (d) the benefit to x of living between two homes rather than three homes, including dr w’s evidence at the final hearing that it would “most certainly” be better for x to have two homes rather than three, (e) the impact of the mother’s current living arrangements on her wellbeing and the flow on effect on x, and (f) the positive attitude and commitment demonstrated by the mother in her evidence and proposals, to supporting x’s relationship with the father from town b,   the benefit to x of living between two homes rather than three homes, including dr w’s evidence at the final hearing that it would “most certainly” be better for x to have two homes rather than three, (e) the impact of the mother’s current living arrangements on her wellbeing and the flow on effect on x, and (f) the positive attitude and commitment demonstrated by the mother in her evidence and proposals, to supporting x’s relationship with the father from town b,   the impact of the mother’s current living arrangements on her wellbeing and the flow on effect on x, and (f) the positive attitude and commitment demonstrated by the mother in her evidence and proposals, to supporting x’s relationship with the father from town b,   the positive attitude and commitment demonstrated by the mother in her evidence and proposals, to supporting x’s relationship with the father from town b,
balanced against:   the negative impact on x of spending less regular time with the father and m in particular, although i find it is possible for the father to overcome that by moving within 120 kilometres from town b as proposed by the mother.   requiring the father to obtain accommodation rather than to move within 120 kilometres of town b, enables x to spend mid-week time with the father even if the father obtains a holiday home or temporary long-term accommodation within 120 kilometres of town b. as pointed out by counsel for the father, this is consistent with the wording used in mr j’s orders, (b) x spending two consecutive nights with the father provides fewer changeovers and less “to and fro” between households for x, and (c) it is also likely to be more convenient for the father given it is his proposal and therefore more likely to be implemented.   x spending two consecutive nights with the father provides fewer changeovers and less “to and fro” between households for x, and (c) it is also likely to be more convenient for the father given it is his proposal and therefore more likely to be implemented.   it is also likely to be more convenient for the father given it is his proposal and therefore more likely to be implemented.   the father’s attitude towards the mother is not in my view conducive to supporting the cooperative co-parenting relationship required to support a more shared parenting arrangement for x, (b) the father did not adduce evidence he had undertaken the psychological therapy recommended by dr w, including to work on strategies to address his mistrust of the mother to promote healthy co-parenting, (c) if the father lives a significant distance from town b (say, 120 kilometres), spending another night with the father mid-week will add to the travel to be undertaken by x to and from school, and (d) dr w recommended x continue spending five nights with the father.   the father did not adduce evidence he had undertaken the psychological therapy recommended by dr w, including to work on strategies to address his mistrust of the mother to promote healthy co-parenting, (c) if the father lives a significant distance from town b (say, 120 kilometres), spending another night with the father mid-week will add to the travel to be undertaken by x to and from school, and (d) dr w recommended x continue spending five nights with the father.   if the father lives a significant distance from town b (say, 120 kilometres), spending another night with the father mid-week will add to the travel to be undertaken by x to and from school, and (d) dr w recommended x continue spending five nights with the father.   dr w recommended x continue spending five nights with the father.
x’s school attendance in town b
schooling disputes are not resolved by application of a “blanket presumption” or preference for the views held by the residential parent (re g at [29], [45], [65]). the court is required to apply the objects and principles of part vii of the act and to consider the statutory criteria in forming conclusions about the child’s best interests (re g at [66]-[68]). that is probably self-evident, but other more generalised observations were made by the full court. in particular, the process of evaluation should not entail an assessment of the relative merits of the schools preferred by the parties, at least in circumstances where the competing schools are prima facie satisfactory (re g at [91]-[92]). ordinarily, it will be in the child’s best interests to attend a school close to his or her residence, and further, it is proper to consider evidence as to any greater effect of the decision upon the resident rather than non-resident parent (re g at [92]-[93]), but that does not mean the convenience of the non-resident parent is ignored (eden-proust at [56]-[63]). while the views of the child are relevant to the inquiry, as s 60cc(3)(a) of the act now stipulates, those views are usually not determinative. that is because, unless a child is actively unhappy in a particular school environment, it is not at all unusual for the child to express a desire to remain at his or her existing school (see re g at [96]).   the impracticability of x continuing to attend at c school if he lives in town b, being a distance of approximately 10 kilometres, (b) the father’s evidence that: (i) he has not visited g school, notwithstanding the mother informed him of the school’s open day, (ii) he has not attended to view any other schools in the city d area, (iii) he rang g school in october 2022 only to enquire if x had been enrolled with the school, (iv) he has not otherwise made enquiries with g school or with other schools in town b, (v) he has refused to discuss with the mother, anything to do with any school in the city d area. he gave evidence this is because he didn’t think it was a “plausible solution” and that the issue would “blow over” “when sanity prevailed”, (vi) he has not put up any alternative proposals for x to attend school in city d or town b explaining his view that it “has not been relevant” as he considered the matter of x’s schooling as secondary to the issue of whether x moves to town b, (vii) it has not been a priority for him from a “time management” point of view, to look into schooling options in that area notwithstanding the mother first raised her proposal for x to attend g school in september 2022, and (viii) he does not currently have any involvement in x’s classroom activities, (c) the mother’s evidence that: (i) mr j’s children attend g school. his eldest child attends one campus and his younger two children attend another campus. this puts the mother in a good position to assess the school. x will have the benefit of his step-siblings attending the same school (two at the same campus as him) and this also provides practical advantages to the mother, making it easier to get x to and from school, (ii) she first conveyed her proposal for x to attend g school to the father in september 2022, (iii) g school is approximately two kilometres from the mother’s home in town b, meaning x can walk or ride his bike to and from school, (iv) a number of children attending g school live nearby in the same estate as the home currently rented by the mother and mr j. the mother and mr j will continue to live in proximity to the school and therefore many of x’s school friends even if they obtain alternate accommodation in town b, (v) g school has small class sizes and is well resourced, (vi) x has been offered a place to commence at g school in 2024, (vii) she will meet x’s school fees at g school notwithstanding the binding child support agreement between the parties requiring them to contribute equally to school fees. the fees begin at $6,524 for year 1 and increase to $17,230 in year 12, (viii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue, (d) dr w’s oral evidence that she did not consider a change of school to be problematic for x, (e) the absence of a proposal from the father to attend to changeovers to and from x’s school, if x lives in town b, and (f) by the close of the final hearing, the father did not have an alternate proposal for x to attend a school in town b, save for him to attend a non-religious school in town b.   the father’s evidence that: (i) he has not visited g school, notwithstanding the mother informed him of the school’s open day, (ii) he has not attended to view any other schools in the city d area, (iii) he rang g school in october 2022 only to enquire if x had been enrolled with the school, (iv) he has not otherwise made enquiries with g school or with other schools in town b, (v) he has refused to discuss with the mother, anything to do with any school in the city d area. he gave evidence this is because he didn’t think it was a “plausible solution” and that the issue would “blow over” “when sanity prevailed”, (vi) he has not put up any alternative proposals for x to attend school in city d or town b explaining his view that it “has not been relevant” as he considered the matter of x’s schooling as secondary to the issue of whether x moves to town b, (vii) it has not been a priority for him from a “time management” point of view, to look into schooling options in that area notwithstanding the mother first raised her proposal for x to attend g school in september 2022, and (viii) he does not currently have any involvement in x’s classroom activities, (c) the mother’s evidence that: (i) mr j’s children attend g school. his eldest child attends one campus and his younger two children attend another campus. this puts the mother in a good position to assess the school. x will have the benefit of his step-siblings attending the same school (two at the same campus as him) and this also provides practical advantages to the mother, making it easier to get x to and from school, (ii) she first conveyed her proposal for x to attend g school to the father in september 2022, (iii) g school is approximately two kilometres from the mother’s home in town b, meaning x can walk or ride his bike to and from school, (iv) a number of children attending g school live nearby in the same estate as the home currently rented by the mother and mr j. the mother and mr j will continue to live in proximity to the school and therefore many of x’s school friends even if they obtain alternate accommodation in town b, (v) g school has small class sizes and is well resourced, (vi) x has been offered a place to commence at g school in 2024, (vii) she will meet x’s school fees at g school notwithstanding the binding child support agreement between the parties requiring them to contribute equally to school fees. the fees begin at $6,524 for year 1 and increase to $17,230 in year 12, (viii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue, (d) dr w’s oral evidence that she did not consider a change of school to be problematic for x, (e) the absence of a proposal from the father to attend to changeovers to and from x’s school, if x lives in town b, and (f) by the close of the final hearing, the father did not have an alternate proposal for x to attend a school in town b, save for him to attend a non-religious school in town b.   he has not visited g school, notwithstanding the mother informed him of the school’s open day, (ii) he has not attended to view any other schools in the city d area, (iii) he rang g school in october 2022 only to enquire if x had been enrolled with the school, (iv) he has not otherwise made enquiries with g school or with other schools in town b, (v) he has refused to discuss with the mother, anything to do with any school in the city d area. he gave evidence this is because he didn’t think it was a “plausible solution” and that the issue would “blow over” “when sanity prevailed”, (vi) he has not put up any alternative proposals for x to attend school in city d or town b explaining his view that it “has not been relevant” as he considered the matter of x’s schooling as secondary to the issue of whether x moves to town b, (vii) it has not been a priority for him from a “time management” point of view, to look into schooling options in that area notwithstanding the mother first raised her proposal for x to attend g school in september 2022, and (viii) he does not currently have any involvement in x’s classroom activities,  ) he has not attended to view any other schools in the city d area, (iii) he rang g school in october 2022 only to enquire if x had been enrolled with the school, (iv) he has not otherwise made enquiries with g school or with other schools in town b, (v) he has refused to discuss with the mother, anything to do with any school in the city d area. he gave evidence this is because he didn’t think it was a “plausible solution” and that the issue would “blow over” “when sanity prevailed”, (vi) he has not put up any alternative proposals for x to attend school in city d or town b explaining his view that it “has not been relevant” as he considered the matter of x’s schooling as secondary to the issue of whether x moves to town b, (vii) it has not been a priority for him from a “time management” point of view, to look into schooling options in that area notwithstanding the mother first raised her proposal for x to attend g school in september 2022, and (viii) he does not currently have any involvement in x’s classroom activities,  i) he rang g school in october 2022 only to enquire if x had been enrolled with the school, (iv) he has not otherwise made enquiries with g school or with other schools in town b, (v) he has refused to discuss with the mother, anything to do with any school in the city d area. he gave evidence this is because he didn’t think it was a “plausible solution” and that the issue would “blow over” “when sanity prevailed”, (vi) he has not put up any alternative proposals for x to attend school in city d or town b explaining his view that it “has not been relevant” as he considered the matter of x’s schooling as secondary to the issue of whether x moves to town b, (vii) it has not been a priority for him from a “time management” point of view, to look into schooling options in that area notwithstanding the mother first raised her proposal for x to attend g school in september 2022, and (viii) he does not currently have any involvement in x’s classroom activities,  ) he has not otherwise made enquiries with g school or with other schools in town b, (v) he has refused to discuss with the mother, anything to do with any school in the city d area. he gave evidence this is because he didn’t think it was a “plausible solution” and that the issue would “blow over” “when sanity prevailed”, (vi) he has not put up any alternative proposals for x to attend school in city d or town b explaining his view that it “has not been relevant” as he considered the matter of x’s schooling as secondary to the issue of whether x moves to town b, (vii) it has not been a priority for him from a “time management” point of view, to look into schooling options in that area notwithstanding the mother first raised her proposal for x to attend g school in september 2022, and (viii) he does not currently have any involvement in x’s classroom activities,   he has refused to discuss with the mother, anything to do with any school in the city d area. he gave evidence this is because he didn’t think it was a “plausible solution” and that the issue would “blow over” “when sanity prevailed”, (vi) he has not put up any alternative proposals for x to attend school in city d or town b explaining his view that it “has not been relevant” as he considered the matter of x’s schooling as secondary to the issue of whether x moves to town b, (vii) it has not been a priority for him from a “time management” point of view, to look into schooling options in that area notwithstanding the mother first raised her proposal for x to attend g school in september 2022, and (viii) he does not currently have any involvement in x’s classroom activities,  ) he has not put up any alternative proposals for x to attend school in city d or town b explaining his view that it “has not been relevant” as he considered the matter of x’s schooling as secondary to the issue of whether x moves to town b, (vii) it has not been a priority for him from a “time management” point of view, to look into schooling options in that area notwithstanding the mother first raised her proposal for x to attend g school in september 2022, and (viii) he does not currently have any involvement in x’s classroom activities,  i) it has not been a priority for him from a “time management” point of view, to look into schooling options in that area notwithstanding the mother first raised her proposal for x to attend g school in september 2022, and (viii) he does not currently have any involvement in x’s classroom activities,  ii) he does not currently have any involvement in x’s classroom activities,   the mother’s evidence that: (i) mr j’s children attend g school. his eldest child attends one campus and his younger two children attend another campus. this puts the mother in a good position to assess the school. x will have the benefit of his step-siblings attending the same school (two at the same campus as him) and this also provides practical advantages to the mother, making it easier to get x to and from school, (ii) she first conveyed her proposal for x to attend g school to the father in september 2022, (iii) g school is approximately two kilometres from the mother’s home in town b, meaning x can walk or ride his bike to and from school, (iv) a number of children attending g school live nearby in the same estate as the home currently rented by the mother and mr j. the mother and mr j will continue to live in proximity to the school and therefore many of x’s school friends even if they obtain alternate accommodation in town b, (v) g school has small class sizes and is well resourced, (vi) x has been offered a place to commence at g school in 2024, (vii) she will meet x’s school fees at g school notwithstanding the binding child support agreement between the parties requiring them to contribute equally to school fees. the fees begin at $6,524 for year 1 and increase to $17,230 in year 12, (viii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue, (d) dr w’s oral evidence that she did not consider a change of school to be problematic for x, (e) the absence of a proposal from the father to attend to changeovers to and from x’s school, if x lives in town b, and (f) by the close of the final hearing, the father did not have an alternate proposal for x to attend a school in town b, save for him to attend a non-religious school in town b.   mr j’s children attend g school. his eldest child attends one campus and his younger two children attend another campus. this puts the mother in a good position to assess the school. x will have the benefit of his step-siblings attending the same school (two at the same campus as him) and this also provides practical advantages to the mother, making it easier to get x to and from school, (ii) she first conveyed her proposal for x to attend g school to the father in september 2022, (iii) g school is approximately two kilometres from the mother’s home in town b, meaning x can walk or ride his bike to and from school, (iv) a number of children attending g school live nearby in the same estate as the home currently rented by the mother and mr j. the mother and mr j will continue to live in proximity to the school and therefore many of x’s school friends even if they obtain alternate accommodation in town b, (v) g school has small class sizes and is well resourced, (vi) x has been offered a place to commence at g school in 2024, (vii) she will meet x’s school fees at g school notwithstanding the binding child support agreement between the parties requiring them to contribute equally to school fees. the fees begin at $6,524 for year 1 and increase to $17,230 in year 12, (viii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue,  ) she first conveyed her proposal for x to attend g school to the father in september 2022, (iii) g school is approximately two kilometres from the mother’s home in town b, meaning x can walk or ride his bike to and from school, (iv) a number of children attending g school live nearby in the same estate as the home currently rented by the mother and mr j. the mother and mr j will continue to live in proximity to the school and therefore many of x’s school friends even if they obtain alternate accommodation in town b, (v) g school has small class sizes and is well resourced, (vi) x has been offered a place to commence at g school in 2024, (vii) she will meet x’s school fees at g school notwithstanding the binding child support agreement between the parties requiring them to contribute equally to school fees. the fees begin at $6,524 for year 1 and increase to $17,230 in year 12, (viii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue,  i) g school is approximately two kilometres from the mother’s home in town b, meaning x can walk or ride his bike to and from school, (iv) a number of children attending g school live nearby in the same estate as the home currently rented by the mother and mr j. the mother and mr j will continue to live in proximity to the school and therefore many of x’s school friends even if they obtain alternate accommodation in town b, (v) g school has small class sizes and is well resourced, (vi) x has been offered a place to commence at g school in 2024, (vii) she will meet x’s school fees at g school notwithstanding the binding child support agreement between the parties requiring them to contribute equally to school fees. the fees begin at $6,524 for year 1 and increase to $17,230 in year 12, (viii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue,  ) a number of children attending g school live nearby in the same estate as the home currently rented by the mother and mr j. the mother and mr j will continue to live in proximity to the school and therefore many of x’s school friends even if they obtain alternate accommodation in town b, (v) g school has small class sizes and is well resourced, (vi) x has been offered a place to commence at g school in 2024, (vii) she will meet x’s school fees at g school notwithstanding the binding child support agreement between the parties requiring them to contribute equally to school fees. the fees begin at $6,524 for year 1 and increase to $17,230 in year 12, (viii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue,   g school has small class sizes and is well resourced, (vi) x has been offered a place to commence at g school in 2024, (vii) she will meet x’s school fees at g school notwithstanding the binding child support agreement between the parties requiring them to contribute equally to school fees. the fees begin at $6,524 for year 1 and increase to $17,230 in year 12, (viii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue,  ) x has been offered a place to commence at g school in 2024, (vii) she will meet x’s school fees at g school notwithstanding the binding child support agreement between the parties requiring them to contribute equally to school fees. the fees begin at $6,524 for year 1 and increase to $17,230 in year 12, (viii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue,  i) she will meet x’s school fees at g school notwithstanding the binding child support agreement between the parties requiring them to contribute equally to school fees. the fees begin at $6,524 for year 1 and increase to $17,230 in year 12, (viii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue,  ii) g school offers longer school holiday periods than government schools, which will enable x to spend more holiday time with the father, and (ix) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue,  ) the mother’s evidence of her involvement in x’s schooling as described in paragraph 37, which i find is likely to continue,   dr w’s oral evidence that she did not consider a change of school to be problematic for x, (e) the absence of a proposal from the father to attend to changeovers to and from x’s school, if x lives in town b, and (f) by the close of the final hearing, the father did not have an alternate proposal for x to attend a school in town b, save for him to attend a non-religious school in town b.   the absence of a proposal from the father to attend to changeovers to and from x’s school, if x lives in town b, and (f) by the close of the final hearing, the father did not have an alternate proposal for x to attend a school in town b, save for him to attend a non-religious school in town b.   by the close of the final hearing, the father did not have an alternate proposal for x to attend a school in town b, save for him to attend a non-religious school in town b.   the father had previously proposed x attend t school or y school, both of which incorporate educational experiences and values from the christian faith, (b) the parties had previously agreed to x attending t school, (c) the emails between the parties tendered by the father,[44] in which he wrote to the mother in early 2020, when discussing y school and t school:   the parties had previously agreed to x attending t school, (c) the emails between the parties tendered by the father,[44] in which he wrote to the mother in early 2020, when discussing y school and t school:   the emails between the parties tendered by the father,[44] in which he wrote to the mother in early 2020, when discussing y school and t school:
my preference is for a secular school but i’m not ruling anything out at this stage. it’s difficult to determine the level of religiosity of either school without visiting them and discussing it in person. you know my stance on religion so it will certainly sway my feelings but won’t necessarily be decisive.   in asserting g school is a “highly christian school” the father referred to extracts from the school’s website and annual report. however, he did not put complete copies of those materials in evidence, (e) he gave evidence he had not attended to view g school and had not spoken with the school’s staff save to enquire about x’s enrolment. accordingly, i do not consider he is in a position to assess the “religiosity” of t school, and (f) the mother gave evidence she attended a non-denominational private school which was based on christian values but is not herself religious. this suggests to me she will provide x with a balanced perspective of his religious education at school.   he gave evidence he had not attended to view g school and had not spoken with the school’s staff save to enquire about x’s enrolment. accordingly, i do not consider he is in a position to assess the “religiosity” of t school, and (f) the mother gave evidence she attended a non-denominational private school which was based on christian values but is not herself religious. this suggests to me she will provide x with a balanced perspective of his religious education at school.   the mother gave evidence she attended a non-denominational private school which was based on christian values but is not herself religious. this suggests to me she will provide x with a balanced perspective of his religious education at school.
changeover
other orders
conclusion
associate: dated: 25 january 2024
dated: 25 january 2024
[1] exhibit a-1.[2] annexure a to the mother’s trial affidavit.[3] annexure b to the mother’s trial affidavit.[4] in his letter sent to the mother by email on 14 october 2023 (annexure a to the mother’s trial affidavit) and his parenting questionnaire (as amended) filed on 10 january 2023 as put to the father in cross-examination.[5] for example, the full court in sayer & radcliffe and anor [2012] famcafc 209; (2012) 48 fam lr 298 at [53] (“sayer & radcliffe and anor”).[6] morgan & miles (2007) flc 93–343 at [72]–[73]; sayer & radcliffe and anor at [47].[7] [2022] fedcfamc1a 119; (2022) 65 fam lr 461 at [12].[8] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at [188] per kirby j at [217]–[218] per hayne j (“ams v aif”).[9] at [188].[10] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238 at [82] (“u v u”) citing ams v aif.[11] (2014) flc 93–622 at [66].[12] malcolm & monroe (2011) flc 93–460 at [83] referring to ams v aif at [179] and u v u at [259]–[260].[13] taylor & barker (2007) flc 93–345 at [54] (“taylor & barker”) referring to u v u and bolitho v cohen [2005] famca 458; (2005) 33 fam lr 471.[14] morgan & miles (2007) flc 93–343 at [80]–[81]; sayer & radcliffe and anor at [48].[15] a v a: relocation approach (2000) flc 93–035 confirmed in taylor & barker.[16] sayer & radcliffe and anor at [48].[17] asher & wilkinson (2020) flc 93–945 at [100] (“asher & wilkinson”) referring to u v u.[18] blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 at [30].[19] [2019] hca 21; (2019) 266 clr 554 at [8].[20] (2009) flc 93–405 (“mccall & clark”).[21] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [26].[22] mccall & clark at [116] cited with approval in asher v wilkinson at [55]; rochford & fitzhugh [2019] famcafc at [23]; godfrey & sanders [2007] famca 102; (2007) 208 flr 287 at [33]–[36]; sigley & evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439 at [182]. [23] annexure b to his trial affidavit.[24] exhibit a-1.[25] paragraph 40 of the mother’s affidavit filed on 8 november 2022.[26] [2019] famcafc 256 at [28] citations omitted but include u v u at [282].[27] (2009) flc 93–405 at [135].[28] [2020] famca 417 at [58].[29] [2013] ewhc 292 at [11].[30] taylor & barker at [113].[31] at [145] citations omitted.[32] at [175] and [176] gleeson cj and mchugh j agreeing.[33] at [35].[34] at [83].[35] taylor & barker at [81]–[83]; mrr v gr (2010) 240 clr 461 at [13] (“mrr v gr”).[36] mrr v gr per french cj, gummow, kayne, kiefel and bell jj at [13].[37] ulster & viney (2016) flc 93–722 at [84]–[91] referring to eddington and eddington (no 2) (2007) flc 93–349.[38] ulster & viney (2016) flc 93–722 per ainslie-wallace and ryan jj at [91] and strickland j agreeing at [4].[39] annexure d to her affidavit in reply filed on 18 october 2023.[40] mrr v gr at [15]–[16]. [41] murphy j in searson & searson (2017) flc 93–788 referring by way of example to what was said in simmons and anor & kingsley (2014) flc 93–581 and the numerous authorities cited in that decision in respect of the parameters for, and use of, family reports (see [40] and from [42]–[44] and [46]).[42] u v u per gummow and callinan jj at [83] with gleeson cj, mchugh and hayne jj agreeing. [43] [2013] famca 578 at [81]–[82].[44] exhibit r-1.