last updated: 7 march 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sloan & bendon [2024] fedcfamc2f 76
orders
the court orders that:  the single expert is to adopt the contents of the report of dr e, neurologist, dated 18 july 2023 as to the diagnosis of a medical condition, symptoms and prognosis, and examine and assess ms sloan (born in 1989) and report as to the following: (i) the impact of her diagnosis, symptoms and effects on her employability and her capacity to obtain and maintain appropriate gainful employment whether that be full-time, part-time or casual employment. (ii) the likely or possible employment for which she may be suited given her diagnosis, education, qualifications, skills or experience, now and in the foreseeable future. (iii) what recommendations, if any, you are able to make as to treatment, therapy and management of her diagnosed medical condition and her potential re-entry to the workforce. (iv) the rationale for the prescription of medication for treatment of a medical condition to ms sloan, and its effects on symptoms, prognosis and capacity for work. (b) the single expert, dr b, may gather information and opinion from ms sloan's treating neurologist, dr d, for the purpose of assessing and reporting. for this purpose, ms sloan is to provide any necessary authority to dr b within seven (7) days of such a request.   the impact of her diagnosis, symptoms and effects on her employability and her capacity to obtain and maintain appropriate gainful employment whether that be full-time, part-time or casual employment. (ii) the likely or possible employment for which she may be suited given her diagnosis, education, qualifications, skills or experience, now and in the foreseeable future. (iii) what recommendations, if any, you are able to make as to treatment, therapy and management of her diagnosed medical condition and her potential re-entry to the workforce. (iv) the rationale for the prescription of medication for treatment of a medical condition to ms sloan, and its effects on symptoms, prognosis and capacity for work.  ) the likely or possible employment for which she may be suited given her diagnosis, education, qualifications, skills or experience, now and in the foreseeable future. (iii) what recommendations, if any, you are able to make as to treatment, therapy and management of her diagnosed medical condition and her potential re-entry to the workforce. (iv) the rationale for the prescription of medication for treatment of a medical condition to ms sloan, and its effects on symptoms, prognosis and capacity for work.  i) what recommendations, if any, you are able to make as to treatment, therapy and management of her diagnosed medical condition and her potential re-entry to the workforce. (iv) the rationale for the prescription of medication for treatment of a medical condition to ms sloan, and its effects on symptoms, prognosis and capacity for work.  ) the rationale for the prescription of medication for treatment of a medical condition to ms sloan, and its effects on symptoms, prognosis and capacity for work.   the single expert, dr b, may gather information and opinion from ms sloan's treating neurologist, dr d, for the purpose of assessing and reporting. for this purpose, ms sloan is to provide any necessary authority to dr b within seven (7) days of such a request.   access any medical information in the name of ms sloan relevant to his inquiries in accordance with the terms of reference outlined in order 1 of these orders, and (b) contact and discuss ms sloan with anyone who is providing her with medical advice and treatment relevant to the terms of reference outlined in order 1 of these orders.   contact and discuss ms sloan with anyone who is providing her with medical advice and treatment relevant to the terms of reference outlined in order 1 of these orders.
reasons for judgment
judge taglieri
should a single expert be appointed by court order?
evaluation
associate: dated: 25 january 2024
dated: 25 january 2024
[1] annexure b-1 of the respondent’s affidavit filed 10 january 2024.[2] respondent’s outline of case document filed 22 january 2024 at [14](f).[3] annexure b-2 of the respondent’s affidavit filed 10 january 2024, p 12.