last updated: 3 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
haigh & parkinson [2024] fedcfamc2f 89
orders
upon the court finding that:
the court orders that:
upon noting:
reasons for judgment
judge parker:
the law
a person is taken for the purposes of this division to have contravened an order under this act affecting children if, and only if: (a) where the person is bound by the order—he or she has:   intentionally failed to comply with the order, or (ii) made no reasonable attempt to comply with the order, or   otherwise—he or she has: (i) intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.  ) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.
reasonable excuse  the circumstances in which a person may be taken to have had, for the purposes of this division, a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act affecting children include, but are not limited to, the circumstances set out in subsections (2), (4), (5), (6) and (7).
standard of proof  without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
mother’s awareness of her obligations
the first alleged contravention  on 19 march 2023, the respondent sent her an email which said, amongst other things, ‘i am still not, comfortable, with sending the children, as i am unable to arrange a method of transport game [sic] for them on the day and time you have chosen...’ and ‘i will, not be, sending the children, om [sic] the visit, as, i still, believe you have used the court process to manipulate me...’[3] (b) on 5 april 2023, the respondent sent the applicant an email attaching a copy of a letter from queensland health indicating that a positive rapid antigen test result for the child x had been registered.[4] (c) on 8 april 2023, the applicant attended d park in town e, queensland (being the designated changeover location pursuant to order 3(a) of the orders) at approximately 8.45am, together with her husband, the paternal grandfather, who is the second applicant in the substantive proceedings and a party to the orders. she remained at the changeover location for approximately 30 minutes. the respondent did not attend with the children.   on 5 april 2023, the respondent sent the applicant an email attaching a copy of a letter from queensland health indicating that a positive rapid antigen test result for the child x had been registered.[4] (c) on 8 april 2023, the applicant attended d park in town e, queensland (being the designated changeover location pursuant to order 3(a) of the orders) at approximately 8.45am, together with her husband, the paternal grandfather, who is the second applicant in the substantive proceedings and a party to the orders. she remained at the changeover location for approximately 30 minutes. the respondent did not attend with the children.   on 8 april 2023, the applicant attended d park in town e, queensland (being the designated changeover location pursuant to order 3(a) of the orders) at approximately 8.45am, together with her husband, the paternal grandfather, who is the second applicant in the substantive proceedings and a party to the orders. she remained at the changeover location for approximately 30 minutes. the respondent did not attend with the children.
the second alleged contravention
the third alleged contravention
more or less serious contraventions?  subject to subsection (2), this subdivision applies if: (a) a primary order has been made, whether before or after the commencement of this division, and (b) a court having jurisdiction under this act is satisfied that a person has, whether before or after that commencement, committed a contravention (the current contravention) of the primary order, and (c) the person does not prove that he or she had a reasonable excuse for the current contravention, and (d) either subsection (2) or (3) applies.   a primary order has been made, whether before or after the commencement of this division, and (b) a court having jurisdiction under this act is satisfied that a person has, whether before or after that commencement, committed a contravention (the current contravention) of the primary order, and (c) the person does not prove that he or she had a reasonable excuse for the current contravention, and (d) either subsection (2) or (3) applies.   a court having jurisdiction under this act is satisfied that a person has, whether before or after that commencement, committed a contravention (the current contravention) of the primary order, and (c) the person does not prove that he or she had a reasonable excuse for the current contravention, and (d) either subsection (2) or (3) applies.   the person does not prove that he or she had a reasonable excuse for the current contravention, and (d) either subsection (2) or (3) applies.   either subsection (2) or (3) applies.
note: for the standard of proof to be applied in determining whether a contravention of the primary order has been committed, see section 70naf.   for the purposes of paragraph (1)(d), this subsection applies if:   no court has previously: (i) made an order imposing a sanction or taking an action in respect of a contravention by the person of the primary order, or (ii) under paragraph 70neb(1)(c), adjourned proceedings in respect of a contravention by the person of the primary order, and (b) the court dealing with the current contravention is satisfied that the person has behaved in a way that showed a serious disregard of his or her obligations under the primary order.   made an order imposing a sanction or taking an action in respect of a contravention by the person of the primary order, or (ii) under paragraph 70neb(1)(c), adjourned proceedings in respect of a contravention by the person of the primary order, and  ) under paragraph 70neb(1)(c), adjourned proceedings in respect of a contravention by the person of the primary order, and   the court dealing with the current contravention is satisfied that the person has behaved in a way that showed a serious disregard of his or her obligations under the primary order.   for the purposes of paragraph (1)(d), this subsection applies if a court has previously: (a) made an order imposing a sanction or taking an action in respect of a contravention by the person of the primary order, or (b) under paragraph 70neb(1)(c), adjourned proceedings in respect of a contravention by the person of the primary order. (4) this subdivision does not apply if the court dealing with the current contravention is satisfied that it is more appropriate for that contravention to be dealt with under subdivision e. (5) this subdivision applies whether the primary order was made, and whether the current contravention occurred, before or after the commencement of this division.   made an order imposing a sanction or taking an action in respect of a contravention by the person of the primary order, or (b) under paragraph 70neb(1)(c), adjourned proceedings in respect of a contravention by the person of the primary order.   under paragraph 70neb(1)(c), adjourned proceedings in respect of a contravention by the person of the primary order.   this subdivision does not apply if the court dealing with the current contravention is satisfied that it is more appropriate for that contravention to be dealt with under subdivision e. (5) this subdivision applies whether the primary order was made, and whether the current contravention occurred, before or after the commencement of this division.   this subdivision applies whether the primary order was made, and whether the current contravention occurred, before or after the commencement of this division.
consequential orders  if this subdivision applies, the court may do any or all of the following:   make an order directing:  the person who committed the current contravention, or (ii) that person and another specified person, to attend a post-separation parenting program, (b) if the current contravention is a contravention of a parenting order in relation to a child—make a further parenting order that compensates a person for time the person did not spend with the child (or time the child did not live with the person) as a result of the current contravention, (c) adjourn the proceedings to allow either or both of the parties to the primary order to apply for a further parenting order under division 6 of part vii that discharges, varies or suspends the primary order or revives some or all of an earlier parenting order, (d) make an order requiring the person who committed the current contravention to enter into a bond in accordance with section 70nec, (da) if the person who committed the current contravention fails, without reasonable excuse, to enter into a bond as required by an order under paragraph (d)—impose a fine not exceeding 10 penalty units on the person,   if the current contravention is a contravention of a parenting order in relation to a child—make a further parenting order that compensates a person for time the person did not spend with the child (or time the child did not live with the person) as a result of the current contravention, (c) adjourn the proceedings to allow either or both of the parties to the primary order to apply for a further parenting order under division 6 of part vii that discharges, varies or suspends the primary order or revives some or all of an earlier parenting order, (d) make an order requiring the person who committed the current contravention to enter into a bond in accordance with section 70nec, (da) if the person who committed the current contravention fails, without reasonable excuse, to enter into a bond as required by an order under paragraph (d)—impose a fine not exceeding 10 penalty units on the person,   adjourn the proceedings to allow either or both of the parties to the primary order to apply for a further parenting order under division 6 of part vii that discharges, varies or suspends the primary order or revives some or all of an earlier parenting order, (d) make an order requiring the person who committed the current contravention to enter into a bond in accordance with section 70nec, (da) if the person who committed the current contravention fails, without reasonable excuse, to enter into a bond as required by an order under paragraph (d)—impose a fine not exceeding 10 penalty units on the person,   make an order requiring the person who committed the current contravention to enter into a bond in accordance with section 70nec, (da) if the person who committed the current contravention fails, without reasonable excuse, to enter into a bond as required by an order under paragraph (d)—impose a fine not exceeding 10 penalty units on the person,  ) if the person who committed the current contravention fails, without reasonable excuse, to enter into a bond as required by an order under paragraph (d)—impose a fine not exceeding 10 penalty units on the person,   if: (i) the current contravention is a contravention of a parenting order in relation to a child, and (ii) the current contravention resulted in a person not spending time with the child (or the child not living with a person for a particular period), and (iii) the person referred to in subparagraph (ii) reasonably incurs expenses as a result of the contravention,   the current contravention is a contravention of a parenting order in relation to a child, and (ii) the current contravention resulted in a person not spending time with the child (or the child not living with a person for a particular period), and (iii) the person referred to in subparagraph (ii) reasonably incurs expenses as a result of the contravention,  ) the current contravention resulted in a person not spending time with the child (or the child not living with a person for a particular period), and (iii) the person referred to in subparagraph (ii) reasonably incurs expenses as a result of the contravention,  i) the person referred to in subparagraph (ii) reasonably incurs expenses as a result of the contravention,
make an order requiring the person who committed the current contravention to compensate the person referred to in subparagraph (ii) for some or all of the expenses referred to in subparagraph (iii), (f) make an order that the person who committed the current contravention pay some or all of the costs of another party, or other parties, to the proceedings under this division, and (g) if the court makes no other orders in relation to the current contravention—order that the person who brought the proceedings in relation to the current contravention pay some or all of the costs of the person who committed the current contravention.   make an order that the person who committed the current contravention pay some or all of the costs of another party, or other parties, to the proceedings under this division, and (g) if the court makes no other orders in relation to the current contravention—order that the person who brought the proceedings in relation to the current contravention pay some or all of the costs of the person who committed the current contravention.   if the court makes no other orders in relation to the current contravention—order that the person who brought the proceedings in relation to the current contravention pay some or all of the costs of the person who committed the current contravention.
“the words “punish” or “punishment” are not found in division 13a other than in section 70nfh, which is concerned with the operation of other laws which may apply to the act or omission which constitutes a contravention for the purposes of division 13a, and in particular with ensuring that a person is not “punished” twice in respect of the same act or omission. i accept that the use of the concept of “punishment” in s.112ap and the virtual absence of that concept from division 13a is a sufficiently important distinction between the two sets of provisions such that it must have some significance.” at [50]-[51].
“in my view, given the coercive nature of proceedings under division 13a, it cannot be assumed, in the absence of a clear basis for doing so, that broader considerations such as ensuring that an offender was “adequately punished for the offence in a way that is just and appropriate”, preventing crime by deterring the offender and other people from committing the same or similar offences, and protecting the community from the offender, are relevant to the exercise of such discretion. as noted earlier, learned counsel for the father sought by reference to the decision of the high court in witham and holloway (supra) to argue that, whether punishment was imposed for coercive or punitive reasons, it remained “punishment”. it was thus submitted that there is no basis for suggesting that the sentencing principles in the exercise of discretion in coercive and punitive proceedings differed. i do not accept that such a conclusion follows from or can be read into the decision of the high court in witham (supra). as brennan, deane, toohey and gaudron jj said in witham (at alr 420) the case turned on the standard of proof which was applicable. it does not in my view follow that because the outcome of coercive and punitive proceedings may be the same in terms of the “punishment” determined, that the outcomes are necessarily reached by reference to the same principles, or in pursuance of the same objectives. whilst i accept that the learned federal magistrate was entitled to have regard to relevant sentencing principles or guidelines, i am unable to accept that his honour was entitled to have regard to ensuring that the mother was “adequately punished” (our emphasis) in a way that was “just and appropriate”, to prevent “other people from committing the same or similar” breaches, to “protect the community” from the mother, or, other than for the purposes of procuring compliance of the court’s orders, “to denounce the conduct” of the mother.” at [156]-[159].
“in my view, there is a distinction between the coercive and punitive provisions of the act. at. it is helpful to compare division 13a of part vii to part xiiia and part xiiib. section 70naa(1) deals with the power of a court to make orders to enforce compliance with orders affecting children. part xiiia specifically refers to “sanctions” and importantly, empowers a court in exercising its “additional sentencing alternative” to apply state or territory laws with respect to certain sentences. whilst there are certain similarities of language between section 70nfc and section 112ag(5), the distinction is clear between the coercive nature of the orders in division 13a and the punitive orders in part xiiia. similarly, the language of part xiiib relating to contempt of court could not be a more stark way of contrasting the intention of the legislature. section 112ap(2) empowers a court to punish a person for contempt. there is no reference to punishment in division 13a. the focus of a court therefore in dealing with a contravention application under division 13a must be in making orders which will enforce future compliance with its orders. for a court to decide to punish a party who has been found to have contravened an order for the purposes of making other like-minded persons comply with orders relevant to them, in other words, to make an example of them, would be an error of law. counsel for the mother was critical of [the] fm for his reference to the act sentencing legislation but it will be seen from his honour’s reasons that he was simply seeking some guidance as to what relevant factors should be applied to determine what is an appropriate way to encourage compliance with court orders. without any other legislative guide in division 13a, i see no reason why a court cannot inform itself by any number of considerations in the exercise of its discretion providing those considerations are set out clearly and the court’s focus is on the individual party rather than on general deterrence or policy. the very concept of tailoring an order to ensure compliance by that party may have the effect of dissuading other like-minded persons from behaving in similar ways but that cannot be the deliberate purpose of the court dealing with the application. the provision is intended to have that party comply with their particular orders relating to their children not to orders generally. section 70naa refers to “the powers that a court...has to make orders to enforce compliance with orders under this act affecting children”. in my view that should not be read generally but rather, specifically to the particular parties because if sub-division f applies and a court determines to vary the existing parenting orders under section 70nba(1) regard must be had to the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration (see section 70nba(2). section 70nfb(1) relating to the making of an order for costs against a party has similar directions about the consideration of the welfare of the child. all of the provisions of division 13a therefore focus on the parties and the court’s obligation to endeavour to make its orders work if they have been contravened.” at [230]-[237].
variations to orders
associate: dated: 30 january 2024
dated: 30 january 2024
[1] jets & maker [2010] famcafc 55 at [83].[2] gaunt & gaunt [1978] famca 97; (1978) flc 90-468, o'brien & o'brien [1992] famca 52; (1993) flc 92-396.[3] affidavit of applicant filed 28 september 2023, annexure h-3.[4] affidavit of applicant filed 28 september 2023, annexure h-2.[5] [2009] famcafc 62; (2009) flc 93-401.[6] see also keehan & keehan [2019] famcafc 250.[7] childers & leslie [2008] famcafc 5; (2008) flc 93-356.