last updated: 8 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
finlay & finlay [2024] fedcfamc2f 153
orders
the court orders that:  the father is to have no time with the children, (b) the father is restrained from approaching or coming within 100 metres of the children.   the father is restrained from approaching or coming within 100 metres of the children.   consuming or being in any way affected by alcohol at any time when the children are with him, (b) possessing, consuming or being in any way affected by illicit substances at any time the children are with him, (c) administering physical discipline to the children when they are with him, (d) denigrating the mother or any member of the mother's family or household at any time when the children are present, or permitting the children to remain within the presence or hearing of any other person engaged in such denigration, or (e) knowingly exposing the children to "family violence" as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to this order.   possessing, consuming or being in any way affected by illicit substances at any time the children are with him, (c) administering physical discipline to the children when they are with him, (d) denigrating the mother or any member of the mother's family or household at any time when the children are present, or permitting the children to remain within the presence or hearing of any other person engaged in such denigration, or (e) knowingly exposing the children to "family violence" as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to this order.   administering physical discipline to the children when they are with him, (d) denigrating the mother or any member of the mother's family or household at any time when the children are present, or permitting the children to remain within the presence or hearing of any other person engaged in such denigration, or (e) knowingly exposing the children to "family violence" as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to this order.   denigrating the mother or any member of the mother's family or household at any time when the children are present, or permitting the children to remain within the presence or hearing of any other person engaged in such denigration, or (e) knowingly exposing the children to "family violence" as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to this order.   knowingly exposing the children to "family violence" as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to this order.   denigrating the father or any member of the father's family or household at any time when the children are present, or permitting the children to remain within the presence or hearing of any other person engaged in such denigration, or (b) knowingly exposing the children to "family violence" as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975.   knowingly exposing the children to "family violence" as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975.
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction
the hearing & material relied upon
detailed chronology of events
the parents
the relationship
breakdown of the relationship in 2020
mid-2020
i lost my composure and i did something very silly and bad. her head was bent down over the sink while she was screaming at me and saying that i had given her concussion. her face was about 10 centimetres from the sink. i was on the other side of the bench from her. i pushed her head face down onto the sink. her nose hit the sink. it was not very hard, but it hurt her nose. she had a cut on her nose. i went back to bed.
late 2020
final avo
the applicant had taken [z] out of my arms by force and grabbed me around the throat and threw me into the fence whilst he was holding [z]. when i hit the fence, it left an indent.
mother complains to police
father’s altercation with police in late 2020
children’s ongoing time with the father including attending sports events with him
because you’re a selfish fuckwit and have kept all my fucking tools now [w]’s [sports gear] is playing up and can’t fix it. hope you’re fucking happy, you selfish cunt.
again, entirely inappropriate, demeaning and insulting and an example of the father not being able to maintain his own composure. i am satisfied that on this occasion w (and probably x) were exposed to his frustration and anger with the mother.
you and your cunt of a fucking daughter, you fucking lowlife piece of shit.
father charged with further avo breach
complaints about the mother to the nsw child welfare authority
january 2021: the co-parenting completely breaks down
my father relayed the conversation to me and said the applicant had said words to the effect of, “i will kill her (meaning me) i don't care if i go to jail. i will get a contract out on her. i don’t fucking care. i will burn down the house with all the cunts in it.”
father charged with another breach of avo
this is a huge risk contacting you. i’m sorry for what i caused. i would like to transfer some money to help pay for the kid’s school stuff. i need your bank details. i’m so sorry for my behaviour.
mother’s concerns communicated to the children
local court proceedings
another alleged threat
breach of avo mid-2021 / father ends up in custody
there were two other occasions i breached the avo. once was when it was alleged that i spoke to [ms finlay] at the [sports] grounds. i was watching [x] play [sports] and i was talking to my friend. i did not want to fight it, so i pled guilty.
local court proceedings are concluded & findings made
child-inclusive conference
interim hearing on 16 november 2021
father breaches avo in late 2022 r the record, “ms q” in the father’s girlfriend].
i went and laid on the lounge and went to bed at 10 pm. i woke up at 12.50pm and had been thinking about it all night, so i went for a walk and i went to [ms finlay]'s house. i wanted to make sure that everything looked safe because my children were there and i was worried after being told about the [drugs] being sold at the house. i told police about this and the arresting officer. the police officer said to me, “we will investigate it”. i chose not to give a statement in relation to the contravene apprehended domestic violence order and i pled guilty and i received a community corrections order...
father opposes extension of avo / sends inappropriate messages to the mother’s solicitor
sell the house. give me 200k. i will give her 100 per cent custody. she agrees to me not paying child support ever. they will never see me again.
at 4.59 pm the same day, he emailed the mother’s solicitor to say:
if she agrees, she can change her name back to [...]. my family don’t want such a low life sharing our last name and i will sign the paperwork so she can change the kids’ name to [...], as well.
parenting proceedings – the law
best interests
some “non-issues”
the real issues  started to sob as he recalled [mr finlay] “hurting” [ms finlay]. [x] did not report this to anyone. the report writer comforted and empathised with [x] and moved onto other areas, so as to limit further distress.
supervision?
conclusion & orders
my relationship with [ms finlay] is over. i don’t want to talk to or communicate with [ms finlay] ever again.
associate: dated: 31 january 2024
dated: 31 january 2024