last updated: 17 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
nixon & nixon [2024] fedcfamc2f 94
orders
order amended pursuant to r 10.13(1)(g) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) on 1 february 2024
the court orders that:  each saturday from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (b) on the first sunday of the short school holidays from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (c) on the first, third and fifth sunday of the long school holidays from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (d) on father's day from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (e) if the children's birthdays fall on a sunday, from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (f) if the children's birthdays fall during the school week, from afterschool until 6pm, (g) on christmas day from 3.00pm until 9.00pm each year.   on the first sunday of the short school holidays from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (c) on the first, third and fifth sunday of the long school holidays from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (d) on father's day from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (e) if the children's birthdays fall on a sunday, from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (f) if the children's birthdays fall during the school week, from afterschool until 6pm, (g) on christmas day from 3.00pm until 9.00pm each year.   on the first, third and fifth sunday of the long school holidays from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (d) on father's day from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (e) if the children's birthdays fall on a sunday, from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (f) if the children's birthdays fall during the school week, from afterschool until 6pm, (g) on christmas day from 3.00pm until 9.00pm each year.   on father's day from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (e) if the children's birthdays fall on a sunday, from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (f) if the children's birthdays fall during the school week, from afterschool until 6pm, (g) on christmas day from 3.00pm until 9.00pm each year.   if the children's birthdays fall on a sunday, from 10.30am until 4.30pm, (f) if the children's birthdays fall during the school week, from afterschool until 6pm, (g) on christmas day from 3.00pm until 9.00pm each year.   if the children's birthdays fall during the school week, from afterschool until 6pm, (g) on christmas day from 3.00pm until 9.00pm each year.   on christmas day from 3.00pm until 9.00pm each year.   may liaise with any educational institution, including private tutors, attended by the children in relation to the progress of the children, and (b) may receive, direct from the school, all school reports, newsletters, and other information which the parent may reasonably request, at the requesting parent's expense.   may receive, direct from the school, all school reports, newsletters, and other information which the parent may reasonably request, at the requesting parent's expense.   may liaise with any person providing a health service, as defined in the privacy act 1988 (cth), to the children, and (b) may receive, direct from that person, all reports, results and any other health information, as defined in the privacy act 1988 (cth), relating to the children, at the requesting parent's expense.   may receive, direct from that person, all reports, results and any other health information, as defined in the privacy act 1988 (cth), relating to the children, at the requesting parent's expense.   that parent initiate a call to the other parent via a video conferencing application, (b) that parent must ensure that the children are available at the above time, and (c) that parent must ensure that the children have privacy during their communication with the other parent.   that parent must ensure that the children are available at the above time, and (c) that parent must ensure that the children have privacy during their communication with the other parent.   that parent must ensure that the children have privacy during their communication with the other parent.   denigrating the mother to or in the hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so, (b) verbally or physically abusing the children or permitting any other person to do so, (c) leaving the children in the care of the paternal grandmother or permitting the paternal uncle (mr c) to be left unsupervised with the children, (d) attending the children's school or any school events, save and unless the mother notifies him in writing that she will not be in attendance, (e) attending any medical or allied health appointment of the children at which the mother is in attendance, (f) physically disciplining the children, (g) communicating with the mother in any form, either by text, email, or telephone, save in accordance with orders 9 10 and 11 12 herein.   verbally or physically abusing the children or permitting any other person to do so, (c) leaving the children in the care of the paternal grandmother or permitting the paternal uncle (mr c) to be left unsupervised with the children, (d) attending the children's school or any school events, save and unless the mother notifies him in writing that she will not be in attendance, (e) attending any medical or allied health appointment of the children at which the mother is in attendance, (f) physically disciplining the children, (g) communicating with the mother in any form, either by text, email, or telephone, save in accordance with orders 9 10 and 11 12 herein.   leaving the children in the care of the paternal grandmother or permitting the paternal uncle (mr c) to be left unsupervised with the children, (d) attending the children's school or any school events, save and unless the mother notifies him in writing that she will not be in attendance, (e) attending any medical or allied health appointment of the children at which the mother is in attendance, (f) physically disciplining the children, (g) communicating with the mother in any form, either by text, email, or telephone, save in accordance with orders 9 10 and 11 12 herein.   attending the children's school or any school events, save and unless the mother notifies him in writing that she will not be in attendance, (e) attending any medical or allied health appointment of the children at which the mother is in attendance, (f) physically disciplining the children, (g) communicating with the mother in any form, either by text, email, or telephone, save in accordance with orders 9 10 and 11 12 herein.   attending any medical or allied health appointment of the children at which the mother is in attendance, (f) physically disciplining the children, (g) communicating with the mother in any form, either by text, email, or telephone, save in accordance with orders 9 10 and 11 12 herein.   physically disciplining the children, (g) communicating with the mother in any form, either by text, email, or telephone, save in accordance with orders 9 10 and 11 12 herein.   communicating with the mother in any form, either by text, email, or telephone, save in accordance with orders 9 10 and 11 12 herein.
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins
introduction
background
what are the issues to be determined in this case?
the evidence
should the court make an order for equal shared parental responsibility in this case?   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
note: the presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that relates solely to the allocation of parental responsibility for a child as defined in section 61b. it does not provide for a presumption about the amount of time the child spends with each of the parents (this issue is dealt with in section 65daa).   the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or   family violence.
4ab definition of family violence etc.   for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person's family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to): (a) an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty. (3) for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to): (a) an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty. (3) for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.
what are the legal principles the court applies in determining where a child should live?
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.
how does the court determine what is in the childrens’ best interests?
the primary considerations
do the parties’ proposals provide for a meaningful relationship between the children and each of their parents?
ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child.
are the children at risk in either parties’ care?
from the beginning of our relationship, and throughout, the applicant said that i was "damaged', that our relationship difficulties were my fault and that i needed counselling. he told me i was ''fucked in the head''. he constantly made me question myself, my judgement, my memory and would frequently correct me and talk down to me in front of others and tell me i didn't know what i was talking about. at times i felt confused, powerless and that i had no voice. i questioned my own ability to help others and felt that there was also a chance that he might try to damage my professional reputation if i stepped out of line or if he felt he was losing control over me.
the mother’s alleged self-harm attempt
mid-2010  d-]2010 - recommence psychological treatment. - supplementary report to sapol withdrawing phone report, in a written form. - apology. - accept that i have the friends that i do, you don't have to like them, just accept that they exist in my life now and into the future. - accept that i am in the [defence forces], and that i may go away, even for long periods (months at a time). - accept the fact that i am going to physically see other women, this does not mean that i am or want to cheat on or leave you. - never ever go through my emails/skype/sms' etc without asking my permission first. - sticky tape [mr m’s] card to us together and leave it on display for two months. - stop being condersending [sic] with respect to nudity and sexually explicit material. - do not take illicit drugs. - do not lie. - support me in my endeavours.
the holiday incident
the incident in country j on in mid-2018
late 2018
the party incident
while i was in the driver's seat, he kept pushing me backwards in my seat and reaching for the keys in the ignition. we drove to his mother's home where we were staying. when we arrived there he jumped out the car and tried to take [y] from his car seat. i put my hand over the buckle, and he bent my fingers back almost breaking them. at one point i lent on the car horn to get assistance. his mother came out and i asked her to call the police because my phone was flat, but she refused.
i wanted the children to remain with me. when we arrived home, and [ms nixon] had stopped the car, i did reach for the keys in the ignition, though was unable to reach them. i then went to the rear left door to take [y] out of his car seat, [ms nixon] reached back whilst i was attending to unbuckle [y]'s restraint and dug her nail into my middle finger causing a laceration, i pulled [ms nixon]'s left fingers back to stop her from hurting me or potentially [y] further...i realised [ms nixon] was in a heightened state of anger and was unable to address the situation rationally.
when we arrived at the home of the applicant's mother, he started packing the car with his belongings saying that he was coming with us. i said we needed time apart and explained the reasons i did not want him coming with us. he completely disregarded what i was saying. he told me had ordered [take-away] and so we had to collect them. the children remained with his mother and we drove to collect the [take-away]. while driving i again told the applicant i didn't want him moving back into the former matrimonial home. his response was that he refused to be separated from "his" family and accused me of assaulting him two days earlier. he said that if he had wanted to break my fingers, he would have and that i should be thankful that he didn't
the special occasion incident
just to make it abundantly clear, letting you into this house tonight does not mean that i agree to your staying over. i know you are insisting that you stay but i'm still not comfortable with it. and if you were to stay here tonight by agreement or otherwise, that does not mean that you have moved back in.
early 2019
father’s self-harm threats early 2019
the country k incident – early 2020   early] 2020, following 15 minutes of [ms nixon] repeatedly and with increasing volume calling me a liar in front of the children, with respect to the me knowing her passwords, which i did not, i walked over to [ms nixon], and she braced up. i pushed [ms nixon] with my left hand in her solar plexus twice. [ms nixon]'s feet did not move at all at this time. [ms nixon] did not stumble, she did not hurt her foot and she did not [injure herself] as she has described.
final separation – counselling session mid-2020
breaches of intervention order
violence directly inflicted on the children
i have seen the applicant be rough with the children on multiple occasions, grabbing, pulling, pushing, and dragging them. i saw him push [x]'s face to the floor when he refused to clean up a mess when we were living overseas. i have seen him throw [x] when he wouldn't go to bed. he would often shout at the children at bedtime. the kids kept telling me that they didn't like their father, that he hurts them when he's angry.   nixon] said that he has never physically harmed the children, noting that he may at times have been angry in response to behaviour, which he considered could be appropriate, and he may have guided them to their bedroom, but he has never hit them. he did not consider there to be any risk for them in his care.
are the children at ongoing risk of family violence?  nixon] denied allegations of domestic violence, and said that it was [ms nixon] who was verbally, emotionally, psychologically, financially and physically violent towards him (it is noted these allegations were made in his affidavit, but not in his notice of risk). [ms nixon] gave examples of [ms nixon] repeatedly kicking him, slapping him, or "gouging" at him with her fingernails.   nixon] explained he is seeking primary care of the boys because he had taken time to reflect on his own experiences with [ms nixon] and could now see that it was she who engaged in coercive controlling abuse towards him.
are the children at unacceptable risk in the mother’s care?
additonal considerations
what are the wishes of the children?
with such developmentally struggling children, it is not possible to be clear about their wishes. for [x], his communication challenges impact on this, and for [y], his young age. both children are also vulnerable to influence from a range of sources (e.g. exposure to their mother's concerns, how the most recent visit with their father went).
what is the children’s relationship like with each parent?  nixon] has been successful in building and maintaining a supportive emotional relationship with [x] and [y] in the 6-hour weekly times together. this overall is working for the boys.
again, what was clear was that while the children, based on the observed interactions with both parents, clearly enjoy relationships with both parents, their closest emotional support is their mother, not unexpectedly in the circumstances where she has been providing the bulk of their care since separation.
have the parents fulfilled their duty to maintain the children?
barely a day goes by when i don't have to deal with phone calls, respond to correspondence and/or provide information including financial information to the child support agency, the aat, ndis or the solicitors engaged by the aat due the actions of the applicant in challenging anything and everything. i often spend hours in the evening once the children are in bed asleep answering emails/correspondence and gathering information. i am also required to attend at the aat on dates when the appeals are listed. this behaviour has had a direct and significant impact on the children, as well as my health and employment.
what would be the impact of any change on the children?  is seven years old and clearly emotionally and developmentally vulnerable... he is significantly behind his peers in his literacy skills, his communication skills are compromised, his emotional regulation skills are limited, he does not have any friends, and he is experiencing ongoing anxiety. [x] also continues to experience night-time wetting. clearly the most pressing need for him at this stage is to further investigate and ensure support is in place for these significant developmental concerns. [y] too is highly vulnerable, given his young age, his own poor emotional regulation, his frequent inappropriate behaviour at school/out of school hours care, involving regularly being sent home, his sensory issues, social skill deficits, and tl1e chance that he too may be on the autism spectrum. additionally, his vision requires intervention, and he has been diagnosed with [a medical condition], requiring treatment both in and out of hospital, and reportedly with some unpleasant side effects. supporting [y] in these areas is, in the writer's view, the priority.
however, introducing more time at this stage risks disrupting the children, when stabilising them developmentally and helping them to achieve whatever their respective potentials needs to be the primary goal. there is no indication from [mr nixon]'s presentation that he would follow [ms nixon]'s approach to routines (e.g. if overnight) and he may not heed professional advice, having concerns about the basis for that advice. he does present as having perceived, or accepted, the level of developmental vulnerability that others around the boys have, and the need for intervention. these boys in particular need structure and consistent routines. there is no benefit to the boys in increasing the demands on them to be adaptive/flexible (to different parenting approaches if time increases). they do not have the capacity and it would very likely compromise any developmental progress.
the stress involved in being fearful for her own safety and for the children's safety and wellbeing because...there are concerns around physical risks, lack of empathy, a lack of understanding, a lack of flexibility... there's concerns about the children's.. psychological wellbeing in the care of their father...all of that...creates a level of stress that can compromise the amount of physical and emotional energy that she has to attending to the many, many other demands on her as a caregiver.
before significant changes to parenting time could be recommended, the children would need to have demonstrated consistent progress. the writer is unable to say how long this may take, but it would at minimum be a year of consistent interventions, which cannot happen until adequate resources can be established through ndis and any other sources of funding (i.e. not a year from the finalisation of this report, at least a year on from the children having regular input from the various professionals involved (e.g. psychology, occupational therapy, speech pathology, supports at school, etc.)).
what is the capacity of each parent to meet the children’s needs?  w] said that [y]'s aggressive behaviour significant damage to others, and [y] has no regard for his own safety when dysregulated (e.g. attacking older/bigger children, at times self-harming, for example, [mr w] has observed [y] to claw "savagely" at his own face). [mr w] said that [y]'s dysregulated behaviour is more severe than he has seen in other children, and that he considered [y]'s issues to present as severe.
he said it is his belief that [ms nixon] relies on the children receiving a range of diagnoses to create dependence on her going forward. he was concerned that the children do not get time to be children, they are always at appointments, which also impact on school, and that [ms nixon] was effectively "tying the children to a range of therapy or interventions that subtract from the children having a childhood".
there may also be a need for [mr nixon] to review how he can demonstrate his child focus in a more child friendly way (e.g., allowing [x] to have his flu vaccination with his mother, who he is closest to and feels most secure with, rather than determinedly insisting against advice that he should be able to do such parenting tasks during his supervised visit.
...i consider that it may not have been the most child focused thing to do at the time particularly because of [x]'s reported discomfort with needles. i would have preferred if [mr nixon] did not do this activity. it is generally beyond the scope of what my practice is designed to provide. [x] expressed his discomfort in several ways through the visit.
what is the parents’ attitude to the responsibilities of parenting?
she [the mother] said that he continues to demand from her "high level" medical information (e.g., seeking information regarding diagnoses, length of treatment, prognosis) but he does not attempt to get information directly from the treating practitioner(s). she noted he may say he does not have time or the money to do so, but that creating the time is a parental responsibility, and that even when practitioners have gone out of their way to make sure he is included (e.g., the speech pathologist reportedly emailing him) he does not respond. she felt there was an ongoing element of control of her in this behaviour.
what orders are in the best interests of the children?  nixon] said that things were always at their worst at night, and it was "very very stressful", and it was reason she did not believe the boys would manage overnight time with their father.
school holidays
special occasions
parental responsibility
... while [mr nixon] has indicated he seeks to mediate/work cooperatively with [ms nixon], asking this of her if she remains afraid of him due to past alleged behaviour is unrealistic.
information in relation to the children
communication
handovers
extracurricular activities and school events
injunctions
section 68q declaration
passports
suspension of time during long summer holidays
variation to these orders
associate: dated: 1 february 2024
dated: 1 february 2024