last updated: 9 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bellanger & wemble (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 150
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
... the mother, ms bellanger (‘the mother’), who is 31 years of age, and the father, mr wemble (‘the father’), who is 36 years of age, commenced living together in or about 2010 and married in 2011. they separated in november 2014. by that time, they had two children. they divorced, according to the law of country d, in 2019. final parenting orders were made in this court on 16 august 2021 for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility but for ms bellanger to have sole parental responsibility for the day to day decision making of the children and for them to live with her, with provisions for spending time and communicating with mr wemble. in proceedings before me today, the children’s mother, ms bellanger, seeks a recovery order issued in the usual terms for the delivery up of the children to her. by way of background, the mother alleges that she took the children to country d to visit her father in late 2021 and that mr wemble and his mother, the second respondent, ms paige, also went to the same place in country d at that time. she says that mr wemble initiated parenting proceedings in country d and that the matter finalised in 2022 with the court recognising the final orders of this court made on 16 august 2021. she says that shortly after that, mr wemble had her father arrested in proceedings relating to repayment. she says that she and her family, including the children, went to a hearing in early 2023 relating to that matter and while there, mr wemble, ms paige (the father’s mother) and a group of their supporters beat her up and took the children away in a motor vehicle, and that she has not seen them since and has only spoken to them once since then. she says that mr wemble and ms paige are keeping the children in city b, a city in c state in country d. ms bellanger is now in country e, and is seeking for the children to be either taken back to australia or recovered to her in country e, where she says she will organise for them to return to australia. the parents and children are australian citizens. ...
associate: dated: 8 february 2024
dated: 8 february 2024