last updated: 25 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
anders & damus (no 4) [2024] fedcfamc2f 156
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgmentex tempore
judge brown:
a party to a proceeding before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) [that is this division] is not entitled to be represented by another person unless: (a) under the judiciary act 1903, the other person is entitled to practice as a barrister and solicitor, or both, in a federal court, or (b) under the regulations, the other person is taken to be an authorised representative, or (c) another law of the commonwealth authorises the other person to represent the party.   under the judiciary act 1903, the other person is entitled to practice as a barrister and solicitor, or both, in a federal court, or (b) under the regulations, the other person is taken to be an authorised representative, or (c) another law of the commonwealth authorises the other person to represent the party.   under the regulations, the other person is taken to be an authorised representative, or (c) another law of the commonwealth authorises the other person to represent the party.   another law of the commonwealth authorises the other person to represent the party.
a person who is entitled to be heard in a proceeding may conduct the proceedings on the person’s own behalf or be represented by a lawyer.
the test for a reasonable apprehension of bias is whether a fair‑minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that the decision‑maker might not have brought an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the question to be decided. the question is to be answered having regard to the legal, statutory and factual contexts in which the decision is made. the hypothetical observer is taken to know the nature of the decision, the context in which it was made and the circumstances leading to it. a two‑step process is involved. the process requires the identification of what is said might lead the decision‑maker to decide the case other than on its merits. the second requires the articulation of the logical connection between the suggested reason and the feared deviation from that course. a finding of apprehended bias is not to be reached lightly. to the contrary, it must be firmly established. there must be strong grounds for inferring the existence of a reasonable suspicion.
a person whose rights may be directly affected by an issue in a proceeding, and whose participation as a party is necessary for the court to determine all issues in dispute of the proceedings must be included as a party to the proceedings.   the parents of the child, (b) any person in whose favour a parenting order is currently in force in relation to the child, (c) any other person with whom the child lives and who is responsible for the care, welfare and development of the child, (d) if a state child order is currently in place in relation to the child, the prescribed child welfare authority.   any person in whose favour a parenting order is currently in force in relation to the child, (c) any other person with whom the child lives and who is responsible for the care, welfare and development of the child, (d) if a state child order is currently in place in relation to the child, the prescribed child welfare authority.   any other person with whom the child lives and who is responsible for the care, welfare and development of the child, (d) if a state child order is currently in place in relation to the child, the prescribed child welfare authority.   if a state child order is currently in place in relation to the child, the prescribed child welfare authority.
associate: dated: 19 february 2024
dated: 19 february 2024