last updated: 9 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
halligan & weldon [2024] fedcfamc2f 164
orders
the court orders that:  for six hours each alternate week as agreed with the mother and failing agreement each alternate sunday from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (b) during school holidays for one additional day each fortnight as agreed and failing agreement the wednesday following the father's sunday time, from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (c) on father's day from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (d) on christmas day in even years from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (e) on boxing day in odd years from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (f) on the children's birthdays if a weekend day from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm and if a school day from after-school until 6.00 pm. (g) such other time as agreed between the parties.   during school holidays for one additional day each fortnight as agreed and failing agreement the wednesday following the father's sunday time, from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (c) on father's day from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (d) on christmas day in even years from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (e) on boxing day in odd years from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (f) on the children's birthdays if a weekend day from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm and if a school day from after-school until 6.00 pm. (g) such other time as agreed between the parties.   on father's day from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (d) on christmas day in even years from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (e) on boxing day in odd years from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (f) on the children's birthdays if a weekend day from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm and if a school day from after-school until 6.00 pm. (g) such other time as agreed between the parties.   on christmas day in even years from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (e) on boxing day in odd years from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (f) on the children's birthdays if a weekend day from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm and if a school day from after-school until 6.00 pm. (g) such other time as agreed between the parties.   on boxing day in odd years from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, (f) on the children's birthdays if a weekend day from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm and if a school day from after-school until 6.00 pm. (g) such other time as agreed between the parties.   on the children's birthdays if a weekend day from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm and if a school day from after-school until 6.00 pm. (g) such other time as agreed between the parties.   such other time as agreed between the parties.   consuming illicit substances for 24 hours prior to or during any period of time spending with the children, (b) drinking alcohol to excess for twelve hours before or during any time the children are in their care, (c) discussing these proceedings within the presence of the children or allowing any other person to do so, and (d) criticising, denigrating or abusing the other parent in the presence of the children or allowing any other person to do so.   drinking alcohol to excess for twelve hours before or during any time the children are in their care, (c) discussing these proceedings within the presence of the children or allowing any other person to do so, and (d) criticising, denigrating or abusing the other parent in the presence of the children or allowing any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings within the presence of the children or allowing any other person to do so, and (d) criticising, denigrating or abusing the other parent in the presence of the children or allowing any other person to do so.   criticising, denigrating or abusing the other parent in the presence of the children or allowing any other person to do so.
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins
introduction
brief background
the evidence
should the court make an order for equal shared parental responsibility in this case?   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
note: the presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that relates solely to the allocation of parental responsibility for a child as defined in section 61b. it does not provide for a presumption about the amount of time the child spends with each of the parents (this issue is dealt with in section 65daa).   the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence. (3) when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence.   family violence.   when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.
what are the legal principles the court applies in determining where a child should live?
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.
how does the court determine what is in the children’s best interests?
the primary considerations
do the parties’ proposals provide for a meaningful relationship between the children and each of their parents?
ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child.
are the children at risk in either parties’ care?  the father may drink to excess prior to his time with the children or when the children are in his care, (2) the father may use or be affected by the use of illicit drugs when the children are in his care, and (3) the father is likely to bring the children into contact with his partner/ex-partner ms b who has a history of significant mental health issues and illicit drugs use.   the father may use or be affected by the use of illicit drugs when the children are in his care, and (3) the father is likely to bring the children into contact with his partner/ex-partner ms b who has a history of significant mental health issues and illicit drugs use.   the father is likely to bring the children into contact with his partner/ex-partner ms b who has a history of significant mental health issues and illicit drugs use.
the father’s alcohol use
the father’s use of illicit drugs
over the past 5 years, i have been continually controlled by the respondent from being told i am an alcoholic, (i drank non-alcoholic beer for twelve months), to me attending also attended [e program], as requested by the respondent through the family court and now i am being accused as being a drug addict. i have refused to do this last hair follicle test due to the fact i cannot afford it, my parents can't, as the respondent suggested, and i am sick of the controlling nature of the respondent. i am not a drug addict as your respondent claims.
bringing the children into contact with ms b
my relationship with [ms b] is complicated due to [ms b’s] poor mental health following the breakdown of her marriage a couple of years ago when her son, [g], was a premature newborn baby and she discovered her husband had had an affair with another woman who was pregnant to him. [ms b] struggles with severe depression for which she receives treatment and, occasionally when she ceases to take her medication, lapses into illicit drug use. [ms b] and i do not live together but we have a strong friendship. when [ms b’s] mental health is good, our relationship is good. it deteriorates when [ms b’s] mental health deteriorates. even when we are not in a relationship, i want to remain supportive of her and her treatment for her mental health issues.
she [ms b] is having active treatment for her depressive condition and is complying with doctor's orders i remain willing to ensure that the children do not come into contact with [ms b] when her mental health is not good and/or when she under the influence of drugs.
risk analysis
i am not going to be 'told' by the respondent what i can and cannot do when i have my children, as i have constantly stated, they never have and never will be put in any danger.
the additional considerations
the children’s views
the children’s relationship with each parent
the children demonstrated a genuine level of comfort in their interactions with [mr halligan], engaging in frequent eye contact with him while [mr halligan] demonstrated a keen interest in what the children were discussing with him, dividing his time between the children. overall, the observation session was relaxed and enjoyed by both [mr halligan] and the children.
the parents’ ability to meet the needs of the children
the parents’ duty to maintain the children
the children’s indigenous heritage
analysis
associate: dated: 14 february 2024
dated: 14 february 2024