last updated: 17 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kneib & kovacheva [2024] fedcfamc2f 180
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
parental responsibility
spend time with arrangements   commencing 2024, on a day in december nominated by the mother, provided it is within seven (7) days of christmas day, and (b) commencing 2025, on a date nominated by the mother in the month of july.   commencing 2025, on a date nominated by the mother in the month of july.   the mother and the paternal grandmother will communicate via the divvito parenting application. (b) the mother shall give the paternal grandmother at least fourteen (14) days advance notice of the nominated date and location. (c) the mother shall propose three (3) dates and the paternal grandmother shall select one (1).   the mother shall give the paternal grandmother at least fourteen (14) days advance notice of the nominated date and location. (c) the mother shall propose three (3) dates and the paternal grandmother shall select one (1).   the mother shall propose three (3) dates and the paternal grandmother shall select one (1).
communication   for her birthday and at christmas. (b) the communication will be posted to an address nominated by the mother from time to time. (c) within six (6) months of these orders, the mother shall nominate a postal address on the divvito parenting application.   the communication will be posted to an address nominated by the mother from time to time. (c) within six (6) months of these orders, the mother shall nominate a postal address on the divvito parenting application.   within six (6) months of these orders, the mother shall nominate a postal address on the divvito parenting application.
injunctions   removing x from the spend time with location at order 6(b), unless with the written agreement of the mother, (b) passing on to x communication or contact information, such as email addresses or mobile numbers, whether from the father or other members of the paternal family, (c) circulating photographs or video recordings of x to any third party, (d) connecting with x or knowingly allowing any member of the paternal family to connect with x via any social media accounts including but not limited to facebook, instagram, tiktok, snapchat, (e) disclosing to the father any information she might have about x’s residential address, the school she attends, and/or the spend time with location at order 6(b), (f) bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b, (g) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship in the presence or hearing of x, and (h) discussing the these proceedings, or any allegations raised in these proceedings with x.   passing on to x communication or contact information, such as email addresses or mobile numbers, whether from the father or other members of the paternal family, (c) circulating photographs or video recordings of x to any third party, (d) connecting with x or knowingly allowing any member of the paternal family to connect with x via any social media accounts including but not limited to facebook, instagram, tiktok, snapchat, (e) disclosing to the father any information she might have about x’s residential address, the school she attends, and/or the spend time with location at order 6(b), (f) bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b, (g) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship in the presence or hearing of x, and (h) discussing the these proceedings, or any allegations raised in these proceedings with x.   circulating photographs or video recordings of x to any third party, (d) connecting with x or knowingly allowing any member of the paternal family to connect with x via any social media accounts including but not limited to facebook, instagram, tiktok, snapchat, (e) disclosing to the father any information she might have about x’s residential address, the school she attends, and/or the spend time with location at order 6(b), (f) bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b, (g) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship in the presence or hearing of x, and (h) discussing the these proceedings, or any allegations raised in these proceedings with x.   connecting with x or knowingly allowing any member of the paternal family to connect with x via any social media accounts including but not limited to facebook, instagram, tiktok, snapchat, (e) disclosing to the father any information she might have about x’s residential address, the school she attends, and/or the spend time with location at order 6(b), (f) bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b, (g) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship in the presence or hearing of x, and (h) discussing the these proceedings, or any allegations raised in these proceedings with x.   disclosing to the father any information she might have about x’s residential address, the school she attends, and/or the spend time with location at order 6(b), (f) bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b, (g) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship in the presence or hearing of x, and (h) discussing the these proceedings, or any allegations raised in these proceedings with x.   bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b, (g) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship in the presence or hearing of x, and (h) discussing the these proceedings, or any allegations raised in these proceedings with x.   denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship in the presence or hearing of x, and (h) discussing the these proceedings, or any allegations raised in these proceedings with x.   discussing the these proceedings, or any allegations raised in these proceedings with x.   the place of residence of the mother and x, and (b) any school or educational institution attended by x, and (c) any location where the paternal grandmother and x are spending time in accordance with order 5.   any school or educational institution attended by x, and (c) any location where the paternal grandmother and x are spending time in accordance with order 5.   any location where the paternal grandmother and x are spending time in accordance with order 5.
change of name
international travel
therapeutic treatment and release of material   any mental health professional she engages with for therapeutic intervention and treatment, and (b) any mental health professional x is engaged with, or in the future receives therapeutic intervention and treatment from.   any mental health professional x is engaged with, or in the future receives therapeutic intervention and treatment from.
reasons for judgment
introduction  has engaged in family violence, which x has been exposed to, (b) has a propensity to behave in a violent and antisocial manner, and has an inability to regulate his behaviour, (c) completely lacks insight into the impact of his behaviour, and (d) engages with the mother and x in a manner which negatively impacts upon the mother’s mental health and her parenting capacity.   has a propensity to behave in a violent and antisocial manner, and has an inability to regulate his behaviour, (c) completely lacks insight into the impact of his behaviour, and (d) engages with the mother and x in a manner which negatively impacts upon the mother’s mental health and her parenting capacity.   completely lacks insight into the impact of his behaviour, and (d) engages with the mother and x in a manner which negatively impacts upon the mother’s mental health and her parenting capacity.   engages with the mother and x in a manner which negatively impacts upon the mother’s mental health and her parenting capacity.
short history of parties and proceedings   f born 2010, and (b) e born 2021.   e born 2021.   the mother have sole parental responsibility of x. (2) the father to spend time with x overnight and during holidays and special occasions. (3) the parties to communicate only about x and through a parenting application. (4) restraints on both parties in relation to the use of social media and consumption of alcohol and/or illicit substances.   the father to spend time with x overnight and during holidays and special occasions. (3) the parties to communicate only about x and through a parenting application. (4) restraints on both parties in relation to the use of social media and consumption of alcohol and/or illicit substances.   the parties to communicate only about x and through a parenting application. (4) restraints on both parties in relation to the use of social media and consumption of alcohol and/or illicit substances.   restraints on both parties in relation to the use of social media and consumption of alcohol and/or illicit substances.   the spend time arrangements between the father and x contained in the april 2021 orders be suspended. (2) the mother have sole parental responsibility for x. (3) the father spend supervised time with x at the h contact service for 3 hours once per week. (4) the father complete a “managing anger” course. (5) the father be restrained from posting on social media any information about these proceedings or x, and from filming or recording x.   the mother have sole parental responsibility for x. (3) the father spend supervised time with x at the h contact service for 3 hours once per week. (4) the father complete a “managing anger” course. (5) the father be restrained from posting on social media any information about these proceedings or x, and from filming or recording x.   the father spend supervised time with x at the h contact service for 3 hours once per week. (4) the father complete a “managing anger” course. (5) the father be restrained from posting on social media any information about these proceedings or x, and from filming or recording x.   the father complete a “managing anger” course. (5) the father be restrained from posting on social media any information about these proceedings or x, and from filming or recording x.   the father be restrained from posting on social media any information about these proceedings or x, and from filming or recording x.
evidence
relevant facts   the mother claimed she received a call from the maternal grandmother to return home as the father was “going crazy”. when the mother arrived, the father appeared intoxicated, and police were present. on the police’s advice, the mother left with x and f. the mother claimed the father filmed this incident and later sent the recording to members of her family. (b) the father claimed he returned home to find that the mother had left the children in the maternal grandmother’s care. when he asked her to leave, the maternal grandmother called police and falsely claimed a violent altercation had taken place.   the father claimed he returned home to find that the mother had left the children in the maternal grandmother’s care. when he asked her to leave, the maternal grandmother called police and falsely claimed a violent altercation had taken place.   the mother claimed that the father refused to let x go and began filming. when the mother attempted to remove x from the father’s car, the father grabbed her neck or her jumper and pulled her to the ground, causing the mother to lose consciousness. when she came to, she was lying on the bitumen of the carpark, and the father and x were gone. after this incident, the mother experienced blurry vision, dizziness, nausea, and a tingling sensation in her legs, neck, and shoulder. (b) the father claimed that x was very upset and distressed and refused to be returned to the mother. despite her distress, the mother removed x from the father’s car, tearing x’s shirt and jumper. while he was holding x, the mother tried to grab her from him and punched him in the kidney area. x ran from the mother a number of times and, at one point, attempted to run onto the road. she also dropped x and as a result hit her head. when the father returned x to his car, the mother charged at him and attempted to remove x. he then grabbed her shirt from behind and when he let her go, the mother allowed herself to fall. he denied that the mother hit her head or became unconscious.   the father claimed that x was very upset and distressed and refused to be returned to the mother. despite her distress, the mother removed x from the father’s car, tearing x’s shirt and jumper. while he was holding x, the mother tried to grab her from him and punched him in the kidney area. x ran from the mother a number of times and, at one point, attempted to run onto the road. she also dropped x and as a result hit her head. when the father returned x to his car, the mother charged at him and attempted to remove x. he then grabbed her shirt from behind and when he let her go, the mother allowed herself to fall. he denied that the mother hit her head or became unconscious.   the mother is living with x, f, and e. she claims she has a positive co-parenting relationship with mr g and has otherwise not re-partnered since their separation. (b) due to concerns about her safety, the mother was not comfortable disclosing her current residential address or current employer. the mother is working part-time as an educator and studying online. (c) the father lives in a three-bedroom rental property. ms t lives with him. the father has not re-partnered. (d) the father is employed full-time in a trade and earns $1,500. he pays approximately $266 a week in child support for x and claims to be paying off the child support arrears accrued. (e) the paternal grandmother is a health professional with 45 years’ experience and is of good health.   due to concerns about her safety, the mother was not comfortable disclosing her current residential address or current employer. the mother is working part-time as an educator and studying online. (c) the father lives in a three-bedroom rental property. ms t lives with him. the father has not re-partnered. (d) the father is employed full-time in a trade and earns $1,500. he pays approximately $266 a week in child support for x and claims to be paying off the child support arrears accrued. (e) the paternal grandmother is a health professional with 45 years’ experience and is of good health.   the father lives in a three-bedroom rental property. ms t lives with him. the father has not re-partnered. (d) the father is employed full-time in a trade and earns $1,500. he pays approximately $266 a week in child support for x and claims to be paying off the child support arrears accrued. (e) the paternal grandmother is a health professional with 45 years’ experience and is of good health.   the father is employed full-time in a trade and earns $1,500. he pays approximately $266 a week in child support for x and claims to be paying off the child support arrears accrued. (e) the paternal grandmother is a health professional with 45 years’ experience and is of good health.   the paternal grandmother is a health professional with 45 years’ experience and is of good health.
proposals   the mother have sole parental responsibility for x and x live with her. (b) x spend not time with the father. (c) the mother be permitted to travel internationally with x and apply for her passport without the father’s consent. (d) x’s name be changed to “x hornik”. (e) the parties be restrained from denigrating each other or their relatives in the presence or hearing of x. (f) the father be restrained and injuncted from: (i) approaching or entering any premises where x may reside and attend school, and (ii) communicating with any staff at any school x may attend.   x spend not time with the father. (c) the mother be permitted to travel internationally with x and apply for her passport without the father’s consent. (d) x’s name be changed to “x hornik”. (e) the parties be restrained from denigrating each other or their relatives in the presence or hearing of x. (f) the father be restrained and injuncted from: (i) approaching or entering any premises where x may reside and attend school, and (ii) communicating with any staff at any school x may attend.   the mother be permitted to travel internationally with x and apply for her passport without the father’s consent. (d) x’s name be changed to “x hornik”. (e) the parties be restrained from denigrating each other or their relatives in the presence or hearing of x. (f) the father be restrained and injuncted from: (i) approaching or entering any premises where x may reside and attend school, and (ii) communicating with any staff at any school x may attend.   x’s name be changed to “x hornik”. (e) the parties be restrained from denigrating each other or their relatives in the presence or hearing of x. (f) the father be restrained and injuncted from: (i) approaching or entering any premises where x may reside and attend school, and (ii) communicating with any staff at any school x may attend.   the parties be restrained from denigrating each other or their relatives in the presence or hearing of x. (f) the father be restrained and injuncted from: (i) approaching or entering any premises where x may reside and attend school, and (ii) communicating with any staff at any school x may attend.   the father be restrained and injuncted from: (i) approaching or entering any premises where x may reside and attend school, and (ii) communicating with any staff at any school x may attend.   approaching or entering any premises where x may reside and attend school, and (ii) communicating with any staff at any school x may attend.  ) communicating with any staff at any school x may attend.   the father have sole parental responsibility of x, and x live with him. (b) x spend time with the mother: (i) on a bi-weekly schedule (until x starts school): (a) week 1: from after daycare friday until before daycare monday. (b) week 2: from after daycare thursday until 6.00 pm friday. (ii) when x commences school: from after school (or 6.00 pm) thursday to before school monday. (c) if the court were to order that x live with the mother, then the above spend time arrangement apply to the father. (d) x’s name remains unchanged. (e) changeover to occur at daycare/school or suburb n mcdonald’s on non-school days, and to be facilitated by the paternal grandmother. (f) the parties to communicate about issues concerning x only though the parenting application, “divvito” (“the divvito app”).   x spend time with the mother: (i) on a bi-weekly schedule (until x starts school): (a) week 1: from after daycare friday until before daycare monday. (b) week 2: from after daycare thursday until 6.00 pm friday. (ii) when x commences school: from after school (or 6.00 pm) thursday to before school monday. (c) if the court were to order that x live with the mother, then the above spend time arrangement apply to the father. (d) x’s name remains unchanged. (e) changeover to occur at daycare/school or suburb n mcdonald’s on non-school days, and to be facilitated by the paternal grandmother. (f) the parties to communicate about issues concerning x only though the parenting application, “divvito” (“the divvito app”).   on a bi-weekly schedule (until x starts school): (a) week 1: from after daycare friday until before daycare monday. (b) week 2: from after daycare thursday until 6.00 pm friday. (ii) when x commences school: from after school (or 6.00 pm) thursday to before school monday.  ) when x commences school: from after school (or 6.00 pm) thursday to before school monday.   if the court were to order that x live with the mother, then the above spend time arrangement apply to the father. (d) x’s name remains unchanged. (e) changeover to occur at daycare/school or suburb n mcdonald’s on non-school days, and to be facilitated by the paternal grandmother. (f) the parties to communicate about issues concerning x only though the parenting application, “divvito” (“the divvito app”).   x’s name remains unchanged. (e) changeover to occur at daycare/school or suburb n mcdonald’s on non-school days, and to be facilitated by the paternal grandmother. (f) the parties to communicate about issues concerning x only though the parenting application, “divvito” (“the divvito app”).   changeover to occur at daycare/school or suburb n mcdonald’s on non-school days, and to be facilitated by the paternal grandmother. (f) the parties to communicate about issues concerning x only though the parenting application, “divvito” (“the divvito app”).   the parties to communicate about issues concerning x only though the parenting application, “divvito” (“the divvito app”).   x spend time with her: (i) every six weeks on saturday from 8.00 am to 11.00 am. (ii) on the saturday immediately following x’s birthday from 8.00 am to 4.00 pm. (iii) on christmas eve, from 8.00 am to 11.00 am. (iv) at all such other times as agreed between the paternal grandmother and the mother. (v) for makeup time to occur the first saturday following a cancelled visit. (b) changeover to occur at suburb n mcdonald’s. (c) x to have facetime communication with the paternal grandmother each alternate wednesday from 5.00 pm to 5.45 pm. (d) the paternal grandmother be permitted to attend events at x’s school that grandparents are ordinarily invited. (e) the paternal grandmother and the mother to communicate via text message. (f) the mother to consider whether x can attend special occasions and birthdays of her paternal cousins.   every six weeks on saturday from 8.00 am to 11.00 am. (ii) on the saturday immediately following x’s birthday from 8.00 am to 4.00 pm. (iii) on christmas eve, from 8.00 am to 11.00 am. (iv) at all such other times as agreed between the paternal grandmother and the mother. (v) for makeup time to occur the first saturday following a cancelled visit.  ) on the saturday immediately following x’s birthday from 8.00 am to 4.00 pm. (iii) on christmas eve, from 8.00 am to 11.00 am. (iv) at all such other times as agreed between the paternal grandmother and the mother. (v) for makeup time to occur the first saturday following a cancelled visit.  i) on christmas eve, from 8.00 am to 11.00 am. (iv) at all such other times as agreed between the paternal grandmother and the mother. (v) for makeup time to occur the first saturday following a cancelled visit.  ) at all such other times as agreed between the paternal grandmother and the mother. (v) for makeup time to occur the first saturday following a cancelled visit.   for makeup time to occur the first saturday following a cancelled visit.   changeover to occur at suburb n mcdonald’s. (c) x to have facetime communication with the paternal grandmother each alternate wednesday from 5.00 pm to 5.45 pm. (d) the paternal grandmother be permitted to attend events at x’s school that grandparents are ordinarily invited. (e) the paternal grandmother and the mother to communicate via text message. (f) the mother to consider whether x can attend special occasions and birthdays of her paternal cousins.   x to have facetime communication with the paternal grandmother each alternate wednesday from 5.00 pm to 5.45 pm. (d) the paternal grandmother be permitted to attend events at x’s school that grandparents are ordinarily invited. (e) the paternal grandmother and the mother to communicate via text message. (f) the mother to consider whether x can attend special occasions and birthdays of her paternal cousins.   the paternal grandmother be permitted to attend events at x’s school that grandparents are ordinarily invited. (e) the paternal grandmother and the mother to communicate via text message. (f) the mother to consider whether x can attend special occasions and birthdays of her paternal cousins.   the paternal grandmother and the mother to communicate via text message. (f) the mother to consider whether x can attend special occasions and birthdays of her paternal cousins.   the mother to consider whether x can attend special occasions and birthdays of her paternal cousins.   the mother have sole parental responsibility for x, and x live with her. (b) x spend no time with the father, but he be permitted to send cards and letters to x on special occasions for her birthday and christmas only. (c) the mother attend therapy with a registered psychologist and continue until no longer recommended by the psychologist. (d) the paternal grandmother spend time with x every six weeks, for no more than six hours, and that: (i) the location be nominated by the mother, (ii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from including other members of the paternal family in visits, except for b, (iii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from knowingly or intentionally showing or sharing photographs of x and the locations of visits to any third party, (iv) both the paternal grandmother and the mother be restrained from denigrating each other in x’s presence or within her hearing. (e) the paternal grandmother and the mother communicate through the divvito app. (f) the parties be restrained from denigrating the other or members of their respective families in the presence of or hearing of x. (g) the parties share the icl’s costs.   x spend no time with the father, but he be permitted to send cards and letters to x on special occasions for her birthday and christmas only. (c) the mother attend therapy with a registered psychologist and continue until no longer recommended by the psychologist. (d) the paternal grandmother spend time with x every six weeks, for no more than six hours, and that: (i) the location be nominated by the mother, (ii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from including other members of the paternal family in visits, except for b, (iii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from knowingly or intentionally showing or sharing photographs of x and the locations of visits to any third party, (iv) both the paternal grandmother and the mother be restrained from denigrating each other in x’s presence or within her hearing. (e) the paternal grandmother and the mother communicate through the divvito app. (f) the parties be restrained from denigrating the other or members of their respective families in the presence of or hearing of x. (g) the parties share the icl’s costs.   the mother attend therapy with a registered psychologist and continue until no longer recommended by the psychologist. (d) the paternal grandmother spend time with x every six weeks, for no more than six hours, and that: (i) the location be nominated by the mother, (ii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from including other members of the paternal family in visits, except for b, (iii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from knowingly or intentionally showing or sharing photographs of x and the locations of visits to any third party, (iv) both the paternal grandmother and the mother be restrained from denigrating each other in x’s presence or within her hearing. (e) the paternal grandmother and the mother communicate through the divvito app. (f) the parties be restrained from denigrating the other or members of their respective families in the presence of or hearing of x. (g) the parties share the icl’s costs.   the paternal grandmother spend time with x every six weeks, for no more than six hours, and that: (i) the location be nominated by the mother, (ii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from including other members of the paternal family in visits, except for b, (iii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from knowingly or intentionally showing or sharing photographs of x and the locations of visits to any third party, (iv) both the paternal grandmother and the mother be restrained from denigrating each other in x’s presence or within her hearing. (e) the paternal grandmother and the mother communicate through the divvito app. (f) the parties be restrained from denigrating the other or members of their respective families in the presence of or hearing of x. (g) the parties share the icl’s costs.   the location be nominated by the mother, (ii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from including other members of the paternal family in visits, except for b, (iii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from knowingly or intentionally showing or sharing photographs of x and the locations of visits to any third party, (iv) both the paternal grandmother and the mother be restrained from denigrating each other in x’s presence or within her hearing.  ) the paternal grandmother be restrained from including other members of the paternal family in visits, except for b, (iii) the paternal grandmother be restrained from knowingly or intentionally showing or sharing photographs of x and the locations of visits to any third party, (iv) both the paternal grandmother and the mother be restrained from denigrating each other in x’s presence or within her hearing.  i) the paternal grandmother be restrained from knowingly or intentionally showing or sharing photographs of x and the locations of visits to any third party, (iv) both the paternal grandmother and the mother be restrained from denigrating each other in x’s presence or within her hearing.  ) both the paternal grandmother and the mother be restrained from denigrating each other in x’s presence or within her hearing.   the paternal grandmother and the mother communicate through the divvito app. (f) the parties be restrained from denigrating the other or members of their respective families in the presence of or hearing of x. (g) the parties share the icl’s costs.   the parties be restrained from denigrating the other or members of their respective families in the presence of or hearing of x. (g) the parties share the icl’s costs.   the parties share the icl’s costs.
credit
applicable legal principles   assess whether that risk is an acceptable risk or unacceptable risk, (b) if it is assessed as an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not that risk is capable of being managed or ameliorated by appropriate orders (see blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 at [83]), and (c) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in x’s best interests.   if it is assessed as an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not that risk is capable of being managed or ameliorated by appropriate orders (see blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 at [83]), and (c) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in x’s best interests.   decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in x’s best interests.
x s] demeanour on the day of observations was of concern. while she appeared to enjoy playing with each of her parents and was happy to see them, she seemed generally wary and was not relaxed and well-settled. ... [x’s] developmental trajectory has likely been disrupted by this and she is therefore at risk of difficulties in regulating emotions and in coping with relationships. it is also likely that [x] has experienced a level of chronic stress and this may create expectations about the course of future conflict experiences, rendering her more distressed and threatened when faced with new instances of conflict. (updated family report, paragraph 74)
x’s parents
successfully elevated himself by bribing her with toys and where the father is using [x] to push his own agenda, which i believe is to destroy me as a mother, my credibility and take over the primary care of [x].
acted protectively of [x] by withholding contact between [x] and her father following the incident [in mid] 2021, and after hearing [x] was witness to her father assaulting a man while intoxicated. it is noted that jcprp does not have access to this information from a third party, only [ms kovacheva]. [ms kovacheva] has taken similar protective steps in the past and more recently when she contacted the police after experiencing threats and violence perpetrated by [mr kneib]. [ms kovacheva] has extended the avo and requested [mr kneib] not have any contact with her, which ensures her safety and also ensures [x] will not be exposed to incidents of violence perpetrated by [mr kneib] at handover.
x’s relationship with her paternal family
discussion of risk   the father has engaged in family violence, which x has been exposed to. (2) the father has a propensity to behave in a violent and antisocial manner and has an inability to regulate his behaviour. (3) the father lacks any insight into his behaviour. (4) the father engages with the mother and x in a manner which negatively impacts upon the mother’s mental health, and this has the potential to impact negatively on her parenting capacity.   the father has a propensity to behave in a violent and antisocial manner and has an inability to regulate his behaviour. (3) the father lacks any insight into his behaviour. (4) the father engages with the mother and x in a manner which negatively impacts upon the mother’s mental health, and this has the potential to impact negatively on her parenting capacity.   the father lacks any insight into his behaviour. (4) the father engages with the mother and x in a manner which negatively impacts upon the mother’s mental health, and this has the potential to impact negatively on her parenting capacity.   the father engages with the mother and x in a manner which negatively impacts upon the mother’s mental health, and this has the potential to impact negatively on her parenting capacity.
the father has engaged in family violence, which x (and other members of the household) have been exposed to  the skip bin incident in late 2017. the mother alleged that this incident occurred after the father confronted her while she was breastfeeding x. (b) the first strangling incident in 2018. the mother alleged that at the time she was holding x, who was only an infant at the time. (c) in early 2018, the kettle incident occurred. the mother alleged that x was hit by a fragment of the kettle after the father threw it at her. (d) in mid-2018, the second strangling incident occurred. (e) in mid-2021, the suburb n mcdonald’s incident occurred.   the first strangling incident in 2018. the mother alleged that at the time she was holding x, who was only an infant at the time. (c) in early 2018, the kettle incident occurred. the mother alleged that x was hit by a fragment of the kettle after the father threw it at her. (d) in mid-2018, the second strangling incident occurred. (e) in mid-2021, the suburb n mcdonald’s incident occurred.   in early 2018, the kettle incident occurred. the mother alleged that x was hit by a fragment of the kettle after the father threw it at her. (d) in mid-2018, the second strangling incident occurred. (e) in mid-2021, the suburb n mcdonald’s incident occurred.   in mid-2018, the second strangling incident occurred. (e) in mid-2021, the suburb n mcdonald’s incident occurred.   in mid-2021, the suburb n mcdonald’s incident occurred.   on the following dates, the father withheld x from her as a deliberate means of exercising control over her: 18 november 2018, 25 may 2019, 1 december 2019, 26 december 2019, 28 april 2021, 29 april 2021, and 4 june 2021. (b) the father has engaged in activities to monitor her movements. they include that: (i) he made enquiries of an ex-employee of the family business to find out her address, (ii) he conspired with the paternal grandmother to hire a private investigator to follow her, monitor her movements, and prepare the k ltd report, and (iii) she saw the father drive past her home on 24 april 2021. (c) the father constantly recorded her and/or his dealings with her without her consent, including at changeovers. (d) the father harassed people close to the mother, including the maternal grandmother, her sister, and mr g, as well as threatening mr g’s family. (e) the father denigrated her on his facebook page on a number of occasions in 2019.   the father has engaged in activities to monitor her movements. they include that: (i) he made enquiries of an ex-employee of the family business to find out her address, (ii) he conspired with the paternal grandmother to hire a private investigator to follow her, monitor her movements, and prepare the k ltd report, and (iii) she saw the father drive past her home on 24 april 2021. (c) the father constantly recorded her and/or his dealings with her without her consent, including at changeovers. (d) the father harassed people close to the mother, including the maternal grandmother, her sister, and mr g, as well as threatening mr g’s family. (e) the father denigrated her on his facebook page on a number of occasions in 2019.   he made enquiries of an ex-employee of the family business to find out her address, (ii) he conspired with the paternal grandmother to hire a private investigator to follow her, monitor her movements, and prepare the k ltd report, and (iii) she saw the father drive past her home on 24 april 2021.  ) he conspired with the paternal grandmother to hire a private investigator to follow her, monitor her movements, and prepare the k ltd report, and (iii) she saw the father drive past her home on 24 april 2021.  i) she saw the father drive past her home on 24 april 2021.   the father constantly recorded her and/or his dealings with her without her consent, including at changeovers. (d) the father harassed people close to the mother, including the maternal grandmother, her sister, and mr g, as well as threatening mr g’s family. (e) the father denigrated her on his facebook page on a number of occasions in 2019.   the father harassed people close to the mother, including the maternal grandmother, her sister, and mr g, as well as threatening mr g’s family. (e) the father denigrated her on his facebook page on a number of occasions in 2019.   the father denigrated her on his facebook page on a number of occasions in 2019.   he made no reference to the skip bin incident in his affidavit. rather, he referred to an incident in 2017 where he alleged being headbutted by the maternal grandfather while he was holding x. the father’s dates for this incident appear to accord with the skip bin incident, however, both parties gave very different versions of what transpired. under cross-examination, he agreed that the allegations arose from the same event but denied making the threats attributed to him or pushing the maternal grandmother into a skip bin. (b) he denied throwing a kettle (or any object) at the mother under cross-examination. he also makes no reference to the kettle incident in his affidavit. (c) he denied the first strangling incident and relied on the fact that he was only convicted for common assault. he also emphasised that the mother’s complaint was made after their relationship had ended. he told the family report writer that any bruises the mother may have had on her neck “were possibly the result of her sexual promiscuity, and denied that he was in any way responsible”. (d) he denied the second strangling incident, again relying on the outcome of local court proceedings where he was convicted of common assault and not strangulation. (e) he denied the mother’s account of the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. his evidence was that he pled not guilty because he was acting in self-defence as he was protecting x from the mother. (f) he reported to the family report writer that the advo issued in 2018 was a result of the mother “making false reports”. he was also unhappy about the loss of his firearms licence.   he denied throwing a kettle (or any object) at the mother under cross-examination. he also makes no reference to the kettle incident in his affidavit. (c) he denied the first strangling incident and relied on the fact that he was only convicted for common assault. he also emphasised that the mother’s complaint was made after their relationship had ended. he told the family report writer that any bruises the mother may have had on her neck “were possibly the result of her sexual promiscuity, and denied that he was in any way responsible”. (d) he denied the second strangling incident, again relying on the outcome of local court proceedings where he was convicted of common assault and not strangulation. (e) he denied the mother’s account of the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. his evidence was that he pled not guilty because he was acting in self-defence as he was protecting x from the mother. (f) he reported to the family report writer that the advo issued in 2018 was a result of the mother “making false reports”. he was also unhappy about the loss of his firearms licence.   he denied the first strangling incident and relied on the fact that he was only convicted for common assault. he also emphasised that the mother’s complaint was made after their relationship had ended. he told the family report writer that any bruises the mother may have had on her neck “were possibly the result of her sexual promiscuity, and denied that he was in any way responsible”. (d) he denied the second strangling incident, again relying on the outcome of local court proceedings where he was convicted of common assault and not strangulation. (e) he denied the mother’s account of the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. his evidence was that he pled not guilty because he was acting in self-defence as he was protecting x from the mother. (f) he reported to the family report writer that the advo issued in 2018 was a result of the mother “making false reports”. he was also unhappy about the loss of his firearms licence.   he denied the second strangling incident, again relying on the outcome of local court proceedings where he was convicted of common assault and not strangulation. (e) he denied the mother’s account of the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. his evidence was that he pled not guilty because he was acting in self-defence as he was protecting x from the mother. (f) he reported to the family report writer that the advo issued in 2018 was a result of the mother “making false reports”. he was also unhappy about the loss of his firearms licence.   he denied the mother’s account of the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. his evidence was that he pled not guilty because he was acting in self-defence as he was protecting x from the mother. (f) he reported to the family report writer that the advo issued in 2018 was a result of the mother “making false reports”. he was also unhappy about the loss of his firearms licence.   he reported to the family report writer that the advo issued in 2018 was a result of the mother “making false reports”. he was also unhappy about the loss of his firearms licence.
other than this pending criminal matter, i have not been convicted with any other offences. i have never been incarcerated nor found guilty of an assault by strangulation [in late] 2018 ...   the mother “stalks” him on facebook and messaged his friends “to say how horrible i am”. (b) the maternal grandmother attacked him in late 2017 while he was holding x, and that he then “banned” her from coming to the home. (c) the maternal grandfather threatened to shoot him. (d) during 2019, the mother constantly threatened to put him in prison. (e) in mid-2021, the mother posted on facebook about the father’s behaviour and the “system” failing. the father believed that this was the mother attempting to instigate further allegations against him.   the maternal grandmother attacked him in late 2017 while he was holding x, and that he then “banned” her from coming to the home. (c) the maternal grandfather threatened to shoot him. (d) during 2019, the mother constantly threatened to put him in prison. (e) in mid-2021, the mother posted on facebook about the father’s behaviour and the “system” failing. the father believed that this was the mother attempting to instigate further allegations against him.   the maternal grandfather threatened to shoot him. (d) during 2019, the mother constantly threatened to put him in prison. (e) in mid-2021, the mother posted on facebook about the father’s behaviour and the “system” failing. the father believed that this was the mother attempting to instigate further allegations against him.   during 2019, the mother constantly threatened to put him in prison. (e) in mid-2021, the mother posted on facebook about the father’s behaviour and the “system” failing. the father believed that this was the mother attempting to instigate further allegations against him.   in mid-2021, the mother posted on facebook about the father’s behaviour and the “system” failing. the father believed that this was the mother attempting to instigate further allegations against him.   x was present during the skip bin incident. (b) x was struck by a broken fragment during the kettle incident. (c) x was present during the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. the mother said that when x was returned to her care in mid-2021, x told her to go to the hospital because “daddy punched you. yeah, mum, you were on mcdonald’s road”. (d) f was present and came to the mother’s defence on both strangling incidents in 2018. (e) x witnessed the father’s violence towards mr m during the adelaide incident. in mid‑2021, the evening when x was returned to her care, the mother heard x say to f: “[f], i am going to punch you so hard i will make you bleed.”   x was struck by a broken fragment during the kettle incident. (c) x was present during the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. the mother said that when x was returned to her care in mid-2021, x told her to go to the hospital because “daddy punched you. yeah, mum, you were on mcdonald’s road”. (d) f was present and came to the mother’s defence on both strangling incidents in 2018. (e) x witnessed the father’s violence towards mr m during the adelaide incident. in mid‑2021, the evening when x was returned to her care, the mother heard x say to f: “[f], i am going to punch you so hard i will make you bleed.”   x was present during the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. the mother said that when x was returned to her care in mid-2021, x told her to go to the hospital because “daddy punched you. yeah, mum, you were on mcdonald’s road”. (d) f was present and came to the mother’s defence on both strangling incidents in 2018. (e) x witnessed the father’s violence towards mr m during the adelaide incident. in mid‑2021, the evening when x was returned to her care, the mother heard x say to f: “[f], i am going to punch you so hard i will make you bleed.”   f was present and came to the mother’s defence on both strangling incidents in 2018. (e) x witnessed the father’s violence towards mr m during the adelaide incident. in mid‑2021, the evening when x was returned to her care, the mother heard x say to f: “[f], i am going to punch you so hard i will make you bleed.”   x witnessed the father’s violence towards mr m during the adelaide incident. in mid‑2021, the evening when x was returned to her care, the mother heard x say to f: “[f], i am going to punch you so hard i will make you bleed.”   he deposed at paragraph 10 of his affidavit, to a violent altercation with the maternal grandfather in late 2017:
the maternal grandfather and i were having a disagreement due to him telling me that i was not a good provider for my family. the maternal grandfather was notably inebriated and approached my face and started making violent threats. i attempted to make space between him and i, in an attempt to deescalate the situation. the maternal grandfather was angered by this and proceeded to headbutt me on my forehead. the assault caused heavy bleeding and a scar on my forehead still visible today...this assault occurred whilst i was holding [x] in my arms.   following their separation in november 2018, he deposed that the mother returned to the home shortly after to collect some belongings. he took x out of the car she had been left in. he alleged that the mother started slapping him and kneed him in the groin, whilst he was holding x. (c) under cross-examination, he agreed that x had been exposed to the parental conflict and “some things”.   under cross-examination, he agreed that x had been exposed to the parental conflict and “some things”.
police and corrective services material   be of good behaviour and not commit any offences, (b) complete a term of community service, and (c) not drink alcohol.   complete a term of community service, and (c) not drink alcohol.   not drink alcohol.
facebook posts   in mid-2019, the father posted a youtube clip title: “mom [sic] denies coaching daughter into making molestations accusations”, with the following comment:
i know a pair of women that done exactly this to a three year old just to gain control and push a father out of their child’s lives.   in or around mid-2019, the father posted:
well this week is two months [x] has been hidden from her dad, no contact, no reason, no explanation, no reason, no face time nothing [...]. (as per the original)   in mid-2019, the father posted:
well it’s fast approaching to 3 months [x] has been hidden from her father and court is next week [...], how disgusting and embarrassing and sad for a mother to have to be court ordered to let her children spend time with their father [...]   in late 2019, the father posted asking his friends to attend the “federal circuit court [...]” in early 2020. i note that the first set of proceedings was listed before his honour judge newbrun for a directions hearing that day.
jcprp records and investigation   he hated having to record those situations, but x would not have seen him filming during the suburb n mcdonald’s incident as he was inside the restaurant at that point. (b) he filmed the sexual abuse disclosure by x as evidence, justifying this by stating: “i am trying to understand your decision making. in a female bias system, what evidence is there without filming”. (c) when he was advised by ms l that filming x when she was upset or crying could be both psychologically and emotionally harmful, he remarked: “i find that absolutely crazy”.   he filmed the sexual abuse disclosure by x as evidence, justifying this by stating: “i am trying to understand your decision making. in a female bias system, what evidence is there without filming”. (c) when he was advised by ms l that filming x when she was upset or crying could be both psychologically and emotionally harmful, he remarked: “i find that absolutely crazy”.   when he was advised by ms l that filming x when she was upset or crying could be both psychologically and emotionally harmful, he remarked: “i find that absolutely crazy”.   kneib] is continuing to display violence and control towards [ms kovacheva], such as threats, stalking, intimidation, and actual physical abuse. evidence of this was in the video [mr kneib] provided to jcprp caseworker of the handover incident where he stands over [ms kovacheva], picks [x] up and walks away from [ms kovacheva], and follows [ms kovacheva] across the car park, while yelling out to [ms kovacheva]. [mr kneib] has also sent jcprp caseworker pictures of his text messages to [ms kovacheva], a copy of the findings from his private investigator which includes images of him, [ms kovacheva] and [x] at handover and [ms kovacheva’s] address. [ms kovacheva] has also advised [mr kneib] recently made threats to kill [mr g] and [mr g’s] father, has threatened her and her parents in the past, has also previously confronted [mr g’s] ex-partner accusing her of being abusive, and also confronted [mr g’s] father at a pub and at his workplace.
often result in the child/young person having difficulty regulating their emotions, and they may learn that violence is an appropriate way to respond to uncomfortable emotions or problems...a child may act out, overreact, be hostile, impulsive, show aggression or defiance as a result of having been exposed to violence. this is particularly relevant for [x] and is evidenced in her comments about using her hands to manage conflict, and her use of physical violence towards her sister such as hitting, kicking, biting and punching...ongoing exposure to such conflict, which dcj records reflect has been raised as a worry since 2018, is also likely to have had a significant emotional impact on [x].
therapeutic intervention, notes, and reports
conclusions   ... family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful.  phasis in original)  he assessment of whether conduct that falls within one of the provided examples constitutes family violence as defined in s 4ab(1) of the act necessarily requires that conduct to be considered in the context in which it occurred.   the father did withhold x from the mother on a number of occasions with the purpose of coercing the mother and exercising control over her. (b) the father has engaged in activities to monitor the mother’s movements. surveillance is part of a pattern of coercive control. that his conduct made the mother feel anxious and intimidated at times is understandable. (c) the father denigrated the mother on his facebook page on a number of occasions in 2019.   the father has engaged in activities to monitor the mother’s movements. surveillance is part of a pattern of coercive control. that his conduct made the mother feel anxious and intimidated at times is understandable. (c) the father denigrated the mother on his facebook page on a number of occasions in 2019.   the father denigrated the mother on his facebook page on a number of occasions in 2019.
their inability to maintain even a vestige of a co-parenting relationship, has meant that [x] has been subjected to conflict in which she has witnessed physical injury, verbal assaults and an inability to resolve matters in a child-focussed manner.   the father has been a persistent perpetrator of family violence against the mother since at least 2018. (b) x has been present and exposed to family violence. (c) the father’s propensity to commit family violence poses a risk to x.   x has been present and exposed to family violence. (c) the father’s propensity to commit family violence poses a risk to x.   the father’s propensity to commit family violence poses a risk to x.
the father has a propensity to behave in a violent and/or antisocial manner and an inability to regulate his behaviour  the father has been observed to be unable to regulate his behaviour in an appropriate manner. she said that this was well observed and documented during his interactions with dcj in 2021. she set out her concerns in detail at paragraph 98 of her affidavit. (b) the mother was especially concerned about the father’s conduct during the weekend of the adelaide incident. in mid-2021, the mother claimed she spoke with mr m who informed her that the father had seriously assaulted him. mr m also told the mother that the father was under the influence of alcohol and x was present when the assault took place. mr m was not on affidavit. (c) the father misuses alcohol and his angry outbursts occur when he is under the influence of alcohol. she also said that his consumption of alcohol has placed him in breach of his undertaking to not consume alcohol to excess when x is in his care, and more recently, in breach of the ico he is subject to. (d) the father has a history of non-compliance with court orders, including that: (i) he retained x in his care for five consecutive days in december 2019. (ii) he removed x from daycare without the mother’s consent, and withheld x from the mother on 28 april 2021, 29 april 2021, and 4 june 2021.   the mother was especially concerned about the father’s conduct during the weekend of the adelaide incident. in mid-2021, the mother claimed she spoke with mr m who informed her that the father had seriously assaulted him. mr m also told the mother that the father was under the influence of alcohol and x was present when the assault took place. mr m was not on affidavit. (c) the father misuses alcohol and his angry outbursts occur when he is under the influence of alcohol. she also said that his consumption of alcohol has placed him in breach of his undertaking to not consume alcohol to excess when x is in his care, and more recently, in breach of the ico he is subject to. (d) the father has a history of non-compliance with court orders, including that: (i) he retained x in his care for five consecutive days in december 2019. (ii) he removed x from daycare without the mother’s consent, and withheld x from the mother on 28 april 2021, 29 april 2021, and 4 june 2021.   the father misuses alcohol and his angry outbursts occur when he is under the influence of alcohol. she also said that his consumption of alcohol has placed him in breach of his undertaking to not consume alcohol to excess when x is in his care, and more recently, in breach of the ico he is subject to. (d) the father has a history of non-compliance with court orders, including that: (i) he retained x in his care for five consecutive days in december 2019. (ii) he removed x from daycare without the mother’s consent, and withheld x from the mother on 28 april 2021, 29 april 2021, and 4 june 2021.   the father has a history of non-compliance with court orders, including that: (i) he retained x in his care for five consecutive days in december 2019. (ii) he removed x from daycare without the mother’s consent, and withheld x from the mother on 28 april 2021, 29 april 2021, and 4 june 2021.   he retained x in his care for five consecutive days in december 2019. (ii) he removed x from daycare without the mother’s consent, and withheld x from the mother on 28 april 2021, 29 april 2021, and 4 june 2021.  ) he removed x from daycare without the mother’s consent, and withheld x from the mother on 28 april 2021, 29 april 2021, and 4 june 2021.   the details surrounding the adelaide incident are disputed. the father agreed that he had consumed alcohol, but he was not inebriated when the altercation with mr m took place. he claimed that his alcohol consumption did not place him over the legal driving limit. he said that he was attacked by mr m, who lunged at him and was injured when he fell and hit his head. the father expressed a belief that the mother coached mr m into attacking him or to make him appear violent. (b) the father said that he did not have any dependency on alcohol or consumed alcohol excessively. he deposed that, due to the nature of his employment, he is subjected to onsite drug testing and has never tested positive for any illicit substances. (c) the father said he had no other criminal offences aside from the criminal matters related to the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. (d) he denied not complying with court orders and argued that the mother has a history of non-compliance and belligerence herself.   the father said that he did not have any dependency on alcohol or consumed alcohol excessively. he deposed that, due to the nature of his employment, he is subjected to onsite drug testing and has never tested positive for any illicit substances. (c) the father said he had no other criminal offences aside from the criminal matters related to the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. (d) he denied not complying with court orders and argued that the mother has a history of non-compliance and belligerence herself.   the father said he had no other criminal offences aside from the criminal matters related to the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. (d) he denied not complying with court orders and argued that the mother has a history of non-compliance and belligerence herself.   he denied not complying with court orders and argued that the mother has a history of non-compliance and belligerence herself.
police records   he was convicted in 2001 for a driving offence and charged in 2014 for refusing or failing to submit to a breath test. (b) he has been charged with a range of offences that could be described as engaging in antisocial behaviour. for example, destroying property and using offensive language in or near a public place. (c) he has twice been convicted of contravening an advo.   he has been charged with a range of offences that could be described as engaging in antisocial behaviour. for example, destroying property and using offensive language in or near a public place. (c) he has twice been convicted of contravening an advo.   he has twice been convicted of contravening an advo.
other evidence about alcohol consumption
other evidence about antisocial behaviour and disregard for court orders   of the mother: (i) “that’s not a good breakfast.” (to x) (ii) “they are dirty, is mummy not cleaning them?” (to x about her ears) (iii) “your mum does them too loose.” (when tightening x’s shoelaces) (b) inappropriate comments to h contact service staff: (i) “this is so controlling, i don’t know how this is in the best interest [sic] of the child” (ii) “this is child trafficking this whole process is money making scheme” (iii) “this whole system that you are a part of is corrupt. ... i don’t know how you can work for a system like this, do you have children?” (iv) “you are just another part of a corrupt system so you are going to say anything, it is a money-making system” (v) “is some of her behaviour concerning[?] ... it’s from the mother’s side, they have no respect for each other” (in relation to x’s behaviour)   “that’s not a good breakfast.” (to x) (ii) “they are dirty, is mummy not cleaning them?” (to x about her ears) (iii) “your mum does them too loose.” (when tightening x’s shoelaces)  ) “they are dirty, is mummy not cleaning them?” (to x about her ears) (iii) “your mum does them too loose.” (when tightening x’s shoelaces)  i) “your mum does them too loose.” (when tightening x’s shoelaces)   inappropriate comments to h contact service staff: (i) “this is so controlling, i don’t know how this is in the best interest [sic] of the child” (ii) “this is child trafficking this whole process is money making scheme” (iii) “this whole system that you are a part of is corrupt. ... i don’t know how you can work for a system like this, do you have children?” (iv) “you are just another part of a corrupt system so you are going to say anything, it is a money-making system” (v) “is some of her behaviour concerning[?] ... it’s from the mother’s side, they have no respect for each other” (in relation to x’s behaviour)   “this is so controlling, i don’t know how this is in the best interest [sic] of the child” (ii) “this is child trafficking this whole process is money making scheme” (iii) “this whole system that you are a part of is corrupt. ... i don’t know how you can work for a system like this, do you have children?” (iv) “you are just another part of a corrupt system so you are going to say anything, it is a money-making system” (v) “is some of her behaviour concerning[?] ... it’s from the mother’s side, they have no respect for each other” (in relation to x’s behaviour)  ) “this is child trafficking this whole process is money making scheme” (iii) “this whole system that you are a part of is corrupt. ... i don’t know how you can work for a system like this, do you have children?” (iv) “you are just another part of a corrupt system so you are going to say anything, it is a money-making system” (v) “is some of her behaviour concerning[?] ... it’s from the mother’s side, they have no respect for each other” (in relation to x’s behaviour)  i) “this whole system that you are a part of is corrupt. ... i don’t know how you can work for a system like this, do you have children?” (iv) “you are just another part of a corrupt system so you are going to say anything, it is a money-making system” (v) “is some of her behaviour concerning[?] ... it’s from the mother’s side, they have no respect for each other” (in relation to x’s behaviour)  ) “you are just another part of a corrupt system so you are going to say anything, it is a money-making system” (v) “is some of her behaviour concerning[?] ... it’s from the mother’s side, they have no respect for each other” (in relation to x’s behaviour)   “is some of her behaviour concerning[?] ... it’s from the mother’s side, they have no respect for each other” (in relation to x’s behaviour)   the father has a history of engaging in antisocial and/or destructive behaviour, often when he has consumed alcohol. (b) the father, at times, has difficulty regulating his behaviour. (c) the father demonstrated no appreciation or understanding of the importance of his need to comply with court orders, undertakings, and other legal obligations. (d) the father has made poor decisions and has exposed x to risks of harm that those various undertakings and court orders were trying to protect her from.   the father, at times, has difficulty regulating his behaviour. (c) the father demonstrated no appreciation or understanding of the importance of his need to comply with court orders, undertakings, and other legal obligations. (d) the father has made poor decisions and has exposed x to risks of harm that those various undertakings and court orders were trying to protect her from.   the father demonstrated no appreciation or understanding of the importance of his need to comply with court orders, undertakings, and other legal obligations. (d) the father has made poor decisions and has exposed x to risks of harm that those various undertakings and court orders were trying to protect her from.   the father has made poor decisions and has exposed x to risks of harm that those various undertakings and court orders were trying to protect her from.
the father’s lack of insight into his behaviour  his lack of insight in relation to recording x especially when she was distressed and may have benefited from being comforted by him. (b) his lack of insight into the impact of his alcohol consumption on x. (c) his failure to take responsibility for his actions and their consequences.   his lack of insight into the impact of his alcohol consumption on x. (c) his failure to take responsibility for his actions and their consequences.   his failure to take responsibility for his actions and their consequences.   the father vehemently denied that he had perpetrated any violence in his relationship with the mother. (b) he spoke about his concern regarding the treatment of men in the family court system, as well as his belief that everything was against them. (c) the father asserted he has done everything possible to minimise x from witnessing conflicts between himself and the mother.   he spoke about his concern regarding the treatment of men in the family court system, as well as his belief that everything was against them. (c) the father asserted he has done everything possible to minimise x from witnessing conflicts between himself and the mother.   the father asserted he has done everything possible to minimise x from witnessing conflicts between himself and the mother.   when conducting the dcj alternate assessment, ms l observed that in questioning x, the father displayed limited insight into his behaviours and actions, and that he had made statements in front of her that were not age appropriate. (b) his lack of insight was also observed by the local court judge tasked with his sentence following the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. in a report to the father from his criminal law solicitor, it was observed that the judge:   his lack of insight was also observed by the local court judge tasked with his sentence following the suburb n mcdonald’s incident. in a report to the father from his criminal law solicitor, it was observed that the judge:
was concerned with the lack of insight and the nature of the offending but was satisfied that you had ‘got the message’ and that you modified your behaviour.
i apologise profusely for the - my part in the distress, but i do not accept 100 per cent responsibility. ... i accept responsibility for my actions, but as reflected by police reports, i am not the total contributor to the conflict. (transcript 21 september 2023, p.145)   despite enrolling into and completing an anger management course, the father was unable to articulate what changes he has made to his behaviour. (b) the father has taken no personal responsibility for his behaviour or actions. (c) the father demonstrated a lack of insight into the impact of his behaviour or exposure to his behaviour on x. (d) the father has limited capacity to change his behaviour in the future.   the father has taken no personal responsibility for his behaviour or actions. (c) the father demonstrated a lack of insight into the impact of his behaviour or exposure to his behaviour on x. (d) the father has limited capacity to change his behaviour in the future.   the father demonstrated a lack of insight into the impact of his behaviour or exposure to his behaviour on x. (d) the father has limited capacity to change his behaviour in the future.   the father has limited capacity to change his behaviour in the future.
the manner in which the father engages with the mother negatively impacts upon her mental health and parenting capacity   when he drove past her home on 24 april 2021, the mother suffered a panic attack. since then, she said that she continued to have panic attacks:
on average once every week but more frequently when i receive correspondence form the father, from the court and even my solicitors in relation to these proceedings.   her mental health has suffered because of the father’s treatment of her and this impacts upon her level of functioning both at work and at home. she now requires the assistance from the maternal grandmother for care relief. (c) the mother told the family report writer, and gave evidence that, she is “triggered” when seeing the father.   the mother told the family report writer, and gave evidence that, she is “triggered” when seeing the father.
i am of the view this was attempt [sic] by the mother to stalk and monitor my movements. i hold cctv footage of the mother attending the home next to mine taunting me over the property boundary.   the father’s hostility towards the mother is “palpable” and her reaction towards the father “is one of deep distress and, possibly, fear”. (b) due to the father’s behaviour, the mother remains fearful of the father and believes that x’s behaviour has been badly impacted. the family report writer concluded that:   due to the father’s behaviour, the mother remains fearful of the father and believes that x’s behaviour has been badly impacted. the family report writer concluded that:  t would therefore be expected that [ms kovacheva] would experience [mr kneib] as an ongoing threat, and one which may impact on her capacity to parent [x] in a calm and considered manner.   the mother “presented as highly distressed regarding the situation and fearful of” the father, and noted the impact this would have on the mother’s parenting capacity:
at the moment, [ms kovacheva] is a single parent of three children and will require maximum support if she is to parent them in an optimal manner. this is almost certainly an impossibility if [ms kovacheva] is continually harassed by [mr kneib’s] allegations and surveillance.
she has always told herself ‘if my kids are okay, i’m okay’, however recognised with her worries for [x’s] behaviours she knew she needed to reach out for counselling for herself. while [ms kovacheva] did not disclose any mental health diagnoses during this assessment, she has verbalised her fear of [mr kneib] as a result of experiencing ongoing violence by [mr kneib]. (as per the original)   the manner in which the father has engaged with the mother has negatively impacted upon her mental health and parenting capacity. however, due to the lack of evidence in relation to the mother’s mental health, no finding can be made about the extent to which the mother’s parenting capacity has been impaired. (b) the mother would benefit from seeking professional assistance or treatment for her mental health. (c) the engagement in professional assistance or treatment by the mother will improve her parenting capacity.   the mother would benefit from seeking professional assistance or treatment for her mental health. (c) the engagement in professional assistance or treatment by the mother will improve her parenting capacity.   the engagement in professional assistance or treatment by the mother will improve her parenting capacity.
does the father pose an unacceptable risk to x?
suffer insecurity, fear, unhappiness, anxiety and hypervigilance from witnessing abusive behaviour of a parent. such effects present a threat to their emotional development.
in the present she is also at risk of experiencing [mr kneib] denigrate her mother and exhibiting a lack of support for her relationship with her and the maternal extended family. this risks placing [x] in an impossible loyalty conflict where she ultimately feels that she must choose between her parents and take sides in their dispute.
children of [x’s] age require security, consistency and safety and it appears that [x] has not had these. it is therefore of the greatest importance that her life henceforth is free from conflict and insecurity and offers her the prospect of settled parenting without ongoing trauma.   he has subjected the mother to family violence, often in the presence of x. (b) the father has demonstrated a poor capacity to comply with court orders and this places x at risk. (c) he has minimised his family violence towards the mother and failed to take responsibility for his behaviour. (d) the father has limited insight into the impact of exposing x to family violence, as well as his poor decision making. (e) the father has limited capacity to change his behaviour in the future. (f) the manner in which the father has engaged with the mother has negatively impacted upon her mental health and parenting capacity.   the father has demonstrated a poor capacity to comply with court orders and this places x at risk. (c) he has minimised his family violence towards the mother and failed to take responsibility for his behaviour. (d) the father has limited insight into the impact of exposing x to family violence, as well as his poor decision making. (e) the father has limited capacity to change his behaviour in the future. (f) the manner in which the father has engaged with the mother has negatively impacted upon her mental health and parenting capacity.   he has minimised his family violence towards the mother and failed to take responsibility for his behaviour. (d) the father has limited insight into the impact of exposing x to family violence, as well as his poor decision making. (e) the father has limited capacity to change his behaviour in the future. (f) the manner in which the father has engaged with the mother has negatively impacted upon her mental health and parenting capacity.   the father has limited insight into the impact of exposing x to family violence, as well as his poor decision making. (e) the father has limited capacity to change his behaviour in the future. (f) the manner in which the father has engaged with the mother has negatively impacted upon her mental health and parenting capacity.   the father has limited capacity to change his behaviour in the future. (f) the manner in which the father has engaged with the mother has negatively impacted upon her mental health and parenting capacity.   the manner in which the father has engaged with the mother has negatively impacted upon her mental health and parenting capacity.
what orders can the court make to sufficiently mitigate against the risks identified?
have, unwaveringly, a poor opinion of the other. the difficulties appear longstanding, and call into question the capacity of either parent to make child-focussed decisions while the other parent is in consciousness. for [x], this has been nothing short of disastrous for her development and wellbeing, as two people with whom she has a loving relationship have been unable to contain their emotions in order to offer her a stable experience of parenting.
which parent should x live with?
what time should the father spend with x?
involving a child in, or exposing them to, high levels of parental conflict, particularly where the conflict extends to or involves other family members, and where the child may be the subject of the conflict, is associated with poorer long-term outcomes for the child’s development and well-being. [x], in her experience of poorly managed conflict, may be at risk of difficulties in emotional self-regulation as well as problems in navigating adult relationships.   will lose the love and concern of another parent and it is likely that there will be some grief associated with this loss. however, this will likely be eclipsed by the damage which will ensue if [x] is required to cope with navigating a parenting relationship which currently exists.
international travel
change of name   x will have no connection to the father. (b) x should share a common surname with her two sisters and the mother, who had completed an application to register a change for her surname to “hornik”. (c) it connects x to the mother and her sisters and will avoid any confusion of identity for x if they all share the same surname. (d) it will avoid any potential embarrassment or sense of exclusion that x may experience having a different surname to those of her household.   x should share a common surname with her two sisters and the mother, who had completed an application to register a change for her surname to “hornik”. (c) it connects x to the mother and her sisters and will avoid any confusion of identity for x if they all share the same surname. (d) it will avoid any potential embarrassment or sense of exclusion that x may experience having a different surname to those of her household.   it connects x to the mother and her sisters and will avoid any confusion of identity for x if they all share the same surname. (d) it will avoid any potential embarrassment or sense of exclusion that x may experience having a different surname to those of her household.   it will avoid any potential embarrassment or sense of exclusion that x may experience having a different surname to those of her household.   the welfare of the child is a paramount consideration. (b) the short and long-term effect of any change in the child’s name. (c) any confusion of identity which may arise for the child if the name is or is not changed. (d) any embarrassment likely to be experienced by the child of the name if the name is different from the parent who has primary care. (e) the effect which any change of surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bears. (f) the effect of random and frequent changes of the child’s name.   the short and long-term effect of any change in the child’s name. (c) any confusion of identity which may arise for the child if the name is or is not changed. (d) any embarrassment likely to be experienced by the child of the name if the name is different from the parent who has primary care. (e) the effect which any change of surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bears. (f) the effect of random and frequent changes of the child’s name.   any confusion of identity which may arise for the child if the name is or is not changed. (d) any embarrassment likely to be experienced by the child of the name if the name is different from the parent who has primary care. (e) the effect which any change of surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bears. (f) the effect of random and frequent changes of the child’s name.   any embarrassment likely to be experienced by the child of the name if the name is different from the parent who has primary care. (e) the effect which any change of surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bears. (f) the effect of random and frequent changes of the child’s name.   the effect which any change of surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bears. (f) the effect of random and frequent changes of the child’s name.   the effect of random and frequent changes of the child’s name.   x’s connection is largely with her maternal family and her siblings, who use different surnames to “kneib”. (b) the long-term effect of the name change is that x will feel more aligned with her siblings as she will share the same name as her sisters and mother. (c) as x grows older, leaving her surname as “kneib” may cause her confusion. (d) x has already noticed and questioned why her surname is different to her sisters, and this may cause her embarrassment in the future amongst her peers. (e) adopting a hyphenated name will not impact on x’s relationship with the father, as it continues to acknowledge her connection with the paternal family. (f) this would be the first occasion x’s name would be changed, and there was no evidence before me that her name would change before she reaches adulthood.   the long-term effect of the name change is that x will feel more aligned with her siblings as she will share the same name as her sisters and mother. (c) as x grows older, leaving her surname as “kneib” may cause her confusion. (d) x has already noticed and questioned why her surname is different to her sisters, and this may cause her embarrassment in the future amongst her peers. (e) adopting a hyphenated name will not impact on x’s relationship with the father, as it continues to acknowledge her connection with the paternal family. (f) this would be the first occasion x’s name would be changed, and there was no evidence before me that her name would change before she reaches adulthood.   as x grows older, leaving her surname as “kneib” may cause her confusion. (d) x has already noticed and questioned why her surname is different to her sisters, and this may cause her embarrassment in the future amongst her peers. (e) adopting a hyphenated name will not impact on x’s relationship with the father, as it continues to acknowledge her connection with the paternal family. (f) this would be the first occasion x’s name would be changed, and there was no evidence before me that her name would change before she reaches adulthood.   x has already noticed and questioned why her surname is different to her sisters, and this may cause her embarrassment in the future amongst her peers. (e) adopting a hyphenated name will not impact on x’s relationship with the father, as it continues to acknowledge her connection with the paternal family. (f) this would be the first occasion x’s name would be changed, and there was no evidence before me that her name would change before she reaches adulthood.   adopting a hyphenated name will not impact on x’s relationship with the father, as it continues to acknowledge her connection with the paternal family. (f) this would be the first occasion x’s name would be changed, and there was no evidence before me that her name would change before she reaches adulthood.   this would be the first occasion x’s name would be changed, and there was no evidence before me that her name would change before she reaches adulthood.
should the court make orders for the paternal grandmother to spend time with x?
i just want to be able to possibly meet up, go to the movies, go shopping, allow [x] and [b] to have some time, and so that she still knows her paternal grandmother cares about her and loves her. that’s it. (transcript 21 september 2023, p.202)   she alleged that the paternal grandmother withheld x from her care on two previous occasions (on 18 november 2018 and 23 march 2020) without her consent and with little communication. (b) she alleged that the paternal grandmother signed undertakings to supervise x’s time with the father but failed to do so on three occasions in 2019. (c) when the father advised x’s daycare centre in early 2020 that x may have been exposed to covid-19 while in the paternal grandmother’s care, the paternal grandmother failed to communicate with the mother and did not respond to the mother’s enquiries. (d) the paternal grandmother attended at the mother’s home uninvited on special occasions such as x’s birthday, easter, and christmas. (e) the paternal grandmother personally hired a private investigator to ascertain the mother’s address and other personal information. the mother believes that she then passed on that information to the father, who drove past the mother’s home. (f) she alleges that the paternal grandmother causes x to be distressed as she “triggered” her anxiety when showing her photos.   she alleged that the paternal grandmother signed undertakings to supervise x’s time with the father but failed to do so on three occasions in 2019. (c) when the father advised x’s daycare centre in early 2020 that x may have been exposed to covid-19 while in the paternal grandmother’s care, the paternal grandmother failed to communicate with the mother and did not respond to the mother’s enquiries. (d) the paternal grandmother attended at the mother’s home uninvited on special occasions such as x’s birthday, easter, and christmas. (e) the paternal grandmother personally hired a private investigator to ascertain the mother’s address and other personal information. the mother believes that she then passed on that information to the father, who drove past the mother’s home. (f) she alleges that the paternal grandmother causes x to be distressed as she “triggered” her anxiety when showing her photos.   when the father advised x’s daycare centre in early 2020 that x may have been exposed to covid-19 while in the paternal grandmother’s care, the paternal grandmother failed to communicate with the mother and did not respond to the mother’s enquiries. (d) the paternal grandmother attended at the mother’s home uninvited on special occasions such as x’s birthday, easter, and christmas. (e) the paternal grandmother personally hired a private investigator to ascertain the mother’s address and other personal information. the mother believes that she then passed on that information to the father, who drove past the mother’s home. (f) she alleges that the paternal grandmother causes x to be distressed as she “triggered” her anxiety when showing her photos.   the paternal grandmother attended at the mother’s home uninvited on special occasions such as x’s birthday, easter, and christmas. (e) the paternal grandmother personally hired a private investigator to ascertain the mother’s address and other personal information. the mother believes that she then passed on that information to the father, who drove past the mother’s home. (f) she alleges that the paternal grandmother causes x to be distressed as she “triggered” her anxiety when showing her photos.   the paternal grandmother personally hired a private investigator to ascertain the mother’s address and other personal information. the mother believes that she then passed on that information to the father, who drove past the mother’s home. (f) she alleges that the paternal grandmother causes x to be distressed as she “triggered” her anxiety when showing her photos.   she alleges that the paternal grandmother causes x to be distressed as she “triggered” her anxiety when showing her photos.   the paternal grandmother will continue to expose x to the parental conflict. (b) the paternal grandmother may undermine the mother to x. (c) x is currently engaged in a therapeutic treatment regime and spending time with the paternal grandmother may undermine her progress or be unsettling for x. (d) the paternal grandmother may obtain details of the mother’s residential address, or the school attended by x, and disclose this information to the father. (e) even if the paternal grandmother were required to enter into an undertaking, or if she were restrained from doing certain things (such as providing details of the mother’s whereabouts to the father), there is a likelihood that she would not comply with them. (f) x’s psychological healing may be delayed by being exposed to the paternal grandmother. (g) an order allowing regular time between x and the paternal grandmother may have a negative impact on the mother’s mental health.   the paternal grandmother may undermine the mother to x. (c) x is currently engaged in a therapeutic treatment regime and spending time with the paternal grandmother may undermine her progress or be unsettling for x. (d) the paternal grandmother may obtain details of the mother’s residential address, or the school attended by x, and disclose this information to the father. (e) even if the paternal grandmother were required to enter into an undertaking, or if she were restrained from doing certain things (such as providing details of the mother’s whereabouts to the father), there is a likelihood that she would not comply with them. (f) x’s psychological healing may be delayed by being exposed to the paternal grandmother. (g) an order allowing regular time between x and the paternal grandmother may have a negative impact on the mother’s mental health.   x is currently engaged in a therapeutic treatment regime and spending time with the paternal grandmother may undermine her progress or be unsettling for x. (d) the paternal grandmother may obtain details of the mother’s residential address, or the school attended by x, and disclose this information to the father. (e) even if the paternal grandmother were required to enter into an undertaking, or if she were restrained from doing certain things (such as providing details of the mother’s whereabouts to the father), there is a likelihood that she would not comply with them. (f) x’s psychological healing may be delayed by being exposed to the paternal grandmother. (g) an order allowing regular time between x and the paternal grandmother may have a negative impact on the mother’s mental health.   the paternal grandmother may obtain details of the mother’s residential address, or the school attended by x, and disclose this information to the father. (e) even if the paternal grandmother were required to enter into an undertaking, or if she were restrained from doing certain things (such as providing details of the mother’s whereabouts to the father), there is a likelihood that she would not comply with them. (f) x’s psychological healing may be delayed by being exposed to the paternal grandmother. (g) an order allowing regular time between x and the paternal grandmother may have a negative impact on the mother’s mental health.   even if the paternal grandmother were required to enter into an undertaking, or if she were restrained from doing certain things (such as providing details of the mother’s whereabouts to the father), there is a likelihood that she would not comply with them. (f) x’s psychological healing may be delayed by being exposed to the paternal grandmother. (g) an order allowing regular time between x and the paternal grandmother may have a negative impact on the mother’s mental health.   x’s psychological healing may be delayed by being exposed to the paternal grandmother. (g) an order allowing regular time between x and the paternal grandmother may have a negative impact on the mother’s mental health.   an order allowing regular time between x and the paternal grandmother may have a negative impact on the mother’s mental health.
analysis of risk   i am not surprised that the mother was alarmed to hear that the father had communicated to the daycare centre that x had been exposed to covid-19 in early 2020. the paternal grandmother could not explain why she did not respond to the mother’s message. she relied on the reason of “privacy and confidentiality” as a health professional, and it was only after some prompting that she conceded that it was possible that the mother had lost trust in her because of her conduct. (b) following the suburb n mcdonald’s incident, the paternal grandmother was aware that the father had been arrested. she acknowledged that x had stayed overnight in her home but showed no apparent interest or care for the mother’s injuries or state of mind. she took no opportunity to communicate with the mother, confirm that x was in her care, nor make plans to return x to the mother. (c) the hiring of a private investigator by the paternal grandmother was an extreme measure to take, especially in a high conflict matter where the mother has alleged concerns for her safety and an advo was in place between the parents for the mother’s protection. the paternal grandmother’s disregard for the mother’s safety concerns highlights a blind spot for her. she accepted that her actions in hiring a private investigator would have caused the mother some anxiety. when asked whether it was the best course of action, she responded that it was. the justification for her conduct was entirely self-serving and self-interested: “so i could see [x]”. (d) despite the mother’s anxiety about the father, the paternal grandmother was affronted by the notion that she could not attend the mother’s home and deliver presents for the children. whilst i appreciate that her intentions were good, she again displayed a complete lack of insight into the impact that her attendance at the mother’s home, without notice, might have on the mother. (e) in her affidavit, she said of the mother: “[ms kovacheva] seems to be trying to stop any, and all contact with [x’s] paternal family for no reason”. after sitting through three days of hearing, having heard the evidence, and having read the affidavits filed, counsel for the icl asked the paternal grandmother whether she still believed her statement. she confirmed that she did. when asked about the father’s conviction for charges of assault against the mother, she opined that “he hasn’t harmed [x]”. (f) when cross-examined on the father’s decision to film x during the distressing suburb n mcdonald’s incident, the paternal grandmother was again defensive of the father and of his behaviour.   following the suburb n mcdonald’s incident, the paternal grandmother was aware that the father had been arrested. she acknowledged that x had stayed overnight in her home but showed no apparent interest or care for the mother’s injuries or state of mind. she took no opportunity to communicate with the mother, confirm that x was in her care, nor make plans to return x to the mother. (c) the hiring of a private investigator by the paternal grandmother was an extreme measure to take, especially in a high conflict matter where the mother has alleged concerns for her safety and an advo was in place between the parents for the mother’s protection. the paternal grandmother’s disregard for the mother’s safety concerns highlights a blind spot for her. she accepted that her actions in hiring a private investigator would have caused the mother some anxiety. when asked whether it was the best course of action, she responded that it was. the justification for her conduct was entirely self-serving and self-interested: “so i could see [x]”. (d) despite the mother’s anxiety about the father, the paternal grandmother was affronted by the notion that she could not attend the mother’s home and deliver presents for the children. whilst i appreciate that her intentions were good, she again displayed a complete lack of insight into the impact that her attendance at the mother’s home, without notice, might have on the mother. (e) in her affidavit, she said of the mother: “[ms kovacheva] seems to be trying to stop any, and all contact with [x’s] paternal family for no reason”. after sitting through three days of hearing, having heard the evidence, and having read the affidavits filed, counsel for the icl asked the paternal grandmother whether she still believed her statement. she confirmed that she did. when asked about the father’s conviction for charges of assault against the mother, she opined that “he hasn’t harmed [x]”. (f) when cross-examined on the father’s decision to film x during the distressing suburb n mcdonald’s incident, the paternal grandmother was again defensive of the father and of his behaviour.   the hiring of a private investigator by the paternal grandmother was an extreme measure to take, especially in a high conflict matter where the mother has alleged concerns for her safety and an advo was in place between the parents for the mother’s protection. the paternal grandmother’s disregard for the mother’s safety concerns highlights a blind spot for her. she accepted that her actions in hiring a private investigator would have caused the mother some anxiety. when asked whether it was the best course of action, she responded that it was. the justification for her conduct was entirely self-serving and self-interested: “so i could see [x]”. (d) despite the mother’s anxiety about the father, the paternal grandmother was affronted by the notion that she could not attend the mother’s home and deliver presents for the children. whilst i appreciate that her intentions were good, she again displayed a complete lack of insight into the impact that her attendance at the mother’s home, without notice, might have on the mother. (e) in her affidavit, she said of the mother: “[ms kovacheva] seems to be trying to stop any, and all contact with [x’s] paternal family for no reason”. after sitting through three days of hearing, having heard the evidence, and having read the affidavits filed, counsel for the icl asked the paternal grandmother whether she still believed her statement. she confirmed that she did. when asked about the father’s conviction for charges of assault against the mother, she opined that “he hasn’t harmed [x]”. (f) when cross-examined on the father’s decision to film x during the distressing suburb n mcdonald’s incident, the paternal grandmother was again defensive of the father and of his behaviour.   despite the mother’s anxiety about the father, the paternal grandmother was affronted by the notion that she could not attend the mother’s home and deliver presents for the children. whilst i appreciate that her intentions were good, she again displayed a complete lack of insight into the impact that her attendance at the mother’s home, without notice, might have on the mother. (e) in her affidavit, she said of the mother: “[ms kovacheva] seems to be trying to stop any, and all contact with [x’s] paternal family for no reason”. after sitting through three days of hearing, having heard the evidence, and having read the affidavits filed, counsel for the icl asked the paternal grandmother whether she still believed her statement. she confirmed that she did. when asked about the father’s conviction for charges of assault against the mother, she opined that “he hasn’t harmed [x]”. (f) when cross-examined on the father’s decision to film x during the distressing suburb n mcdonald’s incident, the paternal grandmother was again defensive of the father and of his behaviour.   in her affidavit, she said of the mother: “[ms kovacheva] seems to be trying to stop any, and all contact with [x’s] paternal family for no reason”. after sitting through three days of hearing, having heard the evidence, and having read the affidavits filed, counsel for the icl asked the paternal grandmother whether she still believed her statement. she confirmed that she did. when asked about the father’s conviction for charges of assault against the mother, she opined that “he hasn’t harmed [x]”. (f) when cross-examined on the father’s decision to film x during the distressing suburb n mcdonald’s incident, the paternal grandmother was again defensive of the father and of his behaviour.   when cross-examined on the father’s decision to film x during the distressing suburb n mcdonald’s incident, the paternal grandmother was again defensive of the father and of his behaviour.   to not provide photographs of x to any third party. (b) to prevent her from disclosing the location of x to the father. (c) to allow the mother to nominate the venue. (d) to only communicate with the mother via a parenting application, such as the divvito app. (e) to immediately notify the mother if the father comes into contact with x. (f) to bring x into contact with any paternal family members apart from her cousin, b.   to prevent her from disclosing the location of x to the father. (c) to allow the mother to nominate the venue. (d) to only communicate with the mother via a parenting application, such as the divvito app. (e) to immediately notify the mother if the father comes into contact with x. (f) to bring x into contact with any paternal family members apart from her cousin, b.   to allow the mother to nominate the venue. (d) to only communicate with the mother via a parenting application, such as the divvito app. (e) to immediately notify the mother if the father comes into contact with x. (f) to bring x into contact with any paternal family members apart from her cousin, b.   to only communicate with the mother via a parenting application, such as the divvito app. (e) to immediately notify the mother if the father comes into contact with x. (f) to bring x into contact with any paternal family members apart from her cousin, b.   to immediately notify the mother if the father comes into contact with x. (f) to bring x into contact with any paternal family members apart from her cousin, b.   to bring x into contact with any paternal family members apart from her cousin, b.
injunctions   passing onto x communication or contact information, such as email addresses or mobile numbers, whether from the father or other members of the paternal family. (b) circulating photographs or video recordings of x to any third party. (c) connecting with x or knowingly allowing any member of the paternal family to connect with x via any social media accounts, such as facebook, instagram, tiktok, snapchat. (d) disclosing to the father any information she may have about x’s residential address, the school she attends, and/or the spend time with location. (e) bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b. (f) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship, in the presence or hearing of x.   circulating photographs or video recordings of x to any third party. (c) connecting with x or knowingly allowing any member of the paternal family to connect with x via any social media accounts, such as facebook, instagram, tiktok, snapchat. (d) disclosing to the father any information she may have about x’s residential address, the school she attends, and/or the spend time with location. (e) bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b. (f) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship, in the presence or hearing of x.   connecting with x or knowingly allowing any member of the paternal family to connect with x via any social media accounts, such as facebook, instagram, tiktok, snapchat. (d) disclosing to the father any information she may have about x’s residential address, the school she attends, and/or the spend time with location. (e) bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b. (f) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship, in the presence or hearing of x.   disclosing to the father any information she may have about x’s residential address, the school she attends, and/or the spend time with location. (e) bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b. (f) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship, in the presence or hearing of x.   bringing x into contact with the father and any paternal family members, except for the paternal cousin, b. (f) denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship, in the presence or hearing of x.   denigrating the mother, members of the mother’s extended family, or a person with whom the mother has a relationship, in the presence or hearing of x.
conclusion
associate: dated: 14 february 2024
dated: 14 february 2024