last updated: 8 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ness & firmin (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 191
orders
the court orders that:  attending at, approaching or being upon the premises of the school or any extracurricular activity attended by the children or any of them, (b) contacting the father or the children or any of them by any means whatsoever including through third parties, save as provided for in order 5 herein, (c) contacting the children’s school, medical and therapeutic practitioners or sporting clubs / extra-curricular activity organisers by and means whatsoever including through third parties, (d) approaching the father or the children or any of them at any time causing or encouraging any person to do so on her behalf, (e) attending at or being 100 meters of any address at which the father resided from time to time or works.   contacting the father or the children or any of them by any means whatsoever including through third parties, save as provided for in order 5 herein, (c) contacting the children’s school, medical and therapeutic practitioners or sporting clubs / extra-curricular activity organisers by and means whatsoever including through third parties, (d) approaching the father or the children or any of them at any time causing or encouraging any person to do so on her behalf, (e) attending at or being 100 meters of any address at which the father resided from time to time or works.   contacting the children’s school, medical and therapeutic practitioners or sporting clubs / extra-curricular activity organisers by and means whatsoever including through third parties, (d) approaching the father or the children or any of them at any time causing or encouraging any person to do so on her behalf, (e) attending at or being 100 meters of any address at which the father resided from time to time or works.   approaching the father or the children or any of them at any time causing or encouraging any person to do so on her behalf, (e) attending at or being 100 meters of any address at which the father resided from time to time or works.   attending at or being 100 meters of any address at which the father resided from time to time or works.
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
the determinative issues
conclusion: least worst outcome
background
detailed background in 2021 reasons
mr ness’ application
the icl’s application
ms firmin’s substantial change of position application
ms firmin’s final position
counsel: the mother is now seeking, in essence, the – in line with the application of the independent children's lawyer, with the exception that she is not seeking a 12 month break before the four times per year start. so she’s looking for the first identity contact, if you like, to happen in three months time.
applicable law
standard of proof   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
reliability & credit of the parties ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... (citations omitted)  ] in carlson & fluvium [2012] famca 32 (“carlson”) at [165] to [169] kent j made the following observations concerning the making of adverse credit findings against a parent in a parenting case:  5] as a general proposition, civil courts usually refrain from specific adverse credit findings against litigants if the disposition of the case can legitimately be achieved otherwise. there are good reasons for that approach. for example, a specific finding that a litigant has misled the court might be tantamount to a finding of perjury. further, it can be accepted as a given that human beings have the capacity to reconstruct or rationalise or even misconstrue past events or conduct, or to engage in self-justification, particularly in recounting events in highly emotive settings or in respect of highly emotive issues. this may make the distinction between an honest, although wrong, account on the one hand, and a deliberate and calculated obfuscation on the other, difficult to draw. ... [169] moreover, the resolution of parenting proceedings in this court usually requires consideration of not only the credibility of the parties as witnesses or litigants but appreciation of the characters and personalities of them as people whose future relationship, or the context of that relationship with their child, the court has the responsibility to decide.  ] we agree with those observations. it follows from them that in parenting proceedings an adverse credit finding against a parent should not only be necessary to determine the real issues joined between the parties but should be soundly based, with due allowance for the limitations referred to.
parenting
60ca child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.
... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests
determining child's best interests (1) subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and  ) to spend time with the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
... 65dac effect of parenting order that provides for shared parental responsibility   this section applies if, under a parenting order: (a) 2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child. (2) the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons. (3) the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue. (4) to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision has been made jointly.   2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child.   the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child.   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.
relevant legal principals
... in helbig & rowe [2016] famcafc 117, the full court explained at [214] (citing a v a [1998] famca 25, (1998) flc 92-800), that where a case is conducted on the basis of it being contended that there is an unacceptable risk of harm to a child in the care of one parent, “[t]he first enquiry is whether there is objectively an unacceptable risk. if there is the court must take steps proportionate to the degree of risk” (emphasis added). after referring to and applying that decision, the full court in keane & keane [2021] famcafc 1, (2021) 62 fam lr 190 at [84] stated:
in undertaking the task of considering what steps are “proportionate to the degree of risk”, the decision of blinko makes it clear that the mere finding that a child may be at an unacceptable risk as a result of spending time in the care of another parent does not conclude the task before the primary judge. a necessary consequence of that finding, having regard to the totality of matters that the court is required to consider pursuant to s 60cc of the act, is for the court to contemplate whether steps can be taken to ameliorate or mitigate against that risk such that the child can maintain a meaningful relationship with the other parent. phasis added) in summerby & cadogen [2011] famcafc 205 at [95], the full court also noted the potential adverse impact upon a child of permanent separation from their parent and, in the context of that case, agreed with and applied the analysis of the trial judge in those proceedings to conclude that “the termination of a child’s relationship with one of her parents is a course of last resort.” given the potential consequences for a child of such a separation, careful consideration is required on the part of a trial judge before reaching a conclusion of no time and no communication. this is made clear in blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 (“blinko”) where the full court said at [28]:
the authorities dealing with cases of unacceptable risk are replete with exhortations to trial judges to “consider deeply where the facts of the particular case fall, and to explain adequately their findings in this regard”: see for example n and s and the separate representative [1995] famca 139, (1996) flc 92-655 at 82,714. that extends not merely to the identification and analysis of the risk itself, but also to the imposition of conditions or other safeguards in relation to the non-resident parent. having determined that the children were at an unacceptable risk of harm in remaining in the primary care of the mother, it was incumbent upon the primary judge to consider whether that risk could be mitigated in a manner that was consistent with the objects to part vii to which we have referred. relevantly, in this case, that included the possibility of the children spending supervised time with their mother (see blinko at [83] referring to r & c [1993] famca 62).
...
significant events and evidence
serious allegations of family violence
shared care arrangement evolved
the trouble starts, “drugs in the tin” and parental relationship dissipates
mother retains children for the first time
the “drugs” justification and demand for a hair follicle test
father’s first hair follicle test (hft) provided and no reply
father’s second hft clear of illicit substance
first interim orders
ms firmin using an illicit drug while alleging same against mr ness
his honour: hang on. hang on. when i ask you a question, start talking, you stop, please. now, getting back to my question, in your affidavit, you describe [illicit drug] use. ms firmin: yes. his honour: it wasn’t clear to me the period that you are describing [illicit drug] use. my question to you is – hang on. hang on. i want to remind you of your right that you can refuse to answer the question on the grounds that it would incriminate you. so with that reminder, i will ask the question again. in your affidavit, when you’re describing your [illicit drug] use, what is the period that you’re describing the [illicit drug] use? ms firmin: it would’ve been over december – just wait. when was i working those long hours? would’ve been about that. and – and january, when i was working the long hours. i can get up the exact dates. his honour: all right. was it earlier in 2020? ms firmin: no, no, no. none in early 2020. his honour: so starting in - - - ms firmin: if i could afford - - - his honour: hang on. hang on. hang on. so you’ve said december, okay? so that’s december and january of – december of 2020, january of 2021. ms firmin: yes, and there was one shift where – in february, where i did have [the illicit drug]. exhibit m2[7], 16 march 2023, being part of the transcript of evidence during the july 2021 interim hearing.
ms s’s affidavit for interim hearing
children’s relationships observed in the first family report
... [x] was informed at the beginning of her interview that she was not required to make a decision regarding which parent she would live with in the future, and it was emphasised that her parents and other adults would make this decision. upon hearing this information, [x] appeared to physically relax as she released a large sigh and smiled at the writer. ... when the children were observed in the presence of each of their parents, they appeared to share a positive and warm relationship with each of their parents... [ms firmin] successfully verbally engaged the other two children while most of her attention was focused on each child. overall, the children engaged positively with their mother in this casual environment. similarly, the children engaged with their father in a positive manner as he focused on the emotional needs of the children. during the children's session with their father, they appeared less interested in the activities he brought for them and more interested in engaging directly with him. the children appeared to compete for his attentions, particularly [z] and [y], who sought ongoing physical interactions with him.... it was notable that the children's separation from their father was protracted as all three (3) children experienced difficulties separating from him and repeatedly returned for additional hugs. [x], in particular, climbed up on her father in a 'koala hug' and snuggled into her father's shoulder while he carried her around the room. as [x] is 11 years old and on the verge of adolescence, this vulnerable and affectionate gesture which is most common in toddlers was significant in highlighting the positive and affectionate relationship [x] shares with her father. ... the writer unsure at this stage whether [ms firmin’s] highly inconsistent accounts of events have been due to her abuse of illicit substances, underlying personality difficulties or an intentional attempt to provide misinformation to the court to support her personal agenda.
ms firmin’s second intervention order application struck out
x does not attend time
second interim orders: substantial and significant time conditional on drug testing
more trouble after interim orders
mother fails to return the children on father’s day 2021
mother undertakes illicit drugs hair follicle test (hft): clear
end of interim applications
dr c, psychiatric examination of both parents as at late 2021
mental state examination ([mr ness]) ... his affect was within normal limit without evidence of significant depression or anxiety. 17. there was no disorder of form of thought. in terms of thought content, there was no depressive or anxious themes or suicide or self-harm ideation. there did not appear to be any delusions. 19. there was no disturbance of perception or cognition. ... past psychiatric history ... [mr ness] denied any previous psychiatric history prior to [late] 2010, when he was woken by police and take to the emergency department under the mental health act due to alleged suicidality. his alcohol level was noted to be 0.223 on admission. according to the nursing assessment on admission, he was agitated and denied intent to self-harm... [mr ness] was interviewed with his parents and they denied any previous or current psychiatric issues. [mr ness] reported being in a stressful period with difficulties with his ex-partner. his mental state examination was described as normal and there was no evidence or mental illness at all. he was discharged home with no follow up required. ... opinions and recommendations in my opinion, [mr ness] suffered from an adjustment disorder with anxious mood in the context of not seeing the children which has resolved. he does not require any mental health treatment and there are no impediments from a mental health point of view to his care of the children. in my opinion, the emergency department presentation in 2010 was not reflective of a mental illness. this is consistent with the assessment at the time. there is no evidence to confirm the existence of a substance use disorder. ...
background [ms firmin] was a well-dressed and appropriately groomed woman who did not display any evidence of agitation ... [ms firmin] is a 32-year-old single woman who is living with her ex-partner, who is the mother of [x], aged 11, [y] aged 9, and [z], aged 7, who are the subject of the current proceedings and are in [mr ness’] care. ... she described physical abuse from her father between the ages of 3 and 15 and she stated that her mother’s undiagnosed mental health conditions caused concern and her mother did not seek help until the year 2000. she said her mother had suffered from post-natal depression and was neglectful and emotionally abusive. mental state examination ... 16. her affect was distressed with periods of depressed affect. 17. there was no disorder of form of thought in terms of thought content, she worried about the consequences on the children of being out of her car. she denied any depressive themes or suicide or self-harm ideation. there did not appear to be any delusions. there was no new abnormality of perception or cognition. in terms of insight, she acknowledged that she had suffered from anxiety and low mod and was accepting of psychological treatment. she was very concerned at the impact that being distressed and getting emotional during this assessment would have on her situation and she was distressed in relation to the observations made by the family consultant. substance use history [ms firmin] stated that she has used [an illicit drug] of three occasions in november 2020, in january 2021 and [in] march 2021. she stated she was working 16-hour days and used the [drug] to keep herself awake. she denied any tolerance or withdrawal symptoms. she denied usage since then. urine drug screen [...] dated [...] august 2021 was negative, hair follicle tests [...] dated [...] october 2021 and tdda dated [...] october 2021 were negative. she describe use of alcohol of approximately one glass of wine per dinner at times with a period of two months of increased use prior to christmas 2020, where she was having six cans of [a mixed drink] every three to four days. she denied any other substance use history. she has not had substance abuse treatment. she acknowledged that her initial affidavit did not report her substance use, and she, stated this was because she was advised to prepare an affidavit denying everything. she acknowledged substance use in a subsequent affidavit. past psychiatric history ... she denied any history of psychosis or mania. she has a referral to a psychiatrist for medication to assist her to calm down. she is not opposed to taking medication. ... opinions and recommendations in my opinion, [ms firmin] has suffered from a chronic adjustment disorder with depressed and anxious mood, including symptoms of a post-traumatic symptoms. she has had [drug] use that, in my opinion, does not appear to have met the threshold for a [drug] use disorder and appears from the event testing to be in remission. i do not believe she required any specialist drug and alcohol intervention at this time... it is clear that there has been contradictions in her materials, for example, the initial denial of drug use, and the inconsistencies in relation to police notification, but i am not convinced that this has a bearing on psychiatric diagnosis, and, whilst potentially ill-advised, could be viewed as an attempt to influence the proceedings in her favour. i note that opinion of [the family report writer] about [ms firmin] presenting ‘scattered’ and note that she did not present that way to me, and i note that there is concern from court about aspects of chaotic functioning, which in my opinion, should be addressed by her psychiatric supports. it is appropriate that she have ongoing psychological treatment and a review of her medication as previously planned. it is clear that she has a degree of ongoing distress at present, which, in my opinion, is understandable given the loss of custody of her children. her psychiatric supports can address this, and clearly, any changes in the arrangements in her favour would be beneficial to her mental state. having carefully considered all of the materials and my assessments of her mental state, notwithstanding the challenges she has had with the court process including the challenges of self-representation, and the other allegations that have been made that are a matter for the court to determine, i do not see any major impediments from a psychiatric point of view to her care of the children at this point in time.
mid-2022: father charged with assault of mother from 2019
may 2022: the second family report interviews
... during her interview for the purpose of this assessment, [ms firmin] reported that she had recently lodged a statement providing photographic evidence of injuries she had sustained from the physical violence perpetrated by [mr ness] with victoria police and anticipated that [mr ness] would shortly be charged with multiple charges [...] suggesting it was likely he may receive a prison sentence[14]. ... [ms firmin] expressed concerns for the children's mental health due to their experiences of family violence, particularly while in the care of [mr ness]. [mr ness] expressed concerns for [ms firmin’s] mental health, claiming that she had struggled with her mental health throughout their relationship as a result of her traumatic family of origin and claims that she and her family have a long history of mental health issues. during his interview for the purpose of this assessment, [mr ness] claimed that he was experiencing poor mental health, inclusive of high anxiety as a consequence of [ms firmin's] ongoing harassing behaviour towards him, inclusive of contacting him and making false allegations about him on a daily basis. ... it appears that in november 2021, [ms firmin] expressed significant concerns for the children's emotional, psychological and physical wellbeing correspondence between the principal and staff indicated that the children were happy and healthy at school, however, [ms firmin] appeared to not believe school’s reports and intended to report their neglect to higher education authorities. the principal was required to have all staff refer and forward all correspondence from [ms firmin] to himself by mid-november 2021, as teachers were feeling harassed and stressed by [ms firmin's] constant emails and accusations. ... [ms firmin] interviewed twice for the purpose of this assessment. [ms firmin’s] first interview was over two (2) hours long, which necessitated a further interview to be scheduled... during this assessment, [ms firmin] was reluctant to share her parenting proposals with the writer and therefore did not advocate for any particular parenting arrangement. ... further, [ms firmin] suggested that [mr ness] has used the legal system against her to perpetuate his family violence towards her, weaponising the court and community services. she also reported that [mr ness] gaslights her by making her doubt her own experiences of the family violence she has endured and continues to experience and that he currently stonewalls her by refusing to share pertinent information regarding the children... ... during her interview, [ms firmin] also suggested that she held concerns that [mr ness] may have sexually groomed the children and, therefore, they could be a risk of sexual abuse within their father’s care... ... [mr ness'] primary concern for the children is their ongoing exposure to their mother's manipulation... ... throughout his interview, [mr ness] spoke with grief that he would like the children to have the opportunity to have a positive relationship with both of their parents. [mr ness] reported that the children love their mother and wished to spend time with her, however, he understood that then being excessively exposed to her negative views regarding him is emotionally abusive for them. he understands that the children blame him for separating them from their mother... [mr ness] is currently convinced that if the children spent significant unsupervised time with their mother that their relationship with him would be eroded as [ms firmin] has embarked on a campaign of denigrating him with multiple agencies and currently uses her limited time of communication with the children to undermine their relationship with him... ... there is a complete absence of appropriate communication and trust between the parents as both parents expressed fear of the other. [mr ness] reported that he was currently subject to ongoing stalking and harassing behaviours from [ms firmin], which were currently being managed by victoria police, while [ms firmin] advocated that [mr ness] was perpetuating family violence against him by weaponising the legal system against her. at this point, there appears to be no capacity for the parents to be able to coparent the children or make joint decisions in relation to their future care. ... ...[x] reported that she loved both of her parents and was frustrated that she had been ‘left in the dark’ regarding why she was unable to spend time with her mother. [x] was aware that there were ongoing 'adult issues' and conflicts playing out in the background, to which she was not privy, and she was hopeful that these would be resolved shortly... [x] identified that her father was currently very stressed and that when he was stressed, he tended to yell more at the children as he had a short fuse. she understood that her father was becoming frustrated about adult issues and felt that, at times, he took this out on the children. [x] reported that she loved her father, and she was not angry at his behaviour, but rather she expressed worry and concern for him. [x] believed that upon returning to her father's care full-time, her relationship with her father had significantly improved and that she also enjoyed spending time with her paternal grandmother. [x] indicated that her paternal grandmother had always been a significant figure in her life, and she understood that recently her mother's relationship with her paternal grandmother had changed as she no longer spoke positively about her as she had in the past. ... in discussing her relationship with her mother, [x] reported that she currently communicated with her tuesdays and thursday evenings, however, she indicated that this was not enough time with her mother. overall, [x] emphasised that she loved both parents and was hopeful that her parents could end their conflict to enable her and her siblings to spend significant time with both parents. ... ...[y] indicated that she would like to spend more time with her mother and did not understand why she was not able to spend time with her. [y] grieved her mother and was confused about the many adult issues which surrounded her involving courts and victoria police... ... [y] reported that she and her siblings often spend overnight time with their paternal grandparents and go on holidays with them. [y] explained that her paternal grandmother "was really mean," although she reported that she used to have a close relationship with her. [y] also stated that her mother also thought that her paternal grandmother was mean, and the writer was unable to distinguish why [y] felt that her grandmother was now mean and to what extent this belief was influenced by her mother. [y] also suggested that she was anxious about living with her father as she was scared that "something bad is going to happen." [y] was also aware that her mother was worried that her father would hurt her or one of her siblings, suggesting, “it is just a matter of time." [y] was unsure what bad things might occur, however, she confirmed that this was a belief she shared with her mother ... in discussing his parenting arrangements, [z] suggested that he lived with his father, and his mother called twice a week. he described this parenting arrangement as "good.” when he was asked if there was anything he would like to change about this parenting arrangement, he suggested that his mother call him five (5) times per week rather than twice a week as he believed his mother wanted to talk to him more. [z] believed that his parents did not like to talk to each other, and he understood that they were fighting. [z] understood that his mother wanted to see him and his siblings. [z] suggested that he would not mind seeing his mother as he had not seen her in a very very long time.” ... [z] suggested that he would like more of a structure regarding where he is sleeping so that he knows which house he will be sleeping at each night. recommendations on the basis of this assessment and unless there is additional information presented to the contrary, it is respectfully recommended that, consideration is given to providing [mr ness] with interim sole parental responsibility for [x], [y] and [z]. in the interim, [ms firmin] is prohibited from contacting [u school], the children’s medical and therapeutic practitioners and their sporting clubs and affiliations. [mr ness] provides [ms firmin] with a quarterly update regarding the children's educational and medical progress, inclusive of any school and medical reports prepared in that time. the children live with their father. until the final hearing, the children spend limited time with their mother, supervised by children's contact service. ...
mid 2022: ms firmin alleges mr ness not y’s father
“this is a courtesy message before it comes forward in proceeding. i suggest you get a paternity test for [y]”. “i have made child support and centrelink aware that a paternity test is required and they have advised this could mean your payments and child support case will cease and you have to apply as a third party carer. i am required to lodge a section 16a and state order. i am confident [y] is not your daughter and you require a dna test. i remind you that you were away for 6 weeks at time of conception and we were not together i strongly advise you to get the test. it’s [y’s] right to know who her father is.”
mid-2022: mother’s hospital attendance
reports he [mr ness] manipulates things, tells lies about her activities, feels he is a psychopath.
counsel: so what would have come out in these proceedings is – if you look at the timing of the last hearing when we were listed for trial and it was adjourned, there was a reference there to her going into a facility, and what that turned out to be was [mid] 2022 at the [...] hospital in a psychiatric voluntary admission. now, of course, [dr c] says there’s no suicidal ideations or self-harm, but of course, what the subpoena material would have revealed is that’s why she put herself in for that.
counsel: i've no idea, your honour, and this – i say that respectfully. i don't know whether [ms firmin] is being calculating, is crying when it suits her, is genuinely upset, is finding it – i have no idea, and i say that because the way she presented to that hospital where she talked specifically about her case just before a court case, to me, sounds manipulative, on those facts. that's not me assuming it, it's that conduct sounds manipulative[15].
joint request to vacate long awaited final hearing
father stops mother’s telephone calls to the children  firmin]: your dads a [f---ing] asshole and if she[17] didn’t want to go with your nan and [ms v] she doesn’t have to. [z]: i know. [ms firmin]: and its [a special occasion] why should you be separated from your family on [a special occasion]. he’s already taken your mum away from you. ... [ms firmin]: do you? [ms firmin]: do you love him or do you not like him[?] [z]: don’t like him but i do love him a little bit because hes still my dad. [ms firmin]: he’s not [y’s], did you know that [z]: na [ms firmin]: yours and [x’s], you’ve got the same mum but not the same dad.
counsel: sure. so, prior years, you’re saying you had discussions with the father about the parentage of [y], is that what you’re saying? [ms firmin]: there was a timeframe we weren’t together. ... counsel: in one of those breaks, you have said to him that he’s not the father of [y], is that what you’re saying?--- [ms firmin]: no. he – in one of those breaks he knew that - - counsel: he knew. yes? [ms firmin]: i had been with someone else, yes ... counsel: and you have now said to this court that you had a discussion with the father about [y’s] parentage many years ago?--- [ms firmin]: about me being intimate with someone else, yes.
counsel: when do you say you knew – your mind – that [y] was not the biological child of [mr ness]?— [ms firmin]: i mean, i’ve always had the thought in the back of my head. it wasn’t until i went back and checked the dates and the scans and realised he was [on holiday] counsel: sure?--- - - - [ms firmin]: when she was - - - counsel: when did you do that? [ms firmin]: conceived. counsel: you have told [y] that [mr ness] is not her biological father, haven’t you? [ms firmin]: yes, she did overhear the court proceedings between [ms w] and [mr ness] and yes, i have spoken to her about that on more than one occasion. and it – it’s accurate. he’s not her biological father. counsel: when did you - - -?---so - - -when did you first speak to her about that? [ms firmin]: when she had overheard [ms w] and [mr ness] having a discussion about it
criminal charges against father withdrawn
the mention hearing on 30 january 2023
his honour: ... the other matter i am going to raise, and i don’t know if it has been raised previously, is whether this hearing should be in person or by videolink. where are you living [ms firmin]? [ms firmin]: i’m happy to do it in person. his honour: happy in person? [ms firmin]: yep. his honour: but that would be in melbourne? [ms firmin]: yep. his honour: righto, thank you.
final hearing
documents relied upon
witnesses  firmin]: well, he’s in the room, and you’re forcing me to give my personal information - - - his honour: no? [ms firmin]: that is none of his business.
67z report dated 31 march 2021
69zw report dated 26 february 2023
fathers parenting case and presentation
counsel: ... he has found this very difficult, but he did what he had to do, and the idea that we can trust the mother to turn up to a supervised visit, control her emotions, regulate herself in such a way that the children don't find it destabilising with their relationship with the father is a real risk, in any – it's not a supervision, as i say, that protects one from a hit, it's a supervision that protects one from demeanour, and all the children have to pick up is, "mum is really sad", and how does that then go.
counsel: this is somebody, in my submission, who has no credit whatsoever and the idea of her and the father somehow having to deal with each other in relation to the children ... would do nothing more than make the father’s life stressful and difficult.
the mother’s parenting case and presentation
section 60cc factors
primary considerations
meaningful relationship with both of the children’s parents
the need to protect children from physical or psychological harm
additional considerations
any views expressed by the child
nature of relationship with each of the child’s parents and other persons
extent to which the child’s parents have taken or failed to take opportunities
extent to which each parent has fulfilled or failed to fulfil obligations to maintain the child
practical difficulty and expense
capacity to provide for the child’s emotional and intellectual needs
attitude to the child and to the responsibilities of parenthood
family violence including section 60g
final or interim orders
parental responsibility
discussion of evidence, submissions and needs of the children
real benefit of children maintaining connection with their mother
burden on contact centre workers
likely dynamic of the supervised visits
counsel: because this is a case where, amongst other things, the court needs to make orders that are less likely to lead to further proceedings, 60cc(l) (l)... one can imagine one visit where there's a supervised contact centre. all the mother needs to do is turn up, look at the children, break down crying, say, "i never wanted this," something to that effect, and the children have to deal with that. the visit is cancelled. what happens next? does it come back to court? does it come back to court with some sort of application? an application in a proceeding that - or no, we start again, because we haven't got an application in a proceeding, there's nothing on foot. so we then say it's a rice & asplund point, everybody. let's go to a registrar and let's go through our process and then go to a senior judicial registrar, who hasn't heard anything about this five days of proceeding, and the father pays privately and has to go through that proceeding. this is the risk that is involved, and the balance to it is him as a primary carer, him as having stability. ... counsel: it really does present a practical problem and i note your honour's comments about the ability of a supervised contact centre to be proactive. what i would add to that, however, within every organisation you can have a good solid worker who has got a great background who intervenes, and then you can have an employer who's not quite up to it, and everyone within that organisation is able to be - - - his honour: and if i can interrupt you for the moment. the next issue the consequences for the children of the intervention and the distress because it's unlikely that the children and the mother would go, "okay. we'll all just go away now. goodbye". it would be a traumatic and distressing scene. counsel: and all it takes, in my submission, is a comment like, "your dad did this", or, "i want to see you. he won't let me". how does a little child get over that? it doesn't take much. this is not a case where someone has to protect someone from being hit with a hammer. it's more subtle. it's just the words said and she has shown by her conduct in the phone call in 2022 what she's prepared to do to the children, and one looks at [ms d’s] report with [z] and with [y]. they were coached pure and simple. [z] gave a description of mum being locked in the house when he was aged 1 or 2. it's impossible. and there's descriptions there of things that have been said. "why did you break up in 2020? what happened? why did you leave?". "because mum had to get away from the fighting". this is not a child recalling. "and what fighting was that?". "we don't know. mum received a text from [ms p]", they say, "and that made her mad". these things are shared with the children and this is the risk. the risk is somebody who can't control herself. you don't get called a narcissistic c by somebody, and everything else under the sun, and then somehow get the respect to be able to treat them as a father figure in the children's lives, respect that relationship and be positive to the children about him, or simply say nothing about him.
conditional orders sought
... 12. upon the mother: (a) providing a certificate to the father confirming that she has attended and completed a co-operative parenting program, “it’s about the kids” and circle of security parenting program/s, and (b) providing a report from her treating psychologist confirming that the mother has engaged in ongoing treatment for a period of twelve (12) months with respect to her mental health and/or anger management and has complied with all reasonable directions, including taking any prescribed medications, and (c) providing to the father the results four (4) consecutive clean hair follicle tests undertaken by an accredited pathology centre over the period of twelve (12) months, such testing to be undertaking within 24 hours of a request made from the father, such request not to be more than once each third calendar month, and (d) providing to the father the results of twelve (12) consecutive liver function tests (“lft”) and carbohydrate deficient transferrin (“cdt”) which shows alcohol consumption to be in the ‘normal’ or ‘lower’ range, and (g) then, the mother commence spending time with the children pursuant to order 4 herein. ...   providing a certificate to the father confirming that she has attended and completed a co-operative parenting program, “it’s about the kids” and circle of security parenting program/s, and (b) providing a report from her treating psychologist confirming that the mother has engaged in ongoing treatment for a period of twelve (12) months with respect to her mental health and/or anger management and has complied with all reasonable directions, including taking any prescribed medications, and (c) providing to the father the results four (4) consecutive clean hair follicle tests undertaken by an accredited pathology centre over the period of twelve (12) months, such testing to be undertaking within 24 hours of a request made from the father, such request not to be more than once each third calendar month, and (d) providing to the father the results of twelve (12) consecutive liver function tests (“lft”) and carbohydrate deficient transferrin (“cdt”) which shows alcohol consumption to be in the ‘normal’ or ‘lower’ range, and (g) then, the mother commence spending time with the children pursuant to order 4 herein.   providing a report from her treating psychologist confirming that the mother has engaged in ongoing treatment for a period of twelve (12) months with respect to her mental health and/or anger management and has complied with all reasonable directions, including taking any prescribed medications, and (c) providing to the father the results four (4) consecutive clean hair follicle tests undertaken by an accredited pathology centre over the period of twelve (12) months, such testing to be undertaking within 24 hours of a request made from the father, such request not to be more than once each third calendar month, and (d) providing to the father the results of twelve (12) consecutive liver function tests (“lft”) and carbohydrate deficient transferrin (“cdt”) which shows alcohol consumption to be in the ‘normal’ or ‘lower’ range, and (g) then, the mother commence spending time with the children pursuant to order 4 herein.   providing to the father the results four (4) consecutive clean hair follicle tests undertaken by an accredited pathology centre over the period of twelve (12) months, such testing to be undertaking within 24 hours of a request made from the father, such request not to be more than once each third calendar month, and (d) providing to the father the results of twelve (12) consecutive liver function tests (“lft”) and carbohydrate deficient transferrin (“cdt”) which shows alcohol consumption to be in the ‘normal’ or ‘lower’ range, and (g) then, the mother commence spending time with the children pursuant to order 4 herein.   providing to the father the results of twelve (12) consecutive liver function tests (“lft”) and carbohydrate deficient transferrin (“cdt”) which shows alcohol consumption to be in the ‘normal’ or ‘lower’ range, and (g) then, the mother commence spending time with the children pursuant to order 4 herein.   then, the mother commence spending time with the children pursuant to order 4 herein.
no delegation of decision
no orders for time
associate: dated: 15 february 2024
dated: 15 february 2024
[1] anonymised as ness & firmin [2021] fcca 1669 (‘the 2021 reasons’).[2] relevant parts recited later in these reasons.[3] see fogarty j in n and s and the separate representative [1995] famca 139; (1996) flc 92-655 at 82,717.[4] and recited and applied by mcclelland dcj at [86] in grier & grier (2023) 94-135.[5] a more detailed recitation of the letter is at [23] of the 2021 reasons.[6] the first had been struck out when ms firmin did not attend court in early 2021.[7] the m prefix to the exhibit designating that the evidence was tendered during ms firmin’s (the mother’s) cross examination.[8] but actually a 29 page, 79 paragraph detailed family report.[9] so 1 july 2021.[10] ms firmin’s then companion or boyfriend but a person she had arranged to care for the children in her absence without consultation or notice to mr ness.[11] that is during the interim hearing on 1 july 2021.[12] these reasons use the same anonymised pseudonyms for the mother’s partner, mr e and the report writer as used in the anonymised 2021 reasons. [13] by the date of the report ms firmin had provided a clean hft.[14] ms firmin was successful in having mr ness charged. he was charged with offences in mid-2022. the charges were withdrawn in late 2022.[15] i understood counsel’s “sounds to me” meant “i submit”.[16] the father relied upon the aid memoire that was tendered as exhibit f1 on 15 march 2023. this is mr ness’ accurate enough transcript of a small part of a phone call between ms firmin and z. i am satisfied exhibit f1 is accurate from compared to the recording played in court.[17] likely a reference to x or y.[18] recited above.[19] icl 1, 14 march 2023.