last updated: 8 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kavran & vinko (no 4) [2024] fedcfamc2f 184
orders
the court orders that:  the address at which the child resides, (b) the school that the child attends, and (c) any important medical information, hospitalisation or significant developmental treatments or therapy in respect of the child.   the school that the child attends, and (c) any important medical information, hospitalisation or significant developmental treatments or therapy in respect of the child.   any important medical information, hospitalisation or significant developmental treatments or therapy in respect of the child.   denigrating each other or any member of the other’s respective family within the presence or hearing of the child, (b) making critical comments about the other or any member of the other’s respective family within the presence or hearing of the child, (c) speaking with the child about these court proceedings, (d) discussing with the child family law matters including matters relating to child support, and (e) shall make their best efforts to ensure that no other party makes any denigrating, critical or derogatory remarks about the other party or their respective family, discusses these proceedings, or speaks about family law matters within the presence or hearing of the child.   making critical comments about the other or any member of the other’s respective family within the presence or hearing of the child, (c) speaking with the child about these court proceedings, (d) discussing with the child family law matters including matters relating to child support, and (e) shall make their best efforts to ensure that no other party makes any denigrating, critical or derogatory remarks about the other party or their respective family, discusses these proceedings, or speaks about family law matters within the presence or hearing of the child.   speaking with the child about these court proceedings, (d) discussing with the child family law matters including matters relating to child support, and (e) shall make their best efforts to ensure that no other party makes any denigrating, critical or derogatory remarks about the other party or their respective family, discusses these proceedings, or speaks about family law matters within the presence or hearing of the child.   discussing with the child family law matters including matters relating to child support, and (e) shall make their best efforts to ensure that no other party makes any denigrating, critical or derogatory remarks about the other party or their respective family, discusses these proceedings, or speaks about family law matters within the presence or hearing of the child.   shall make their best efforts to ensure that no other party makes any denigrating, critical or derogatory remarks about the other party or their respective family, discusses these proceedings, or speaks about family law matters within the presence or hearing of the child.   copies of all half year or yearly reports of the child to both the mother and the father, and (b) copies of all order forms for school photographs to both the mother and the father,   copies of all order forms for school photographs to both the mother and the father,
provided that should the provision of such reports or photographs to the father entail any cost, the father shall be responsible for all such payments to the school and providing a copy of these orders shall be deemed to be such authorisation to the school.
reasons for judgment
judge street
introduction
background
chronology
evidence  affidavit of ms kavran dated 14 july 2023, (2) affidavit of mr vinko dated 14 july 2023, (3) affidavit of mr vinko dated 22 january 2024, (4) affidavit of x dated 21 july 2023, (5) affidavit of dr d dated 5 april 2022, (6) affidavit of dr s dated 6 july 2023, (7) affidavit of dr s dated 5 february 2024.   affidavit of mr vinko dated 14 july 2023, (3) affidavit of mr vinko dated 22 january 2024, (4) affidavit of x dated 21 july 2023, (5) affidavit of dr d dated 5 april 2022, (6) affidavit of dr s dated 6 july 2023, (7) affidavit of dr s dated 5 february 2024.   affidavit of mr vinko dated 22 january 2024, (4) affidavit of x dated 21 july 2023, (5) affidavit of dr d dated 5 april 2022, (6) affidavit of dr s dated 6 july 2023, (7) affidavit of dr s dated 5 february 2024.   affidavit of x dated 21 july 2023, (5) affidavit of dr d dated 5 april 2022, (6) affidavit of dr s dated 6 july 2023, (7) affidavit of dr s dated 5 february 2024.   affidavit of dr d dated 5 april 2022, (6) affidavit of dr s dated 6 july 2023, (7) affidavit of dr s dated 5 february 2024.   affidavit of dr s dated 6 july 2023, (7) affidavit of dr s dated 5 february 2024.   affidavit of dr s dated 5 february 2024.
the single expert report
mr vinko (respondent father)
ms kavran (applicant mother)
x (the child)
paternal grandparents
evaluations and recommendations   the child should reside with the mother, (2) the child should continue spending supervised time with the father and paternal family, as per the current schedule for at least one year, with steps to progression, (3) the child should be at liberty to contact the paternal family as per her wishes, (4) the father should engage with a treating psychiatrist for diagnostic clarification and medication review. the father’s psychiatrist would benefit from access to the medical records provided in the current assessment to inform her assessment and treatment planning, (5) the father should engage in psychological treatment aimed at increasing his capacity to meet the child’s psychological needs given his parenting vulnerabilities of mental illness and low cognitive capacity. this should be provided by a clinician with experience in the field of family law, as the father would benefit from individualised review of the post-separation parenting courses he has already completed, and the triple p program as recommended below. (6) the father’s time with the child could progress to unsupervised (day only) time if the following conditions are met: (a) he has demonstrated a 12-month period of consistent engagement with his psychiatrist (which would likely include a period of monthly appointments initially, reducing to three- or six-monthly as per the psychiatrist’s recommendation) and medication compliance, (b) he is not demonstrating symptoms of active mental health episodes, (c) he is demonstrating positive engagement with the child in the supervised contacts, (d) he has participated in psychological treatment as per (5) above. (7) the child should be able to refuse to spend time with the father if he demonstrates a deterioration in psychological or behavioural functioning, (8) the child could have overnight time with the father as per her wishes, after one year of unsupervised time. the expert writes that they recommend that the child expressed wishes be assessed by the child’s psychologist to establish the independence of her stated position. the expert expressed a concern about the child being pressured by both her maternal and paternal family in relation to this issue. if the child’s psychologist forms a view that either family is placing pressure on the child, that party should be referred for further therapeutic input, (9) the child should continue in her current counselling and sessions should progress to supporting them to manage the conflict that has occurred between her parents and supporting them to rebuild her relationship with the father and understanding his mental illness, (10) all treating clinicians (including psychologists, psychiatrists, other counsellors) involved with the family should have access with to this report to support her clinical work, (11) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.   the child should continue spending supervised time with the father and paternal family, as per the current schedule for at least one year, with steps to progression, (3) the child should be at liberty to contact the paternal family as per her wishes, (4) the father should engage with a treating psychiatrist for diagnostic clarification and medication review. the father’s psychiatrist would benefit from access to the medical records provided in the current assessment to inform her assessment and treatment planning, (5) the father should engage in psychological treatment aimed at increasing his capacity to meet the child’s psychological needs given his parenting vulnerabilities of mental illness and low cognitive capacity. this should be provided by a clinician with experience in the field of family law, as the father would benefit from individualised review of the post-separation parenting courses he has already completed, and the triple p program as recommended below. (6) the father’s time with the child could progress to unsupervised (day only) time if the following conditions are met: (a) he has demonstrated a 12-month period of consistent engagement with his psychiatrist (which would likely include a period of monthly appointments initially, reducing to three- or six-monthly as per the psychiatrist’s recommendation) and medication compliance, (b) he is not demonstrating symptoms of active mental health episodes, (c) he is demonstrating positive engagement with the child in the supervised contacts, (d) he has participated in psychological treatment as per (5) above. (7) the child should be able to refuse to spend time with the father if he demonstrates a deterioration in psychological or behavioural functioning, (8) the child could have overnight time with the father as per her wishes, after one year of unsupervised time. the expert writes that they recommend that the child expressed wishes be assessed by the child’s psychologist to establish the independence of her stated position. the expert expressed a concern about the child being pressured by both her maternal and paternal family in relation to this issue. if the child’s psychologist forms a view that either family is placing pressure on the child, that party should be referred for further therapeutic input, (9) the child should continue in her current counselling and sessions should progress to supporting them to manage the conflict that has occurred between her parents and supporting them to rebuild her relationship with the father and understanding his mental illness, (10) all treating clinicians (including psychologists, psychiatrists, other counsellors) involved with the family should have access with to this report to support her clinical work, (11) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.   the child should be at liberty to contact the paternal family as per her wishes, (4) the father should engage with a treating psychiatrist for diagnostic clarification and medication review. the father’s psychiatrist would benefit from access to the medical records provided in the current assessment to inform her assessment and treatment planning, (5) the father should engage in psychological treatment aimed at increasing his capacity to meet the child’s psychological needs given his parenting vulnerabilities of mental illness and low cognitive capacity. this should be provided by a clinician with experience in the field of family law, as the father would benefit from individualised review of the post-separation parenting courses he has already completed, and the triple p program as recommended below. (6) the father’s time with the child could progress to unsupervised (day only) time if the following conditions are met: (a) he has demonstrated a 12-month period of consistent engagement with his psychiatrist (which would likely include a period of monthly appointments initially, reducing to three- or six-monthly as per the psychiatrist’s recommendation) and medication compliance, (b) he is not demonstrating symptoms of active mental health episodes, (c) he is demonstrating positive engagement with the child in the supervised contacts, (d) he has participated in psychological treatment as per (5) above. (7) the child should be able to refuse to spend time with the father if he demonstrates a deterioration in psychological or behavioural functioning, (8) the child could have overnight time with the father as per her wishes, after one year of unsupervised time. the expert writes that they recommend that the child expressed wishes be assessed by the child’s psychologist to establish the independence of her stated position. the expert expressed a concern about the child being pressured by both her maternal and paternal family in relation to this issue. if the child’s psychologist forms a view that either family is placing pressure on the child, that party should be referred for further therapeutic input, (9) the child should continue in her current counselling and sessions should progress to supporting them to manage the conflict that has occurred between her parents and supporting them to rebuild her relationship with the father and understanding his mental illness, (10) all treating clinicians (including psychologists, psychiatrists, other counsellors) involved with the family should have access with to this report to support her clinical work, (11) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.   the father should engage with a treating psychiatrist for diagnostic clarification and medication review. the father’s psychiatrist would benefit from access to the medical records provided in the current assessment to inform her assessment and treatment planning, (5) the father should engage in psychological treatment aimed at increasing his capacity to meet the child’s psychological needs given his parenting vulnerabilities of mental illness and low cognitive capacity. this should be provided by a clinician with experience in the field of family law, as the father would benefit from individualised review of the post-separation parenting courses he has already completed, and the triple p program as recommended below. (6) the father’s time with the child could progress to unsupervised (day only) time if the following conditions are met: (a) he has demonstrated a 12-month period of consistent engagement with his psychiatrist (which would likely include a period of monthly appointments initially, reducing to three- or six-monthly as per the psychiatrist’s recommendation) and medication compliance, (b) he is not demonstrating symptoms of active mental health episodes, (c) he is demonstrating positive engagement with the child in the supervised contacts, (d) he has participated in psychological treatment as per (5) above. (7) the child should be able to refuse to spend time with the father if he demonstrates a deterioration in psychological or behavioural functioning, (8) the child could have overnight time with the father as per her wishes, after one year of unsupervised time. the expert writes that they recommend that the child expressed wishes be assessed by the child’s psychologist to establish the independence of her stated position. the expert expressed a concern about the child being pressured by both her maternal and paternal family in relation to this issue. if the child’s psychologist forms a view that either family is placing pressure on the child, that party should be referred for further therapeutic input, (9) the child should continue in her current counselling and sessions should progress to supporting them to manage the conflict that has occurred between her parents and supporting them to rebuild her relationship with the father and understanding his mental illness, (10) all treating clinicians (including psychologists, psychiatrists, other counsellors) involved with the family should have access with to this report to support her clinical work, (11) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.   the father should engage in psychological treatment aimed at increasing his capacity to meet the child’s psychological needs given his parenting vulnerabilities of mental illness and low cognitive capacity. this should be provided by a clinician with experience in the field of family law, as the father would benefit from individualised review of the post-separation parenting courses he has already completed, and the triple p program as recommended below. (6) the father’s time with the child could progress to unsupervised (day only) time if the following conditions are met: (a) he has demonstrated a 12-month period of consistent engagement with his psychiatrist (which would likely include a period of monthly appointments initially, reducing to three- or six-monthly as per the psychiatrist’s recommendation) and medication compliance, (b) he is not demonstrating symptoms of active mental health episodes, (c) he is demonstrating positive engagement with the child in the supervised contacts, (d) he has participated in psychological treatment as per (5) above. (7) the child should be able to refuse to spend time with the father if he demonstrates a deterioration in psychological or behavioural functioning, (8) the child could have overnight time with the father as per her wishes, after one year of unsupervised time. the expert writes that they recommend that the child expressed wishes be assessed by the child’s psychologist to establish the independence of her stated position. the expert expressed a concern about the child being pressured by both her maternal and paternal family in relation to this issue. if the child’s psychologist forms a view that either family is placing pressure on the child, that party should be referred for further therapeutic input, (9) the child should continue in her current counselling and sessions should progress to supporting them to manage the conflict that has occurred between her parents and supporting them to rebuild her relationship with the father and understanding his mental illness, (10) all treating clinicians (including psychologists, psychiatrists, other counsellors) involved with the family should have access with to this report to support her clinical work, (11) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.   the father’s time with the child could progress to unsupervised (day only) time if the following conditions are met: (a) he has demonstrated a 12-month period of consistent engagement with his psychiatrist (which would likely include a period of monthly appointments initially, reducing to three- or six-monthly as per the psychiatrist’s recommendation) and medication compliance, (b) he is not demonstrating symptoms of active mental health episodes, (c) he is demonstrating positive engagement with the child in the supervised contacts, (d) he has participated in psychological treatment as per (5) above. (7) the child should be able to refuse to spend time with the father if he demonstrates a deterioration in psychological or behavioural functioning, (8) the child could have overnight time with the father as per her wishes, after one year of unsupervised time. the expert writes that they recommend that the child expressed wishes be assessed by the child’s psychologist to establish the independence of her stated position. the expert expressed a concern about the child being pressured by both her maternal and paternal family in relation to this issue. if the child’s psychologist forms a view that either family is placing pressure on the child, that party should be referred for further therapeutic input, (9) the child should continue in her current counselling and sessions should progress to supporting them to manage the conflict that has occurred between her parents and supporting them to rebuild her relationship with the father and understanding his mental illness, (10) all treating clinicians (including psychologists, psychiatrists, other counsellors) involved with the family should have access with to this report to support her clinical work, (11) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.   he has demonstrated a 12-month period of consistent engagement with his psychiatrist (which would likely include a period of monthly appointments initially, reducing to three- or six-monthly as per the psychiatrist’s recommendation) and medication compliance, (b) he is not demonstrating symptoms of active mental health episodes, (c) he is demonstrating positive engagement with the child in the supervised contacts, (d) he has participated in psychological treatment as per (5) above.   he is not demonstrating symptoms of active mental health episodes, (c) he is demonstrating positive engagement with the child in the supervised contacts, (d) he has participated in psychological treatment as per (5) above.   he is demonstrating positive engagement with the child in the supervised contacts, (d) he has participated in psychological treatment as per (5) above.   he has participated in psychological treatment as per (5) above.   the child should be able to refuse to spend time with the father if he demonstrates a deterioration in psychological or behavioural functioning, (8) the child could have overnight time with the father as per her wishes, after one year of unsupervised time. the expert writes that they recommend that the child expressed wishes be assessed by the child’s psychologist to establish the independence of her stated position. the expert expressed a concern about the child being pressured by both her maternal and paternal family in relation to this issue. if the child’s psychologist forms a view that either family is placing pressure on the child, that party should be referred for further therapeutic input, (9) the child should continue in her current counselling and sessions should progress to supporting them to manage the conflict that has occurred between her parents and supporting them to rebuild her relationship with the father and understanding his mental illness, (10) all treating clinicians (including psychologists, psychiatrists, other counsellors) involved with the family should have access with to this report to support her clinical work, (11) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.   the child could have overnight time with the father as per her wishes, after one year of unsupervised time. the expert writes that they recommend that the child expressed wishes be assessed by the child’s psychologist to establish the independence of her stated position. the expert expressed a concern about the child being pressured by both her maternal and paternal family in relation to this issue. if the child’s psychologist forms a view that either family is placing pressure on the child, that party should be referred for further therapeutic input, (9) the child should continue in her current counselling and sessions should progress to supporting them to manage the conflict that has occurred between her parents and supporting them to rebuild her relationship with the father and understanding his mental illness, (10) all treating clinicians (including psychologists, psychiatrists, other counsellors) involved with the family should have access with to this report to support her clinical work, (11) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.   the child should continue in her current counselling and sessions should progress to supporting them to manage the conflict that has occurred between her parents and supporting them to rebuild her relationship with the father and understanding his mental illness, (10) all treating clinicians (including psychologists, psychiatrists, other counsellors) involved with the family should have access with to this report to support her clinical work, (11) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.  ) all treating clinicians (including psychologists, psychiatrists, other counsellors) involved with the family should have access with to this report to support her clinical work, (11) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.  ) the mother should participate in a parenting after separation program as per the earlier orders, and (12) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.  ) the mother and father should complete triple p for teens to support their boundary-setting and disciplinary practices. the expert writer also suggests that the mother’s partner would benefit from participating in this program as well. they would benefit from psychoeducation about the impact of inappropriate media on the child and the child’s school can likely offer guidance and support in this regard.
report of dr d
parenting proceedings – the legal principles
the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
best interests of the child
...no doubt in the majority of cases, there will be a positive benefit for the child having a significant relationship with both parents, but there will also be some cases where there will be no positive benefit to be derived by a child by a court attempting to craft orders to foster a relationship with one parent, if this would not be in the child’s best interests.
... having a “meaningful relationship” with both parents is but one part of a set of arrangements that makes up a care arrangement. all parts of the arrangement must be considered before deciding what outcome is in the child’s best interests.
there is no legislative definition of “meaningful relationship” but for there to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child. (emphasis added)
and that desirability only operates when there is a chance of a meaningful relationship, which is beneficial to the child. it is not, in other words, a question of contact for contact sake. if there is a situation where contact with a parent is, on balance, likely to cause more harm to the child than good, or even is not likely to confer any benefit, then little purpose is served by this court making orders for such contact. that does not detract from the desirability of the child having a meaningful relationship, but the possibility of a meaningful relationship must first exist. (emphasis added)
issue of risk
... as was recognised by hale lj (as her ladyship then was) in re c and b (children) (care order: future harm) [2001] 1 f.l.r 611 at [28], in child-related proceedings, a comparatively small risk of really serious harm can justify action, while even the virtual certainty of slight harm might not. it could hardly be otherwise, because no prudent adult would willingly expose a child to the risk of sexual abuse when there is an unacceptably high chance of its occurrence, even though the chance is not proven by the evidence to be probable. requiring the proof of any possible future child abuse as a probability would pervert the law as settled by the high court in m v m and malec. (emphasis in the original)   it is now well established that “unacceptable risk” includes not merely physical harm but also includes an assessment of the risk of emotional harm: see a v a [1998] famca 25, (1998) flc 92-800 at 84,996, m v m (1988) 166 clr 69 at 77. (2) such an unacceptable risk can include any or all matters that compromise the safety, welfare and well-being of a child, and is examined in light of an accumulation of factors proved: see director general, department of family and community services (nsw) and the colt children [2013] nswchc 5 at [146]–[148]. (3) the components which lead to a conclusion that an unacceptable risk exists need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of “unacceptable risk” from the accumulation of factors, none or only some of which are proved to that standard: see johnson & page [2007] famca 1235, (2007) flc 93-344 at [68], endorsing and applying the principles set out in a paper prepared by the hon john fogarty am, “unacceptable risk: a return to basics” (2006) 20 australian journal of family law 249. (4) while each factor establishing risk need not be proved to the standard of s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), insofar as determining whether an unacceptable risk exists involves a prediction of the future, based on findings of fact: “the confidence one will have in the prediction will be, in part, a reflection of the confidence one has in the factual findings that base the prediction”.   such an unacceptable risk can include any or all matters that compromise the safety, welfare and well-being of a child, and is examined in light of an accumulation of factors proved: see director general, department of family and community services (nsw) and the colt children [2013] nswchc 5 at [146]–[148]. (3) the components which lead to a conclusion that an unacceptable risk exists need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of “unacceptable risk” from the accumulation of factors, none or only some of which are proved to that standard: see johnson & page [2007] famca 1235, (2007) flc 93-344 at [68], endorsing and applying the principles set out in a paper prepared by the hon john fogarty am, “unacceptable risk: a return to basics” (2006) 20 australian journal of family law 249. (4) while each factor establishing risk need not be proved to the standard of s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), insofar as determining whether an unacceptable risk exists involves a prediction of the future, based on findings of fact: “the confidence one will have in the prediction will be, in part, a reflection of the confidence one has in the factual findings that base the prediction”.   the components which lead to a conclusion that an unacceptable risk exists need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of “unacceptable risk” from the accumulation of factors, none or only some of which are proved to that standard: see johnson & page [2007] famca 1235, (2007) flc 93-344 at [68], endorsing and applying the principles set out in a paper prepared by the hon john fogarty am, “unacceptable risk: a return to basics” (2006) 20 australian journal of family law 249. (4) while each factor establishing risk need not be proved to the standard of s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), insofar as determining whether an unacceptable risk exists involves a prediction of the future, based on findings of fact: “the confidence one will have in the prediction will be, in part, a reflection of the confidence one has in the factual findings that base the prediction”.   while each factor establishing risk need not be proved to the standard of s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), insofar as determining whether an unacceptable risk exists involves a prediction of the future, based on findings of fact: “the confidence one will have in the prediction will be, in part, a reflection of the confidence one has in the factual findings that base the prediction”.
submissions
findings and conclusions
“is your mum teaching you how to change your name like her now do you no it’s a crime.”
that post showed the most recent example of the father prioritising his feelings over the feelings of the child in the context of the apparent distress of the child and the failure of the father to take down the video posts. on the seventh day of the hearing of the trial, there was an order made by consent that the father would take steps to endeavour to remove those posts. the consent to those orders do reflect a level of insight by the father as to trying to prioritise the best interests of the child. nonetheless, this came at the end of the seven-day hearing in circumstances where the child had already made patent her distress at the videos and the father had not earlier taken steps to seek to remove the same using his ipad.
associate: dated: 16 february 2024
dated: 16 february 2024