last updated: 8 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hess & forsyth [2024] fedcfamc2f 251
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge turnbull
overview  referred the parties back to mediation because the father filed his application before obtaining a s60i certificate, and (b) allocated 24 may 2024 as a mention date rather than its original listing date of 21 march 2024.   allocated 24 may 2024 as a mention date rather than its original listing date of 21 march 2024.
background  the parties have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) x lives primarily with the mother, (c) the father spends time with x each week, building overtime through various stages until eventually it increases to 6 nights per fortnight, (d) the father spends time with x on special days including christmas day, easter, and birthdays, (e) that changeovers occur with the mother delivering x at the start of the father’s time and the father returning her at the conclusion of his time, (f) that the parties use alternative dispute resolution before coming back to the court.   x lives primarily with the mother, (c) the father spends time with x each week, building overtime through various stages until eventually it increases to 6 nights per fortnight, (d) the father spends time with x on special days including christmas day, easter, and birthdays, (e) that changeovers occur with the mother delivering x at the start of the father’s time and the father returning her at the conclusion of his time, (f) that the parties use alternative dispute resolution before coming back to the court.   the father spends time with x each week, building overtime through various stages until eventually it increases to 6 nights per fortnight, (d) the father spends time with x on special days including christmas day, easter, and birthdays, (e) that changeovers occur with the mother delivering x at the start of the father’s time and the father returning her at the conclusion of his time, (f) that the parties use alternative dispute resolution before coming back to the court.   the father spends time with x on special days including christmas day, easter, and birthdays, (e) that changeovers occur with the mother delivering x at the start of the father’s time and the father returning her at the conclusion of his time, (f) that the parties use alternative dispute resolution before coming back to the court.   that changeovers occur with the mother delivering x at the start of the father’s time and the father returning her at the conclusion of his time, (f) that the parties use alternative dispute resolution before coming back to the court.   that the parties use alternative dispute resolution before coming back to the court.
submissions
b. separation from her extended family, with whom she lives. the mother is proposing to change the time the child spends with her father. there would be no opportunity for the incidental time that is occurring at daycare and the time when the mother is unable to care for the child as set out in order 19 (which has been occurring). some orders will not be able to be carried out - i.e. orders 10, 19 and orders relating to special days. a minimum of 10 hours of travel imposed on the child over a weekend, twice each month. joint decision making for major long-term issues such as the child’s daycare and health providers. if the matter is delayed for the parties to attend fdr, then a first return date is likely to be mid-year, noting that the next chamber date is 10 may 2024. by may 2024, the child may have already been relocated to [town b] and the nature of the father’s application will change from an injunction to seeking the return of the child. more importantly, delay is likely to mean extensive changes imposed onto the child, changes not contemplated by the parties when the orders were made just over 1 year ago, including the extensive travel now proposed. the mother seems to take a narrow interpretation of the orders, without consideration of the impact on the child of the relocation, the intention of the build-up time arrangement and the equal shared parental responsibility of the parents. if this application proceeds, it is likely to avoid further litigation for the parties, but importantly, save unnecessary disruption to this young child’s life, pending an agreement being reached or a decision of the court, in relation to the substantive issue of relocation. the mother has engaged the same lawyers who acted for her when the final parenting orders were made on 2 february 2024. the mother has been served with all material.[7]
d. the mother will continue to comply with the consent orders. the mother sought to increase the time the father would spend with the child. order 19 sets out a “first care option”. the mother offered this to the father when the site travel to [town b], for her employment, was required. the chambers hearing date of 10 may 2024 allows for mediation to occur (with ancillary orders made in circumstances if the mediation occurred prior or is not considered appropriate). due to original listing date being vacated, 21 march 2024 the availability of a judicial officer would need to be sought.
11. the mother seeks that the application for review be dismissed.[8]
the law
allocation of a return or hearing date  a court must hear an application for review of an exercise of power by a senior judicial registrar or judicial registrar as an original hearing.
note: in an original hearing, the court rehears the whole matter and does not simply review the decision of the original court. (2) the court may receive as evidence:   any affidavit or exhibit tendered in the first hearing, or (b) any further affidavit or exhibit, or (c) the transcript (if any) of the first hearing, or (d) if a transcript is not available—an affidavit about the evidence that was adduced at the first hearing, sworn by a person who was present at the first hearing.   if a transcript is not available—an affidavit about the evidence that was adduced at the first hearing, sworn by a person who was present at the first hearing.   where the registry proposes to fix a first court date in the normal course and the applicant seeks a different date but one that would still allow for compliance with the relevant rules fixing time limits referable to the application, (b) where the applicant seeks a first court date that would not allow time for compliance with the relevant rules fixing time limits referable to the application, but does not seek any variation of time limits fixed by the rules, and (c) where the applicant seeks a first court date that would not allow time for compliance with the relevant rules fixing time limits referable to the application and seeks that any of those normal time limits fixed by the rules be shortened or dispensed with.[9]   where the applicant seeks a first court date that would not allow time for compliance with the relevant rules fixing time limits referable to the application, but does not seek any variation of time limits fixed by the rules, and (c) where the applicant seeks a first court date that would not allow time for compliance with the relevant rules fixing time limits referable to the application and seeks that any of those normal time limits fixed by the rules be shortened or dispensed with.[9]   where the applicant seeks a first court date that would not allow time for compliance with the relevant rules fixing time limits referable to the application and seeks that any of those normal time limits fixed by the rules be shortened or dispensed with.[9]
dispute resolution
subject to subsection (9), a court exercising jurisdiction under this act must not hear an application for a part vii order in relation to a child unless the applicant files in the court a certificate given to the applicant by a family dispute resolution practitioner under subsection (8). the certificate must be filed with the application for the part vii order.
subsection (7) does not apply to an application for a part vii order in relation to a child if:   the applicant is applying for the order: (i) to be made with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, or (ii) in response to an application that another party to the proceedings has made for a part vii order, or (b) the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that: (i) there has been abuse of the child by one of the parties to the proceedings, or (ii) there would be a risk of abuse of the child if there were to be a delay in applying for the order, or (iii) there has been family violence by one of the parties to the proceedings, or (iv) there is a risk of family violence by one of the parties to the proceedings, or (c) all the following conditions are satisfied:   to be made with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, or (ii) in response to an application that another party to the proceedings has made for a part vii order, or  ) in response to an application that another party to the proceedings has made for a part vii order, or   there has been abuse of the child by one of the parties to the proceedings, or (ii) there would be a risk of abuse of the child if there were to be a delay in applying for the order, or (iii) there has been family violence by one of the parties to the proceedings, or (iv) there is a risk of family violence by one of the parties to the proceedings, or  ) there would be a risk of abuse of the child if there were to be a delay in applying for the order, or (iii) there has been family violence by one of the parties to the proceedings, or (iv) there is a risk of family violence by one of the parties to the proceedings, or  i) there has been family violence by one of the parties to the proceedings, or (iv) there is a risk of family violence by one of the parties to the proceedings, or  ) there is a risk of family violence by one of the parties to the proceedings, or  the application is made in relation to a particular issue, (ii) a part vii order has been made in relation to that issue within the period of 12 months before the application is made, (iii) the application is made in relation to a contravention of the order by a person, (iv) the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person has behaved in a way that shows a serious disregard for his or her obligations under the order, or  ) a part vii order has been made in relation to that issue within the period of 12 months before the application is made, (iii) the application is made in relation to a contravention of the order by a person, (iv) the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person has behaved in a way that shows a serious disregard for his or her obligations under the order, or  i) the application is made in relation to a contravention of the order by a person, (iv) the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person has behaved in a way that shows a serious disregard for his or her obligations under the order, or  ) the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person has behaved in a way that shows a serious disregard for his or her obligations under the order, or   the application is made in circumstances of urgency, or (e) one or more of the parties to the proceedings is unable to participate effectively in family dispute resolution (whether because of an incapacity of some kind, physical remoteness from dispute resolution services or for some other reason), or (f) other circumstances specified in the regulations are satisfied.   one or more of the parties to the proceedings is unable to participate effectively in family dispute resolution (whether because of an incapacity of some kind, physical remoteness from dispute resolution services or for some other reason), or
consideration
responding to an application in a proceeding   a respondent to an application in a proceeding who seeks to oppose the application, or seeks different orders, must file and serve a response to an application in a proceeding. (2) a respondent who files and serves a response to an application in a proceeding must, at the same time, file and serve an affidavit stating the facts relied on in support of the response. note: a response to an application in a proceeding must be filed and served within 28 days after service of the application to which it relates (see sub-rule 2.18(2)).
leave is granted to the other party to file an updating affidavit – non-filing of family dispute resolution certificate and request the registrar reconsider an exemption pursuant to section 60i(9) of the act.[12]
associate: dated: 28 february 2024
dated: 28 february 2024
[1] affidavit of mr hess filed 8 february 2024 [44] (‘father’s affidavit’). [2] ibid [41]-[59]. [3] ibid. [4] order of deputy registrar in hess & forsyth (federal circuit and family court of australia, roc1175/2022, 9 february 2024) (‘court orders’). [5] ibid. [6] application for review of mr hess filed 13 february 2024. [7] written submissions of mr hess filed 20 february 2024. [8] written submissions of ms forsyth filed 22 february 2024. [9] myers & myers [2011] fmcafam 1104 (‘myers & myers’). [10] court orders (n 4) [3(b)]. [11] father’s affidavit (n 1) [44]: the mother believes that she will lose her job if she does not relocate. see paragraph 6 of these reasons. [12] court orders (n 4) [4(b)].