last updated: 13 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
lavigne & gavin [2024] fedcfamc2f 353
orders
the court orders that:
ex-tempore reasons for judgmentjudge harland
section 190 overarching purpose of civil practice and procedure provisions the overarching purpose of the civil practice and procedure provisions is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes: according to law, and as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible. section 191 parties to act consistently with the overarching purpose the parties to a civil proceeding before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose. a party’s lawyer must, in the conduct of such a proceeding before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) (including negotiations for settlement) on the party’s behalf: take account of the duty imposed on the party by subsection (1), and assist the party to comply with the duty.
rule 14.07 procedure for review a court must hear an application for review of an exercise of power by a senior judicial registrar or judicial registrar as an original hearing. note: in an original hearing, the court rehears the whole matter and does not simply review the decision of the original court. the court may receive as evidence: any affidavit or exhibit tendered in the first hearing, or with the leave of the court, any further affidavit or exhibit, or the transcript (if any) of the first hearing, or if a transcript is not available—an affidavit about the evidence that was adduced at the first hearing, sworn by a person who was present at the first hearing.
the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) envisage review applications being heard and determined promptly (r 14.05(4)). it would be tantamount to the repudiation of common law principles (aon risk services aust ltd v anu [2009] hca 27, (2009) 239 clr 175) and the statutory demand for efficiency (s 67 of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 (cth)) for the court to postpone hearing what is supposed to be an urgent interim application concerning a child. regardless of the contents of the family report, the opinions and recommendations within it will be untested and will not assist the resolution of any contentious issues of fact or law because conclusive findings are beyond the ambit of an interlocutory hearing.
the first core principle in paragraph 3.2 of the central practice direction points out the importance of prioritising the safety of the children reflecting the provisions of the act. this is clearly what the registrar had in mind in making the orders that she did on the occasion that the matter came before the court. it is also apparent that the registrar had in mind the importance of relationships between children and the parents and, for that reason, provided for a very short return date so that more detailed material could be put before the court.
i have mixed views about [x]'s capacity to be separated from her mother. i think that [x] is a child who requires a high degree of continuity, structure, and predictability. she may find it difficult to be in any environment away from her home [which is the house she shares with her mother]. for example, there were reports that [x] found it difficult to be in a holiday house with her father. i do not think that this reflects on her attachment towards either parent, but is reflective of her behavioural and neurological vulnerabilities. that is, it is common for children with adhd and behavioural dysregulation to demonstrate regressive behaviours when they are in a new or unfamiliar environment. that said, i think that [x] has a positive relationship with her father and is also able to spend several consecutive nights away from her mother in the care of her father, without significant regression or distress. however, i am strongly of the view that such time needs to be regular, predictable, and predetermined. i do not think that [x] has the capacity to cope with ad hoc, changing, or unstructured living and parenting arrangements.
associate: dated: 1 march 2024
dated: 1 march 2024