last updated: 15 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
eckhardt & eckhardt [2024] fedcfamc2f 271
orders
the court orders that:  each alternate weekend from 6.30pm friday until 6.00pm sunday. (b) each wednesday at 7.30pm by telephone with the father to initiate the call to the mother's mobile number. (c) for half of all school term holidays as agreed between the mother and father in writing and failing agreement: (i) for the first half in even-numbered years, from the conclusion of school on friday on the last day of term until 12:00pm on the middle saturday of the school term holiday, and (ii) for the second half in odd-numbered years, from 12:00pm on the middle saturday of the school term holiday until the commencement of school on the first day of the next term. (d) in the summer school holidays in 2024/25 and each year thereafter for half of the long summer holidays as agreed between the parties and failing agreement: (i) for the first half in even numbered years from the conclusion of the last day of school in term 4 for a period of consecutive nights calculated to be half of the long summer school holidays until 12.00pm on the last day. (ii) for the second half in odd numbered years from 12.00pm on the day calculated to be the middle day of the long summer holidays until 12.00pm on the day prior to commencement of the school year. (e) on special occasions, as follows: (i) on father's day weekend, from the conclusion of school on the friday immediately preceding father's day (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday, (ii) on x's birthday from 3:15pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am until 2:00pm if x's birthday falls on a non-school day and in the event the father is not able to spend time with x in accordance with this order, by telephone at 6.00pm, (iii) on the father's birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until 7:00 pm, (iv) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each odd year, (v) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each even year, (vi) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year. (f) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   each wednesday at 7.30pm by telephone with the father to initiate the call to the mother's mobile number. (c) for half of all school term holidays as agreed between the mother and father in writing and failing agreement: (i) for the first half in even-numbered years, from the conclusion of school on friday on the last day of term until 12:00pm on the middle saturday of the school term holiday, and (ii) for the second half in odd-numbered years, from 12:00pm on the middle saturday of the school term holiday until the commencement of school on the first day of the next term. (d) in the summer school holidays in 2024/25 and each year thereafter for half of the long summer holidays as agreed between the parties and failing agreement: (i) for the first half in even numbered years from the conclusion of the last day of school in term 4 for a period of consecutive nights calculated to be half of the long summer school holidays until 12.00pm on the last day. (ii) for the second half in odd numbered years from 12.00pm on the day calculated to be the middle day of the long summer holidays until 12.00pm on the day prior to commencement of the school year. (e) on special occasions, as follows: (i) on father's day weekend, from the conclusion of school on the friday immediately preceding father's day (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday, (ii) on x's birthday from 3:15pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am until 2:00pm if x's birthday falls on a non-school day and in the event the father is not able to spend time with x in accordance with this order, by telephone at 6.00pm, (iii) on the father's birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until 7:00 pm, (iv) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each odd year, (v) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each even year, (vi) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year. (f) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   for half of all school term holidays as agreed between the mother and father in writing and failing agreement: (i) for the first half in even-numbered years, from the conclusion of school on friday on the last day of term until 12:00pm on the middle saturday of the school term holiday, and (ii) for the second half in odd-numbered years, from 12:00pm on the middle saturday of the school term holiday until the commencement of school on the first day of the next term. (d) in the summer school holidays in 2024/25 and each year thereafter for half of the long summer holidays as agreed between the parties and failing agreement: (i) for the first half in even numbered years from the conclusion of the last day of school in term 4 for a period of consecutive nights calculated to be half of the long summer school holidays until 12.00pm on the last day. (ii) for the second half in odd numbered years from 12.00pm on the day calculated to be the middle day of the long summer holidays until 12.00pm on the day prior to commencement of the school year. (e) on special occasions, as follows: (i) on father's day weekend, from the conclusion of school on the friday immediately preceding father's day (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday, (ii) on x's birthday from 3:15pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am until 2:00pm if x's birthday falls on a non-school day and in the event the father is not able to spend time with x in accordance with this order, by telephone at 6.00pm, (iii) on the father's birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until 7:00 pm, (iv) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each odd year, (v) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each even year, (vi) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year. (f) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   for the first half in even-numbered years, from the conclusion of school on friday on the last day of term until 12:00pm on the middle saturday of the school term holiday, and (ii) for the second half in odd-numbered years, from 12:00pm on the middle saturday of the school term holiday until the commencement of school on the first day of the next term.  ) for the second half in odd-numbered years, from 12:00pm on the middle saturday of the school term holiday until the commencement of school on the first day of the next term.   in the summer school holidays in 2024/25 and each year thereafter for half of the long summer holidays as agreed between the parties and failing agreement: (i) for the first half in even numbered years from the conclusion of the last day of school in term 4 for a period of consecutive nights calculated to be half of the long summer school holidays until 12.00pm on the last day. (ii) for the second half in odd numbered years from 12.00pm on the day calculated to be the middle day of the long summer holidays until 12.00pm on the day prior to commencement of the school year. (e) on special occasions, as follows: (i) on father's day weekend, from the conclusion of school on the friday immediately preceding father's day (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday, (ii) on x's birthday from 3:15pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am until 2:00pm if x's birthday falls on a non-school day and in the event the father is not able to spend time with x in accordance with this order, by telephone at 6.00pm, (iii) on the father's birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until 7:00 pm, (iv) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each odd year, (v) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each even year, (vi) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year. (f) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   for the first half in even numbered years from the conclusion of the last day of school in term 4 for a period of consecutive nights calculated to be half of the long summer school holidays until 12.00pm on the last day. (ii) for the second half in odd numbered years from 12.00pm on the day calculated to be the middle day of the long summer holidays until 12.00pm on the day prior to commencement of the school year.  ) for the second half in odd numbered years from 12.00pm on the day calculated to be the middle day of the long summer holidays until 12.00pm on the day prior to commencement of the school year.   on special occasions, as follows: (i) on father's day weekend, from the conclusion of school on the friday immediately preceding father's day (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday, (ii) on x's birthday from 3:15pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am until 2:00pm if x's birthday falls on a non-school day and in the event the father is not able to spend time with x in accordance with this order, by telephone at 6.00pm, (iii) on the father's birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until 7:00 pm, (iv) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each odd year, (v) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each even year, (vi) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year. (f) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on father's day weekend, from the conclusion of school on the friday immediately preceding father's day (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday, (ii) on x's birthday from 3:15pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am until 2:00pm if x's birthday falls on a non-school day and in the event the father is not able to spend time with x in accordance with this order, by telephone at 6.00pm, (iii) on the father's birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until 7:00 pm, (iv) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each odd year, (v) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each even year, (vi) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year.  ) on x's birthday from 3:15pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am until 2:00pm if x's birthday falls on a non-school day and in the event the father is not able to spend time with x in accordance with this order, by telephone at 6.00pm, (iii) on the father's birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until 7:00 pm, (iv) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each odd year, (v) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each even year, (vi) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year.  i) on the father's birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until 7:00 pm, (iv) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each odd year, (v) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each even year, (vi) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year.  ) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each odd year, (v) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each even year, (vi) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year.   from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each even year, (vi) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year.  ) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each odd year, (vii) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year.  i) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each even year.   such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on mother's day weekend from the conclusion of school on the friday immediately preceding mother's day (or 3:15 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday, (b) on the mother's birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3:15pm if a non‑school day) until 7:00pm, (c) on x's birthday, from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am until 2:00pm if it falls on a non-school day, (d) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each even year, (e) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each odd year, (f) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each even year, (g) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each odd year. (h) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on the mother's birthday, from the conclusion of school (or 3:15pm if a non‑school day) until 7:00pm, (c) on x's birthday, from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am until 2:00pm if it falls on a non-school day, (d) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each even year, (e) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each odd year, (f) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each even year, (g) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each odd year. (h) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on x's birthday, from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am until 2:00pm if it falls on a non-school day, (d) from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each even year, (e) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each odd year, (f) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each even year, (g) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each odd year. (h) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   from 5.30pm on the saturday immediately preceding easter sunday until 11.00am on easter monday in each even year, (e) from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each odd year, (f) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each even year, (g) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each odd year. (h) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   from 9.00am on easter friday until 5.30pm saturday in each odd year, (f) from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each even year, (g) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each odd year. (h) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   from 3:30 pm christmas day until 5:30 pm boxing day each even year, (g) from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each odd year. (h) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   from 5.30pm christmas eve until 3.30pm christmas day each odd year. (h) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   shall provide all necessary authorisations to all of x's treating medical practitioners to allow both parties to have direct access to x's medical records so as to ensure that any progress reports, recommendations, diagnosis, prescriptions or other information are able to be issued to both parties, (b) do all acts and things including signing all necessary documents to ensure that x continue to attend, at the parties joint expense, any such other medical or allied health professional as required, (c) comply with all directions provided to the parties by x's treating medical professionals including, but not limited to, administering medication as directed, and (d) will not provide to x any therapies, treatments, medications, or anything else that has not been recommended by the child's medical or allied health professionals without the agreement of the other parent.   do all acts and things including signing all necessary documents to ensure that x continue to attend, at the parties joint expense, any such other medical or allied health professional as required, (c) comply with all directions provided to the parties by x's treating medical professionals including, but not limited to, administering medication as directed, and (d) will not provide to x any therapies, treatments, medications, or anything else that has not been recommended by the child's medical or allied health professionals without the agreement of the other parent.   comply with all directions provided to the parties by x's treating medical professionals including, but not limited to, administering medication as directed, and (d) will not provide to x any therapies, treatments, medications, or anything else that has not been recommended by the child's medical or allied health professionals without the agreement of the other parent.   will not provide to x any therapies, treatments, medications, or anything else that has not been recommended by the child's medical or allied health professionals without the agreement of the other parent.   the party wishing to travel interstate with x shall provide the other party with no less than 14 days' notice of their intention to do so and provide to the other party with an itinerary for their proposed travel, including the following details: (i) departure, arrival and return dates and times, (ii) details of any flights and other transport particulars, (iii) accommodation details, including bookings and contact details. (b) the other party must not unreasonably refuse the other parties request to travel with x. (c) all travel subject to this provision occur during the time that x would be spending time with that parent and is not to interfere with the other parent's time pursuant to these orders.   departure, arrival and return dates and times, (ii) details of any flights and other transport particulars, (iii) accommodation details, including bookings and contact details.  ) details of any flights and other transport particulars, (iii) accommodation details, including bookings and contact details.  i) accommodation details, including bookings and contact details.   the other party must not unreasonably refuse the other parties request to travel with x. (c) all travel subject to this provision occur during the time that x would be spending time with that parent and is not to interfere with the other parent's time pursuant to these orders.   all travel subject to this provision occur during the time that x would be spending time with that parent and is not to interfere with the other parent's time pursuant to these orders.   exposing x to family violence or allowing another person to do so, (b) consuming alcohol to excess (being to a blood alcohol content of greater than 0.05 %) for twenty-four hours before or during any period x is in their care, (c) denigrating, belittling rebuking or otherwise insulting the other party or any member of their family or any person they are in a relationship with, in the hearing or presence of x, (d) discussing the details of these proceedings, or any matters arising from these proceedings, with x.   consuming alcohol to excess (being to a blood alcohol content of greater than 0.05 %) for twenty-four hours before or during any period x is in their care, (c) denigrating, belittling rebuking or otherwise insulting the other party or any member of their family or any person they are in a relationship with, in the hearing or presence of x, (d) discussing the details of these proceedings, or any matters arising from these proceedings, with x.   denigrating, belittling rebuking or otherwise insulting the other party or any member of their family or any person they are in a relationship with, in the hearing or presence of x, (d) discussing the details of these proceedings, or any matters arising from these proceedings, with x.   discussing the details of these proceedings, or any matters arising from these proceedings, with x.
notations:
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins:
introduction
background
he does not want to go home with you he wants to stay with me so for the best don't come over or i will call the cops.
the evidence
the full court has said more than once that a judge cannot be expected to rummage through a large volume of documents on the off chance that the facts might emerge.
what are the legal principles the court applies in determining where a child should live?
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
note: the presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that relates solely to the allocation of parental responsibility for a child as defined in section 61b. it does not provide for a presumption about the amount of time the child spends with each of the parents (this issue is dealt with in section 65daa).   the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence. (3) when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence.   family violence.   when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.
parental responsibility
"i don't need ur [sic] advice" ..... "don't start ur [sic] shit with me...".
how does the court determine what is in the child's best interests?
the focus placed by the father upon the prescribed consideration stated in s 60cc(3)(a) tended to elevate the views expressed by a child to something approaching a decisive status. in some cases, it may be right, in the exercise of a primary judge's discretion, to accord the views expressed by a child such weight, but s 60cc(3)(a) does not require that course to be taken. they are but one consideration of a number to be taken into account in the overall assessment of a child's best interests. (emphasis added)
the primary considerations
the benefit to x of a meaningful relationship with each of his parents
ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child.
the need to protect x from harm
the father's alcohol use
lack of boundaries
analysis of risk
the additional considerations
x's views
x's relationship with his parents and other important persons in his life
impact of change, including separation from a parent
the parents' ability to meet the needs of x, including his emotional and intellectual needs
the attitude to the child and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the child's parents
orders that are least likely to lead to further proceedings
determination
associate: dated: 5 march 2024
dated: 5 march 2024