last updated: 15 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
donata & hannes (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 277
orders
the court orders that:  the sum of $201,125.50 to the applicant at her direction, (b) the sum of $125,525.50 to the respondent at his direction, and (c) any balance to be divided 50/50 between the parties.   the sum of $125,525.50 to the respondent at his direction, and (c) any balance to be divided 50/50 between the parties.   any balance to be divided 50/50 between the parties.   in the case of the applicant: (i) her f bank account #...83, (b) in the case of the respondent: (i) his commonwealth bank of australia account #...78, (ii) his motor vehicle 1, (iii) his motor vehicle 2, (iv) his motor vehicle 3, (v) his motor vehicle 4, (vi) his motor vehicle 5, (vii) his caravan, and (viii) the parties’ chattels currently in storage with g company.   her f bank account #...83,   in the case of the respondent: (i) his commonwealth bank of australia account #...78, (ii) his motor vehicle 1, (iii) his motor vehicle 2, (iv) his motor vehicle 3, (v) his motor vehicle 4, (vi) his motor vehicle 5, (vii) his caravan, and (viii) the parties’ chattels currently in storage with g company.   his commonwealth bank of australia account #...78, (ii) his motor vehicle 1, (iii) his motor vehicle 2, (iv) his motor vehicle 3, (v) his motor vehicle 4, (vi) his motor vehicle 5, (vii) his caravan, and (viii) the parties’ chattels currently in storage with g company.  ) his motor vehicle 1, (iii) his motor vehicle 2, (iv) his motor vehicle 3, (v) his motor vehicle 4, (vi) his motor vehicle 5, (vii) his caravan, and (viii) the parties’ chattels currently in storage with g company.  i) his motor vehicle 2, (iv) his motor vehicle 3, (v) his motor vehicle 4, (vi) his motor vehicle 5, (vii) his caravan, and (viii) the parties’ chattels currently in storage with g company.  ) his motor vehicle 3, (v) his motor vehicle 4, (vi) his motor vehicle 5, (vii) his caravan, and (viii) the parties’ chattels currently in storage with g company.   his motor vehicle 4, (vi) his motor vehicle 5, (vii) his caravan, and (viii) the parties’ chattels currently in storage with g company.  ) his motor vehicle 5, (vii) his caravan, and (viii) the parties’ chattels currently in storage with g company.  i) his caravan, and (viii) the parties’ chattels currently in storage with g company.  ii) the parties’ chattels currently in storage with g company.   in the case of the applicant: (i) any debt owed by the parties to ms h as at the date of these orders, (b) in the case of the respondent: (i) his commonwealth bank of australia mastercard debt, (ii) his commonwealth bank of australia overdraft account debt bearing account #...71, (iii) his j company debt, (iv) his k company debt, (v) his l company debt, (vi) his toll debt, (vii) his m company debt, (viii) any personal debt owed to mr n, (ix) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.   any debt owed by the parties to ms h as at the date of these orders,   in the case of the respondent: (i) his commonwealth bank of australia mastercard debt, (ii) his commonwealth bank of australia overdraft account debt bearing account #...71, (iii) his j company debt, (iv) his k company debt, (v) his l company debt, (vi) his toll debt, (vii) his m company debt, (viii) any personal debt owed to mr n, (ix) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.   his commonwealth bank of australia mastercard debt, (ii) his commonwealth bank of australia overdraft account debt bearing account #...71, (iii) his j company debt, (iv) his k company debt, (v) his l company debt, (vi) his toll debt, (vii) his m company debt, (viii) any personal debt owed to mr n, (ix) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.  ) his commonwealth bank of australia overdraft account debt bearing account #...71, (iii) his j company debt, (iv) his k company debt, (v) his l company debt, (vi) his toll debt, (vii) his m company debt, (viii) any personal debt owed to mr n, (ix) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.  i) his j company debt, (iv) his k company debt, (v) his l company debt, (vi) his toll debt, (vii) his m company debt, (viii) any personal debt owed to mr n, (ix) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.  ) his k company debt, (v) his l company debt, (vi) his toll debt, (vii) his m company debt, (viii) any personal debt owed to mr n, (ix) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.   his l company debt, (vi) his toll debt, (vii) his m company debt, (viii) any personal debt owed to mr n, (ix) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.  ) his toll debt, (vii) his m company debt, (viii) any personal debt owed to mr n, (ix) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.  i) his m company debt, (viii) any personal debt owed to mr n, (ix) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.  ii) any personal debt owed to mr n, (ix) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.  ) any personal debt owed to ms o, and (x) any personal debt owed to mr p.   any personal debt owed to mr p.   the applicant is entitled to be paid the specific percentage out of the respondent’s interest in the fund, (b) the respondent’s entitlement in the fund is correspondingly reduced by force of this order, and (c) the percentage specified for the purposes of this order is 50%.   the respondent’s entitlement in the fund is correspondingly reduced by force of this order, and (c) the percentage specified for the purposes of this order is 50%.   the percentage specified for the purposes of this order is 50%.   calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the act and the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 (cth) the entitlement awarded to the applicant in the immediately preceding clause of these orders, and (b) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment from the respondent’s interest in the fund.   pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment from the respondent’s interest in the fund.   the value of the non-member spouse interest is calculated in accordance with the sis regulations, and (b) any payments from respondent’s superannuation interest in the fund made after the trustee has created a new interest in the applicant’s name in the fund are not splitable payments in accordance with the requirement of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001.   any payments from respondent’s superannuation interest in the fund made after the trustee has created a new interest in the applicant’s name in the fund are not splitable payments in accordance with the requirement of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001.
reasons for judgment
judge obradovic:
credit
relevant legal principles
add-backs ] the full court held in omacini and omacini that addbacks fall into “three clear categories”: where the parties have expended money on legal fees, where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets, and “waste” or wanton, negligent, or reckless dissipation of assets. [28] however, the full court also made it clear that an addback does not necessarily occur whenever “a party has expended money realised from the disposition of assets that existed as at the date of separation”, the full court describing such a proposition as “unduly simplistic”. an earlier full court made the same point, saying that adding back is “the exception rather than the rule”. [29] the fundamental precept that addbacks are exceptional, reflected in the decisions just referred to, also mirrors what has been said in earlier decisions of the full court that, for example, “the family court must take the property of a party to the marriage as it finds it” at trial. an important parallel proposition is that the parties do not “go into a state of suspended economic animation” after separation. thus, reasonably incurred expenditure does not usually come within accepted categories of addback. [30] two fundamental premises emerge from omacini and the authorities preceding it. first, “adding back” is a discretionary exercise. when the discretion is exercised in favour of adding back, it reflects a decision that, exceptionally, in the particular circumstances of a case, justice and equity requires it. the second premise is its corollary: in cases that are not “exceptional” justice and equity can be achieved, not by adding back, but by the exercise of a different discretion – usually by taking up the same as a relevant s 75(2) factor. indeed, it has been said that the latter is “a course which is, perhaps, technically more correct” than adding back to the list of existing interests in property. (citations omitted)
relevant facts  the applicant was born in 1963. (b) the respondent was born in 1966. (c) the parties met in 1982. (d) in 1997, the applicant started receiving a disability pension. (e) in 2003, the respondent was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. (f) in 2007, the respondent had weekend leave and he spent it with the applicant. (g) in 2008, the respondent was released from gaol and granted parole to live at a home in suburb q rented by the applicant. (h) in early 2009, the respondent purchased in his sole name the property at b street, suburb c, and on completion of the purchase, the applicant started living at the suburb c property with the respondent. (i) in late 2022, the respondent purchased in his sole name accommodation in town e and the applicant then starts to occupy the accommodation. (j) upon the respondent’s release from prison, the applicant and members of her extended family financially supported the respondent for a period, helped him find employment and “generally put him on the right track”. (k) for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   the respondent was born in 1966. (c) the parties met in 1982. (d) in 1997, the applicant started receiving a disability pension. (e) in 2003, the respondent was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. (f) in 2007, the respondent had weekend leave and he spent it with the applicant. (g) in 2008, the respondent was released from gaol and granted parole to live at a home in suburb q rented by the applicant. (h) in early 2009, the respondent purchased in his sole name the property at b street, suburb c, and on completion of the purchase, the applicant started living at the suburb c property with the respondent. (i) in late 2022, the respondent purchased in his sole name accommodation in town e and the applicant then starts to occupy the accommodation. (j) upon the respondent’s release from prison, the applicant and members of her extended family financially supported the respondent for a period, helped him find employment and “generally put him on the right track”. (k) for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   the parties met in 1982. (d) in 1997, the applicant started receiving a disability pension. (e) in 2003, the respondent was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. (f) in 2007, the respondent had weekend leave and he spent it with the applicant. (g) in 2008, the respondent was released from gaol and granted parole to live at a home in suburb q rented by the applicant. (h) in early 2009, the respondent purchased in his sole name the property at b street, suburb c, and on completion of the purchase, the applicant started living at the suburb c property with the respondent. (i) in late 2022, the respondent purchased in his sole name accommodation in town e and the applicant then starts to occupy the accommodation. (j) upon the respondent’s release from prison, the applicant and members of her extended family financially supported the respondent for a period, helped him find employment and “generally put him on the right track”. (k) for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   in 1997, the applicant started receiving a disability pension. (e) in 2003, the respondent was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. (f) in 2007, the respondent had weekend leave and he spent it with the applicant. (g) in 2008, the respondent was released from gaol and granted parole to live at a home in suburb q rented by the applicant. (h) in early 2009, the respondent purchased in his sole name the property at b street, suburb c, and on completion of the purchase, the applicant started living at the suburb c property with the respondent. (i) in late 2022, the respondent purchased in his sole name accommodation in town e and the applicant then starts to occupy the accommodation. (j) upon the respondent’s release from prison, the applicant and members of her extended family financially supported the respondent for a period, helped him find employment and “generally put him on the right track”. (k) for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   in 2003, the respondent was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. (f) in 2007, the respondent had weekend leave and he spent it with the applicant. (g) in 2008, the respondent was released from gaol and granted parole to live at a home in suburb q rented by the applicant. (h) in early 2009, the respondent purchased in his sole name the property at b street, suburb c, and on completion of the purchase, the applicant started living at the suburb c property with the respondent. (i) in late 2022, the respondent purchased in his sole name accommodation in town e and the applicant then starts to occupy the accommodation. (j) upon the respondent’s release from prison, the applicant and members of her extended family financially supported the respondent for a period, helped him find employment and “generally put him on the right track”. (k) for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   in 2007, the respondent had weekend leave and he spent it with the applicant. (g) in 2008, the respondent was released from gaol and granted parole to live at a home in suburb q rented by the applicant. (h) in early 2009, the respondent purchased in his sole name the property at b street, suburb c, and on completion of the purchase, the applicant started living at the suburb c property with the respondent. (i) in late 2022, the respondent purchased in his sole name accommodation in town e and the applicant then starts to occupy the accommodation. (j) upon the respondent’s release from prison, the applicant and members of her extended family financially supported the respondent for a period, helped him find employment and “generally put him on the right track”. (k) for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   in 2008, the respondent was released from gaol and granted parole to live at a home in suburb q rented by the applicant. (h) in early 2009, the respondent purchased in his sole name the property at b street, suburb c, and on completion of the purchase, the applicant started living at the suburb c property with the respondent. (i) in late 2022, the respondent purchased in his sole name accommodation in town e and the applicant then starts to occupy the accommodation. (j) upon the respondent’s release from prison, the applicant and members of her extended family financially supported the respondent for a period, helped him find employment and “generally put him on the right track”. (k) for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   in early 2009, the respondent purchased in his sole name the property at b street, suburb c, and on completion of the purchase, the applicant started living at the suburb c property with the respondent. (i) in late 2022, the respondent purchased in his sole name accommodation in town e and the applicant then starts to occupy the accommodation. (j) upon the respondent’s release from prison, the applicant and members of her extended family financially supported the respondent for a period, helped him find employment and “generally put him on the right track”. (k) for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   in late 2022, the respondent purchased in his sole name accommodation in town e and the applicant then starts to occupy the accommodation. (j) upon the respondent’s release from prison, the applicant and members of her extended family financially supported the respondent for a period, helped him find employment and “generally put him on the right track”. (k) for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   upon the respondent’s release from prison, the applicant and members of her extended family financially supported the respondent for a period, helped him find employment and “generally put him on the right track”. (k) for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   for the entirety of the time the parties lived in the same home, from mid-2008 onwards, the applicant was in receipt of a commonwealth disability pension at the rate for a sole pensioner paid into her own account. this was despite the applicant’s contention that the parties lived as a de facto couple and the respondent being in a well-paying job, being two facts that would mean she was not eligible to receive that pension. (l) at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   at no stage did the applicant inform or notify the relevant pension authority that she was living in a de facto relationship. (m) the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   the applicant was responsible for undertaking all household tasks for the parties such as shopping, cooking, cleaning and washing. (n) the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   the suburb c property and the caravan were purchased in the respondent’s sole name and the borrowings were in his sole name. (o) the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   the respondent had the applicant’s first name tattooed upon himself. (p) at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   at times, the respondent stayed elsewhere than the suburb c property for short periods of time to make his attendance at his workplace easier by lessening travel time. (q) the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   the applicant would weekly provide money to the respondent to finance joint expenses.   the respondent called her names such as “cunt” from time to time, (b) the respondent demolished a piece of furniture with a weapon in the applicant’s presence, following an argument between the parties in late 2009, (c) the respondent would from time to time use his open right hand to slap the applicant’s face, (d) in about 2005, following an argument between the parties and while the applicant was in the kitchen washing up, the respondent poured petrol on the kitchen floor, said to the applicant “you want to fucking leave – i’ll set you on fire” and grabbed a lighter, (e) in mid-2020, following an argument, the respondent came into the bedroom where the applicant was watching television and punched the televisions screen 3 or 4 times, with such force that it resulted in him breaking his hand, and (f) in early 2021, the respondent lifted the mattress off the bed on which the applicant had been sleeping causing her to roll on the floor, he then barred his teeth at her, he then approached her and bit her on her body 3 times drawing blood and causing bruising. the respondent then grabbed the applicant, threw her face first onto the bed, got behind her and pulled her underpants down and said “do you want me to be a fucking animal?”. the respondent then let the applicant go and began smashing items, such as a glass bowl and bottles of perfume, on the floor. he also broke all 4 blades of the ceiling fan that was in the room.   the respondent demolished a piece of furniture with a weapon in the applicant’s presence, following an argument between the parties in late 2009, (c) the respondent would from time to time use his open right hand to slap the applicant’s face, (d) in about 2005, following an argument between the parties and while the applicant was in the kitchen washing up, the respondent poured petrol on the kitchen floor, said to the applicant “you want to fucking leave – i’ll set you on fire” and grabbed a lighter, (e) in mid-2020, following an argument, the respondent came into the bedroom where the applicant was watching television and punched the televisions screen 3 or 4 times, with such force that it resulted in him breaking his hand, and (f) in early 2021, the respondent lifted the mattress off the bed on which the applicant had been sleeping causing her to roll on the floor, he then barred his teeth at her, he then approached her and bit her on her body 3 times drawing blood and causing bruising. the respondent then grabbed the applicant, threw her face first onto the bed, got behind her and pulled her underpants down and said “do you want me to be a fucking animal?”. the respondent then let the applicant go and began smashing items, such as a glass bowl and bottles of perfume, on the floor. he also broke all 4 blades of the ceiling fan that was in the room.   the respondent would from time to time use his open right hand to slap the applicant’s face, (d) in about 2005, following an argument between the parties and while the applicant was in the kitchen washing up, the respondent poured petrol on the kitchen floor, said to the applicant “you want to fucking leave – i’ll set you on fire” and grabbed a lighter, (e) in mid-2020, following an argument, the respondent came into the bedroom where the applicant was watching television and punched the televisions screen 3 or 4 times, with such force that it resulted in him breaking his hand, and (f) in early 2021, the respondent lifted the mattress off the bed on which the applicant had been sleeping causing her to roll on the floor, he then barred his teeth at her, he then approached her and bit her on her body 3 times drawing blood and causing bruising. the respondent then grabbed the applicant, threw her face first onto the bed, got behind her and pulled her underpants down and said “do you want me to be a fucking animal?”. the respondent then let the applicant go and began smashing items, such as a glass bowl and bottles of perfume, on the floor. he also broke all 4 blades of the ceiling fan that was in the room.   in about 2005, following an argument between the parties and while the applicant was in the kitchen washing up, the respondent poured petrol on the kitchen floor, said to the applicant “you want to fucking leave – i’ll set you on fire” and grabbed a lighter, (e) in mid-2020, following an argument, the respondent came into the bedroom where the applicant was watching television and punched the televisions screen 3 or 4 times, with such force that it resulted in him breaking his hand, and (f) in early 2021, the respondent lifted the mattress off the bed on which the applicant had been sleeping causing her to roll on the floor, he then barred his teeth at her, he then approached her and bit her on her body 3 times drawing blood and causing bruising. the respondent then grabbed the applicant, threw her face first onto the bed, got behind her and pulled her underpants down and said “do you want me to be a fucking animal?”. the respondent then let the applicant go and began smashing items, such as a glass bowl and bottles of perfume, on the floor. he also broke all 4 blades of the ceiling fan that was in the room.   in mid-2020, following an argument, the respondent came into the bedroom where the applicant was watching television and punched the televisions screen 3 or 4 times, with such force that it resulted in him breaking his hand, and (f) in early 2021, the respondent lifted the mattress off the bed on which the applicant had been sleeping causing her to roll on the floor, he then barred his teeth at her, he then approached her and bit her on her body 3 times drawing blood and causing bruising. the respondent then grabbed the applicant, threw her face first onto the bed, got behind her and pulled her underpants down and said “do you want me to be a fucking animal?”. the respondent then let the applicant go and began smashing items, such as a glass bowl and bottles of perfume, on the floor. he also broke all 4 blades of the ceiling fan that was in the room.   in early 2021, the respondent lifted the mattress off the bed on which the applicant had been sleeping causing her to roll on the floor, he then barred his teeth at her, he then approached her and bit her on her body 3 times drawing blood and causing bruising. the respondent then grabbed the applicant, threw her face first onto the bed, got behind her and pulled her underpants down and said “do you want me to be a fucking animal?”. the respondent then let the applicant go and began smashing items, such as a glass bowl and bottles of perfume, on the floor. he also broke all 4 blades of the ceiling fan that was in the room.
future needs
the pool
ownership
description
value
respondent
moneys held in kahlil family lawyers trust account from sale of suburb c property
$326,000
addback
$52,100
accommodation at d street, town e
$37,000
motor vehicle 5
$27,500
motor vehicle 4
$17,500
motor vehicle 3
$7,000
caravan
$3,000
contents of g company storage shed
$2,000
super fund 1 (accumulation superannuation interest)
$118,000
total value of various credit card debts, financial institution debts and overdraft (from financial statement)  8,500)
applicant/joint
debt to ms h  0,000)
total:
$531,000
contributions and adjustment
$201,125.50
$59,000
$265,125.50
$125,525.50
motor vehicle 2
associate: dated: 11 march 2024
dated: 11 march 2024
[1] donata & hannes [2023] fedcfamc2f 439.[2] bain v bain [2017] famcafc 80; (2017) 319 flr 119 at [112].[3] [2012] hca 52, see in particular [37] to [42].[4] oamra & williams [2021] famcafc 117 at [35].[5] [2013] famcafc 116 (“bevan”).[6] [2014] famcafc 91 (“chapman”).[7] [2014] famcafc 203 (“scott”).[8] see for example peters & walker [2015] famca 732.[9] see generally russell & russell [1999] famca 1875; (1999) flc 92-877; teal & teal [2010] famcafc 120, but in the context of s.79.[10] bevan at [86].[11] [2018] famcafc 173 (“trevi”).[12] trevi at [27]-[30].[13] made up as follows: $26,000 + $68,600 + $50,000 + $20,000.[14] rounded to the nearest $1000[15] financial statement filed 21 february 2024.[16] $164,600 - $35,000 - $20,000 - $77,500 = $32,100.[17] rounded to the nearest dollar.