last updated: 29 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
marlon & calkins [2024] fedcfamc2f 307
orders
the court orders that:
parenting
parental responsibility
2.1 the wife consult with the husband with respect to medical decisions and seek the husband’s input and views, and
spend time arrangements
4.1 during school terms in each alternate week from the conclusion of school (or 3:30 pm if a non-school day) on friday until the commencement of school (or 9:00 am if a non-school day) on wednesday, with the first occasion of time to commence on the first friday the children would ordinarily spend time with the husband pursuant to order 2.2 of the orders made by consent on 19 july 2023. 4.2 during school holidays:
4.2.1 for the second half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school term holidays in 2024 and alternating yearly thereafter, 4.2.2 for the first half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school term holidays in 2025 and alternating yearly thereafter,
5.1 during school holidays:
5.1.1 for the first half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school term holidays in 2024 and alternating yearly thereafter, 5.1.2 for the second half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school term holidays in 2025 and alternating yearly thereafter.
5.3.1 from 4:00 pm christmas eve 2025 until 4:00 pm christmas day 2025 and each alternate year.
6.1 in the event the school holidays consist of an odd number of nights, the parties alternate having one night in excess of half of the school holiday period, with the wife to have the first extra night.
medical
travel
property
with the transfers to be at the expense of the wife save that the husband be solely responsible for his own legal costs and pexa fees with respect to the transfers (the wife’s transfers), and
with the mortgage of whichever property settles first to be discharged first and so much of the sale proceeds as may remain to be applied to reduce or discharge the mortgage remaining over the other properties,
0.565 (z + y) = w
w – z = x
where
z represents the assets to be retained by the wife
y represents the assets to be retained by the husband
w represents the portion of the asset pool to be retained by the wife
with the husband and the wife to thereafter close the offset accounts.
preparation of tax returns and payment of cgt
repayment to children’s accounts by the husband
defaults
superannuation split
the husband be and is hereby restrained by himself, his servants or agents from executing a death nomination in favour of any person or doing any other act or thing which would render any part of his interest in the fund a non-splittable payment within the meaning of regulation 12 or 13 of the regulations and the trustee give effect to this order.
chattels collection and division
other
child support
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins:
introduction
background
the evidence
the issues in this case
should the court make an order for equal shared or sole parental responsibility?  when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
note: the presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that relates solely to the allocation of parental responsibility for a child as defined in section 61b. it does not provide for a presumption about the amount of time the child spends with each of the parents (this issue is dealt with in section 65daa).   the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence.   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence.   family violence.
17. these sessions usually begin with both [the husband] and [the wife] focussed on the needs of their children and able to engage in discussions but deteriorate into verbal arguments [the husband] and [the wife] are the anthesis of each other in their parenting styles. ... 26. in sessions [the wife] can become dysregulated and begin raising her voice and seems frustrated and angry with the process. it would seem at these times the sessions may not be helpful for [the wife] and present as a source of vexation. ... 37. ...both parents have limitations in their parenting and communication styles which seem to be cause for expressed frustration by [the wife] and a calm and controlled response by [the husband].
what are the legal principles the court applies in determining where a child should live?
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.
how does the court determine what is in the child’s best interests?
do the parties’ proposals provide for a meaningful relationship between the children and each of their parents?
ensuring the children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child.
are the children at risk of harm, physically, emotionally or from neglect in either party’s care?
additional considerations
what are the views of the children?
what is the relationship of the children like with each parent?  said he was not in the room but could hear his parents yelling and his father saying, "put that [weapon] down". [y] nonchalantly commented that his mother always started fights and said "mum and dad don't like each other"... [y] said, "i like dad because he is very calm." ..."sometimes i am a bit frightened of mum." [y] commented his mother is always calm when the supervisor is present, "other times she is a lot angrier, and she says fuck about things." ...[x] commented in her initial session her mother "yells and screams a bit."
during interview, [the husband] presented with a tendency to overstate, and he made no effort to restrain himself when denigrating [the wife]. it was noted that [y] outlined near identical concerns and complaints about his mother to those outlined by his father. it may be in this matter, [the husband] has inadvertently or intentionally influenced the children against their mother.
what was apparent was that [y] immediately and unprompted reported on [the wife] as he had during the march 2023 interview. although despite this, he did not indicate a fear of her, and he was not averse to living with her equally.
does each parent have the capacity to meet the children’s needs, including their emotional needs?
the children sometimes appear scruffy and unkempt when they return from spending time with [the husband], this was particularly evident when the children were living primarily with [the husband]. they are dressed in dirty or inappropriate clothes, and do not appear to wash their hair, cut their fingernails or shower or bath regularly, whilst in his care.  e wife] appears to be organised, focussed on the children's education and their emotional wellbeing, and has support from her sisters and the maternal grandwife. [the husband] appears to be self-sufficient, recent to seek or accept help, a calming influence and present for the children for discussions about many topics. he appears to be less focused on routines and structure than [the wife].  's attendance to cleaning up the cards was in keeping with a theme of her picking up after her brother, which was observed in the previous assessments.  e husband] said he had mentioned to the children about the lack of money as [the wife] withheld money and asked them if he could borrow their money. [the wife] said she told the children their father was to blame for their situation.
there are some signs on history and examination to suggest the presence of some narcissistic personality traits, namely the need to prominently elevate his achievements and success even if not relevant to the area of discussion, and appear to desire admiration. he also demonstrated a lack of empathy for the effects on the children of the ongoing conflicts and family violence perpetrated in front of them, and a lack of response to [the wife's] requests for additional support.
he shows an expressed a preference for understanding situations through a logical lens rather than solely relying on emotional assessment. again, the client is aware of this preference and seeks therapy to assist him in developing his emotional awareness and sensitivity.
when asked, [the husband] could not offer specific examples of how he had reflected on his own behaviour and addressed his own behaviour in this regard during the sessions with [ms c]. although [the husband] has remained insistent that he is not without his imperfections, to the contrary he presents as seeking to portray himself in very high regard. in this regard, [the wife] offers greater confidence in her capacity to alter her parenting approach and respond to the children's evolving needs throughout their development. she also demonstrates greater self-reflective capacity and a willingness to take on feedback positively.
... she demonstrated a capacity for self-reflection and the impact of her behaviour on others, specifically [x] and [y]. [the wife] was intently focussed on the children's wellbeing... it was noted that whilst [the wife] raised her concerns for the children's wellbeing in [the husband's] care, she presented as child focussed rather than seeking opportunities to denigrate [the husband] as he did towards her...it is the assessor's opinion that [the wife] is better able to promote the children's relationship with [the husband] than [the husband] can promote the children's relationship with their mother.
throughout clinical psychology sessions, [the wife] has demonstrated a capacity for self-reflection and has been able to articulate the impact of her behaviour on others, specifically that of her children. [the wife] acknowledges the emotional dysregulation that presented in the context of the dispute with her ex-husband. however, she feels since this time and having the peace of not living in a home with him, has allowed her to manage her emotions in a much more considerate way on a day-to-day basis with her children. ... she openly discusses her parenting and has been happy to take feedback and complete additional parenting education to ensure she can enhance her communication skills with her children and provide the best possible childhood experiences now and into the future for both [x] and [y].
however, she [the wife] was markedly less blaming to [the husband] compared to her previous assessment in 2022. insight: she seemed to have developed a greater degree of insight into her own level of anxiety and some difficulties in coping with the children's difficult behaviour, particularly with [y]. her ability to express vulnerability was better than on the first assessment. overall, [the wife] seems to have been able to positively use the psychological assistance given, and is able to acknowledge her own vulnerabilities and needs to a greater extent.
although he was markedly less blaming of [the wife] compared to the previous assessment, some critical thoughts about her parenting emerged during the course of the assessment. he seemed very keen to present himself as more attuned to the needs of the children. he made reference to the description of him as having had narcissistic traits. overall, there seemed to be a greater capacity for him to convey his sense of vulnerability than compared to the previous assessment.
impact on the children of any change
family violence  e wife] does not currently suffer from any psychiatric disorder. however, that the presence of cluster b personality traits contributes to ongoing brief anxiety attacks in the setting of stresses managing the children, and interactions with the [husband]. she does still have dysregulative episodes (chiefly precipitated by communication with the [husband]) but she manages these in a more adaptive manner, and shields the children from them, by utilising strategies that she has developed.  e wife] has engaged well with her clinical psychologist, [ms b], over this year, and has found her to be very helpful. although her level of anxiety does not appear to be significantly different from the initial assessment, she seems to have managed her symptoms in a more adaptive and reflective manner, which likely is due to the work done with [ms b]. her dysregulative episodes, although not at the same level of severity as during the relationship with the [husband], are being managed in a similarly more effective manner.
what are the orders that are in the children’s best interests?
the property
the issues to be determined in this case
what are the relevant legal principles when determining property division?
what is the asset pool for division in this case?   item 8- the loan owing to ms aa of $75,000: (b) items 9.1 and 9.2 - addbacks with the husband seeking to add back $411,385 and the wife conceding only $337,032, (c) item 13 being monies owed by mr ll of with the husband claiming only $28,914 is owed to him and the wife saying it is $31,814, and (d) item 15 being the monies owed on the credit card with the wife saying $12,441 and the husband $23,278.   items 9.1 and 9.2 - addbacks with the husband seeking to add back $411,385 and the wife conceding only $337,032, (c) item 13 being monies owed by mr ll of with the husband claiming only $28,914 is owed to him and the wife saying it is $31,814, and (d) item 15 being the monies owed on the credit card with the wife saying $12,441 and the husband $23,278.   item 13 being monies owed by mr ll of with the husband claiming only $28,914 is owed to him and the wife saying it is $31,814, and (d) item 15 being the monies owed on the credit card with the wife saying $12,441 and the husband $23,278.   item 15 being the monies owed on the credit card with the wife saying $12,441 and the husband $23,278.
the loan owing to ms aa
add back of legal fees
the treatment of property already distributed and exhausted prior to trial, usually called "add backs", has been the subject of many authorities in this court. in omacini & omacini [2005] famcafc 104, (2005) flc 93-218 at [30] ("omacini"), following kowaliw & kowaliw [1981] famca 70, (1981) flc 91-092 and townsend & townsend [1994] famca 144, (1995) flc 92-569 ("townsend"), the full court held that add backs fall into "three clear categories": where the parties have expended money on legal fees, where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets, and "waste" or wanton, negligent, or reckless dissipation of assets. this latter category indicates that the nature of the expenditure of post-separation or premature distributions can be relevant to the exercise of discretion to add back. ... with respect to the second category, in trevi & trevi [2018] famcafc 173, (2018) flc 93-858 at [28]- [30] the full court (murphy j, alstergren dcj (as he then was) and kent j agreeing) explained the decision in omacini as follows:
28. however, the full court also made it clear that an add back does not necessarily occur whenever "a party has expended money realised from the disposition of assets that existed as at the date of separation", the full court describing such a proposition as "unduly simplistic". an earlier full court made the same point, saying that adding back is "the exception rather than the rule". 29. the fundamental precept that add backs are exceptional, reflected in the decisions just referred to, also mirrors what has been said in earlier decisions of the full court that, for example, "the family court must take the property of a party to the marriage as it finds it" at trial. an important parallel proposition is that the parties do not "go into a state of suspended economic animation" after separation. thus, reasonably incurred expenditure does not usually come within accepted categories of add back. 30. two fundamental premises emerge from omacini and the authorities preceding it. first, "adding back" is a discretionary exercise. when the discretion is exercised in favour of adding back, it reflects a decision that, exceptionally, in the particular circumstances of a case, justice and equity requires it. the second premise is its corollary: in cases that are not "exceptional" justice and equity can be achieved, not by adding back, but by the exercise of a different discretion - usually by taking up the same as a relevant s 75(2) factor. indeed, it has been said that the latter is "a course which is, perhaps, technically more correct" than adding back to the list of existing interests in property. (footnotes omitted)
murphy j continued at [47]:
the essence of a claim for add backs is that the asserted sum/s should be added to the value of the existing property interests of the parties and, subsequent to the assessment of contributions, credited to the spending party as part of the value of their assessed entitlements. doing so does not offend what was emphasised by the high court [in stanford]. adding back does not seek to create property interests that do not exist. rather, doing so emphasises that satisfying the respective requirements of ss 79(2) and (4) of the act to do justice and equity can require an "accounting" or "balance sheet" exercise for the purposes of s 79(2) and (4), so as to include the value of the dissipated property or expended sums within the total value of the parties' existing interests in property, and to credit the value of same against the assessed entitlement of the dissipating or spending party. (footnotes omitted)  e husband] did not disclose at this time, that he was unemployed or that he had received a net pay out from [bb company] of $186,000. i was also not aware, at this time, of the extent of his expenditure at auction houses or cash withdrawals. [the husband] did not provide any documents in response to that letter. [in early] 2023, issued subpoenas to [bb company], [credit card company] and [oo company]. in addition to revealing the termination of [the husband’s] employment at [bb company], the documents produced under subpoena indicated: [the husband] had accounts with westpac and nab he had not disclosed. [in early] 2023 i issued subpoenas to [o bank], westpac, nab, [mm company] and [nn company].
legal fees paid in total by the wife $411,385 less wife's part-property payment $129,694 fees paid from personal income $41,000 cost of subpoenas $5,000 husband's half of family report $3,000 husband's half of icl costs $3,342.50 total $229,348.50
monies owed by mr ll
the credit card
parties tax returns
is it just and equitable that an order be made?
... is a qualitative description of a conclusion reached after examination of a range of potentially competing considerations. it does not admit of exhaustive definition. it is not possible to chart its metes and bounds.
section 79(4)
...weigh and assess the contributions of all kinds and from all sources made by each of the parties throughout the period of their cohabitation and then translate such assessment into a percentage of the overall property of the parties or provide for a transfer of property in specie in accordance with that assessment.
the judge must weigh up various areas of contribution. in a short marriage, significant weight might be given to a large capital contribution. in a long marriage, other factors often assume great significance and ought not be left almost unseen by eyes dazzled by the magnitude of recently acquired capital... what is important is to somehow give a reasonable value to all of the elements that go to making up the entirety of the marriage relationship.
... the task of the court in proceedings under s 79 is not akin to an accounting exercise. the task is to examine the facts of each case carefully to decide what is appropriate and just and equitable in the circumstances. there cannot be expected to be a universal answer to that question on any given set of facts. it is of the essence of judicial discretion that different minds may comfortably arrive at different conclusions.
what were the parties’ initial contributions?
what were the parties’ contributions during the relationship?
contributions by the wife’s family
factors under section 75(2) of the act
the husband’s conduct
finally, on 25 september 2023, some 10 months after the original orders were made for the preparation of our tax returns, and only after being told the returns would be lodged on an 'as is' basis, [the husband] began to intermittently provide documents to the accountant with respect to the rental income and expenses.
since the orders were made on 23 november 2022, [the husband] failed to pay the [suburb e] loan on seven separate occasions. [the husband's] failure to pay the [suburb e] loan resulted in repayment dishonour fees and additional interest being incurred, as the interest was calculated on the higher loan amount outstanding due to the arrears. it also negatively impacted my credit rating [...].
non-disclosed funds in country hh/uk pension fund
funds had and received by the parties
potential stamp duty and cgt
is the proposed adjustment just and equitable?
lump sum child support   an application may be made to a court having jurisdiction under this act for: (a) an order that a liable parent provide child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the carer entitled to child support, or (b) an order that a liable parent provide child support in the form of a lump sum payment to be credited against the amount payable under the liability under the relevant administrative assessment. (2) an application under subsection (1): (a) may only be made if an administrative assessment is in force in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and   an order that a liable parent provide child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the carer entitled to child support, or (b) an order that a liable parent provide child support in the form of a lump sum payment to be credited against the amount payable under the liability under the relevant administrative assessment.   an order that a liable parent provide child support in the form of a lump sum payment to be credited against the amount payable under the liability under the relevant administrative assessment.   may only be made if an administrative assessment is in force in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and   may be made by the carer entitled to child support or the liable parent.   where: (a) a carer entitled to child support or a liable parent makes an application under paragraph 123(1)(a), and   a carer entitled to child support or a liable parent makes an application under paragraph 123(1)(a), and   the court is satisfied that it would be: (i) just and equitable as regards the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (ii) otherwise proper, to make an order that the liable parent provide child support for the child otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the carer entitled to child support,   just and equitable as regards the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (ii) otherwise proper,  ) otherwise proper,
the court may make the order. (2) in determining the application, the court must have regard to: (a) the administrative assessment in force in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (aa) any determination in force under part 6a (departure determinations) in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (b) any order in force under division 4 (departure orders) in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (c) whether the carer entitled to child support is in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit or, if the carer entitled to child support is not in receipt of such a pension, allowance or benefit, whether the circumstances of the carer are such that, taking into account the effect of the order proposed to be made by the court, the carer would be unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   the administrative assessment in force in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (aa) any determination in force under part 6a (departure determinations) in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (b) any order in force under division 4 (departure orders) in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (c) whether the carer entitled to child support is in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit or, if the carer entitled to child support is not in receipt of such a pension, allowance or benefit, whether the circumstances of the carer are such that, taking into account the effect of the order proposed to be made by the court, the carer would be unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.  ) any determination in force under part 6a (departure determinations) in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (b) any order in force under division 4 (departure orders) in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (c) whether the carer entitled to child support is in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit or, if the carer entitled to child support is not in receipt of such a pension, allowance or benefit, whether the circumstances of the carer are such that, taking into account the effect of the order proposed to be made by the court, the carer would be unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   any order in force under division 4 (departure orders) in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (c) whether the carer entitled to child support is in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit or, if the carer entitled to child support is not in receipt of such a pension, allowance or benefit, whether the circumstances of the carer are such that, taking into account the effect of the order proposed to be made by the court, the carer would be unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   whether the carer entitled to child support is in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit or, if the carer entitled to child support is not in receipt of such a pension, allowance or benefit, whether the circumstances of the carer are such that, taking into account the effect of the order proposed to be made by the court, the carer would be unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   in determining whether it would be just and equitable as regards the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent to make an order under subsection (1), the court must have regard to the matters mentioned in subsections 117(4), (6), (7), (7a) and (8).  ) in having regard to the earning capacity of a parent of the child under paragraph 117(4)(da), the court may determine that the parent's earning capacity is greater than is reflected in his or her income for the purposes of this act only if the court is satisfied as mentioned in subsection 117(7b).   in determining whether it would be otherwise proper to make an order under subsection (1), the court must have regard to the matters mentioned in subsection 117(5). (5) subsections (2), (3), (3a) and (4) do not limit the matters to which the court may have regard.   subsections (2), (3), (3a) and (4) do not limit the matters to which the court may have regard.
associate: dated: 14 march 2024
dated: 14 march 2024