last updated: 29 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
lamar & lamar [2024] fedcfamc2f 339
orders
the court orders that:
parenting  until such time as x commences primary school: (i) during the school term, on alternate weekends commencing 29 march 2024 from 4:00pm friday until 4:00pm monday, and (ii) during the school term holiday period as agreed, and failing agreement: during the first week from 4:00pm friday until 4:00pm monday, and during the second week from 4:00pm tuesday until 4:00pm friday. (iii) during the long summer school holidays for three nights per week as agreed, and failing agreement as follows: during the first, third and fifth week, from 4:00pm friday until 4:00pm monday, and during the second, fourth and sixth week, from 4:00pm tuesday until 4:00pm friday. (b) upon x commencing primary school: (i) during the school term, on alternate weekends from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4:00pm if a non-school day), until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am on a non-school day), (ii) for one half of each term school holiday period as agreed, and failing agreement, the first week with the father in odd years and the second week in even years, with changeover to occur at 12:00pm on the middle saturday, (iii) for one half of the long summer school holidays on a week about basis as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, the child shall spend time with the father during the first, third and fifth week of the long summer school holidays commencing in odd years, and during the second, fourth and sixth week of the long summer school holidays commencing in even years, with changeover to occur each saturday at 12:00pm, and (c) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   during the school term, on alternate weekends commencing 29 march 2024 from 4:00pm friday until 4:00pm monday, and (ii) during the school term holiday period as agreed, and failing agreement: during the first week from 4:00pm friday until 4:00pm monday, and during the second week from 4:00pm tuesday until 4:00pm friday. (iii) during the long summer school holidays for three nights per week as agreed, and failing agreement as follows: during the first, third and fifth week, from 4:00pm friday until 4:00pm monday, and during the second, fourth and sixth week, from 4:00pm tuesday until 4:00pm friday.  ) during the school term holiday period as agreed, and failing agreement: during the first week from 4:00pm friday until 4:00pm monday, and during the second week from 4:00pm tuesday until 4:00pm friday. (iii) during the long summer school holidays for three nights per week as agreed, and failing agreement as follows: during the first, third and fifth week, from 4:00pm friday until 4:00pm monday, and during the second, fourth and sixth week, from 4:00pm tuesday until 4:00pm friday.  i) during the long summer school holidays for three nights per week as agreed, and failing agreement as follows: during the first, third and fifth week, from 4:00pm friday until 4:00pm monday, and during the second, fourth and sixth week, from 4:00pm tuesday until 4:00pm friday.   upon x commencing primary school: (i) during the school term, on alternate weekends from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4:00pm if a non-school day), until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am on a non-school day), (ii) for one half of each term school holiday period as agreed, and failing agreement, the first week with the father in odd years and the second week in even years, with changeover to occur at 12:00pm on the middle saturday, (iii) for one half of the long summer school holidays on a week about basis as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, the child shall spend time with the father during the first, third and fifth week of the long summer school holidays commencing in odd years, and during the second, fourth and sixth week of the long summer school holidays commencing in even years, with changeover to occur each saturday at 12:00pm, and (c) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   during the school term, on alternate weekends from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4:00pm if a non-school day), until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am on a non-school day), (ii) for one half of each term school holiday period as agreed, and failing agreement, the first week with the father in odd years and the second week in even years, with changeover to occur at 12:00pm on the middle saturday, (iii) for one half of the long summer school holidays on a week about basis as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, the child shall spend time with the father during the first, third and fifth week of the long summer school holidays commencing in odd years, and during the second, fourth and sixth week of the long summer school holidays commencing in even years, with changeover to occur each saturday at 12:00pm, and  ) for one half of each term school holiday period as agreed, and failing agreement, the first week with the father in odd years and the second week in even years, with changeover to occur at 12:00pm on the middle saturday, (iii) for one half of the long summer school holidays on a week about basis as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, the child shall spend time with the father during the first, third and fifth week of the long summer school holidays commencing in odd years, and during the second, fourth and sixth week of the long summer school holidays commencing in even years, with changeover to occur each saturday at 12:00pm, and  i) for one half of the long summer school holidays on a week about basis as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, the child shall spend time with the father during the first, third and fifth week of the long summer school holidays commencing in odd years, and during the second, fourth and sixth week of the long summer school holidays commencing in even years, with changeover to occur each saturday at 12:00pm, and   as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   on mother’s day with the mother from 10:00am until 5:00pm, (b) on father’s day with the father from 10:00am until 5:00pm, (c) for christmas, with the mother from 12.00pm christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day, and with the father from 12:00pm christmas day until 12:00pm 26 december, and (d) for easter: (i) in even years, with the father from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the mother from 1:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday, and (ii) in odd years with the mother from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the father from 1:00 pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday.   on father’s day with the father from 10:00am until 5:00pm, (c) for christmas, with the mother from 12.00pm christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day, and with the father from 12:00pm christmas day until 12:00pm 26 december, and (d) for easter: (i) in even years, with the father from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the mother from 1:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday, and (ii) in odd years with the mother from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the father from 1:00 pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday.   for christmas, with the mother from 12.00pm christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day, and with the father from 12:00pm christmas day until 12:00pm 26 december, and (d) for easter: (i) in even years, with the father from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the mother from 1:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday, and (ii) in odd years with the mother from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the father from 1:00 pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday.   for easter: (i) in even years, with the father from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the mother from 1:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday, and (ii) in odd years with the mother from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the father from 1:00 pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday.   in even years, with the father from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the mother from 1:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday, and (ii) in odd years with the mother from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the father from 1:00 pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday.  ) in odd years with the mother from 4:00pm maundy thursday until 1:00pm easter saturday, and with the father from 1:00 pm easter saturday until 4:00pm easter monday.   at kindergarten or school at kindergarten or school times, and (b) otherwise, at the father’s residence at the commencement of x’s time with her father, and the mother’s residence at the conclusion of time.   otherwise, at the father’s residence at the commencement of x’s time with her father, and the mother’s residence at the conclusion of time.   when x is with the mother, the father be at liberty to call x between 5:30pm and 6:00pm each wednesday, (b) when x is with the father, the mother be at liberty to call x between 5:30pm and 6:00pm on saturday, (c) the parent with whom x is residing shall facilitate telephone calls pursuant to this order, and (d) the parties be restrained from recording the telephone conversations with the child.   when x is with the father, the mother be at liberty to call x between 5:30pm and 6:00pm on saturday, (c) the parent with whom x is residing shall facilitate telephone calls pursuant to this order, and (d) the parties be restrained from recording the telephone conversations with the child.   the parent with whom x is residing shall facilitate telephone calls pursuant to this order, and (d) the parties be restrained from recording the telephone conversations with the child.   the parties be restrained from recording the telephone conversations with the child.   the nature of the significant injury or illness, (b) the names of all relevant treating medical and allied health practitioners, and (c) the treatment given to date and relevant information about the diagnosis.   the names of all relevant treating medical and allied health practitioners, and (c) the treatment given to date and relevant information about the diagnosis.   the treatment given to date and relevant information about the diagnosis.   d sports centre and the parties shall ensure that x is taken to all lessons and/or associated events while she is in their respective care, and (b) e sports centre and the parties shall ensure that x is taken to weekly lessons and/or associated events while she is in their respective care.   e sports centre and the parties shall ensure that x is taken to weekly lessons and/or associated events while she is in their respective care.   the travelling parent shall give the other parent sixty (60) days prior notice in writing of the proposed travel including full particulars of the following: (i) a full travel itinerary, including all travel dates, (ii) copies of e-tickets including return details, (iii) address(es) at which x shall be staying and contact number(s), (iv) a proposal for make-up time, and (b) the mother retain x’s passport for safekeeping purposes and provide same to the father upon request by him no later than 14 days prior to travel, (c) the father shall return the passports to the mother within 7 days of return to melbourne, (d) neither parent shall travel with x to any country which is: (i) not a signatory to the hague convention, or (ii) that the australian government has issued a travel advice higher than "exercise a high degree of caution", and (e) at least 10 days prior to the travel. the travelling parent provide the non‑travelling parent with the following: (i) evidence that the travelling parent has enquired with x’s treating general practitioner about any vaccinations recommended to persons travelling to the country or countries to which she will travel, (ii) evidence that x received the recommended vaccinations at the cost of the parent organising the overseas trip, (iii) the travelling parent keep the other parent informed in writing of all changes to the travel itinerary, accommodation details, and x’s contact details for the duration of the proposed travel as soon as practicable.   a full travel itinerary, including all travel dates, (ii) copies of e-tickets including return details, (iii) address(es) at which x shall be staying and contact number(s), (iv) a proposal for make-up time, and  ) copies of e-tickets including return details, (iii) address(es) at which x shall be staying and contact number(s), (iv) a proposal for make-up time, and  i) address(es) at which x shall be staying and contact number(s), (iv) a proposal for make-up time, and  ) a proposal for make-up time, and   the mother retain x’s passport for safekeeping purposes and provide same to the father upon request by him no later than 14 days prior to travel, (c) the father shall return the passports to the mother within 7 days of return to melbourne, (d) neither parent shall travel with x to any country which is: (i) not a signatory to the hague convention, or (ii) that the australian government has issued a travel advice higher than "exercise a high degree of caution", and (e) at least 10 days prior to the travel. the travelling parent provide the non‑travelling parent with the following: (i) evidence that the travelling parent has enquired with x’s treating general practitioner about any vaccinations recommended to persons travelling to the country or countries to which she will travel, (ii) evidence that x received the recommended vaccinations at the cost of the parent organising the overseas trip, (iii) the travelling parent keep the other parent informed in writing of all changes to the travel itinerary, accommodation details, and x’s contact details for the duration of the proposed travel as soon as practicable.   the father shall return the passports to the mother within 7 days of return to melbourne, (d) neither parent shall travel with x to any country which is: (i) not a signatory to the hague convention, or (ii) that the australian government has issued a travel advice higher than "exercise a high degree of caution", and (e) at least 10 days prior to the travel. the travelling parent provide the non‑travelling parent with the following: (i) evidence that the travelling parent has enquired with x’s treating general practitioner about any vaccinations recommended to persons travelling to the country or countries to which she will travel, (ii) evidence that x received the recommended vaccinations at the cost of the parent organising the overseas trip, (iii) the travelling parent keep the other parent informed in writing of all changes to the travel itinerary, accommodation details, and x’s contact details for the duration of the proposed travel as soon as practicable.   neither parent shall travel with x to any country which is: (i) not a signatory to the hague convention, or (ii) that the australian government has issued a travel advice higher than "exercise a high degree of caution", and (e) at least 10 days prior to the travel. the travelling parent provide the non‑travelling parent with the following: (i) evidence that the travelling parent has enquired with x’s treating general practitioner about any vaccinations recommended to persons travelling to the country or countries to which she will travel, (ii) evidence that x received the recommended vaccinations at the cost of the parent organising the overseas trip, (iii) the travelling parent keep the other parent informed in writing of all changes to the travel itinerary, accommodation details, and x’s contact details for the duration of the proposed travel as soon as practicable.   not a signatory to the hague convention, or (ii) that the australian government has issued a travel advice higher than "exercise a high degree of caution", and  ) that the australian government has issued a travel advice higher than "exercise a high degree of caution", and   at least 10 days prior to the travel. the travelling parent provide the non‑travelling parent with the following: (i) evidence that the travelling parent has enquired with x’s treating general practitioner about any vaccinations recommended to persons travelling to the country or countries to which she will travel, (ii) evidence that x received the recommended vaccinations at the cost of the parent organising the overseas trip, (iii) the travelling parent keep the other parent informed in writing of all changes to the travel itinerary, accommodation details, and x’s contact details for the duration of the proposed travel as soon as practicable.   evidence that the travelling parent has enquired with x’s treating general practitioner about any vaccinations recommended to persons travelling to the country or countries to which she will travel, (ii) evidence that x received the recommended vaccinations at the cost of the parent organising the overseas trip, (iii) the travelling parent keep the other parent informed in writing of all changes to the travel itinerary, accommodation details, and x’s contact details for the duration of the proposed travel as soon as practicable.  ) evidence that x received the recommended vaccinations at the cost of the parent organising the overseas trip, (iii) the travelling parent keep the other parent informed in writing of all changes to the travel itinerary, accommodation details, and x’s contact details for the duration of the proposed travel as soon as practicable.  i) the travelling parent keep the other parent informed in writing of all changes to the travel itinerary, accommodation details, and x’s contact details for the duration of the proposed travel as soon as practicable.
property  transfer the property situated at f street, suburb h in the state of victoria more particularly described as volume ... and folio ... ("suburb h property") to the respondent at her expense, (b) discharge the mortgage in favour of the j bank (mortgage number ...) secured over the suburb h property and the respondent shall refinance the loan in her sole name, (c) transfer the property situated at k street, suburb l in the state of queensland, being the land more particularly described with title reference ... (“suburb l property”) to the applicant at his sole expense, and (d) discharge the mortgage in favour of the j bank secured over the suburb l property and the applicant shall refinance the loan in his sole name.   discharge the mortgage in favour of the j bank (mortgage number ...) secured over the suburb h property and the respondent shall refinance the loan in her sole name, (c) transfer the property situated at k street, suburb l in the state of queensland, being the land more particularly described with title reference ... (“suburb l property”) to the applicant at his sole expense, and (d) discharge the mortgage in favour of the j bank secured over the suburb l property and the applicant shall refinance the loan in his sole name.   transfer the property situated at k street, suburb l in the state of queensland, being the land more particularly described with title reference ... (“suburb l property”) to the applicant at his sole expense, and (d) discharge the mortgage in favour of the j bank secured over the suburb l property and the applicant shall refinance the loan in his sole name.   discharge the mortgage in favour of the j bank secured over the suburb l property and the applicant shall refinance the loan in his sole name.   the selling agent be as agreed, and failing agreement m company shall have care and conduct of the sale, (b) the conveyancer for the sale be as agreed between the parties and if there is no agreement n company shall conduct the conveyance on behalf of the parties, (c) the terms and conditions of the sale including but not limited to the sale price be as agreed between the parties but if there is no agreement, the sale price shall be pursuant to the sworn valuation of $520,000 or as nominated by the real estate agent from time to time, and (d) the parties shall accept the higher of any offer within $15,000 from the sale price.   the conveyancer for the sale be as agreed between the parties and if there is no agreement n company shall conduct the conveyance on behalf of the parties, (c) the terms and conditions of the sale including but not limited to the sale price be as agreed between the parties but if there is no agreement, the sale price shall be pursuant to the sworn valuation of $520,000 or as nominated by the real estate agent from time to time, and (d) the parties shall accept the higher of any offer within $15,000 from the sale price.   the terms and conditions of the sale including but not limited to the sale price be as agreed between the parties but if there is no agreement, the sale price shall be pursuant to the sworn valuation of $520,000 or as nominated by the real estate agent from time to time, and (d) the parties shall accept the higher of any offer within $15,000 from the sale price.   the parties shall accept the higher of any offer within $15,000 from the sale price.   firstly, payment of all agent's commission, advertising expenses and legal expenses of the sale, (b) secondly, to discharge the mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the real property, (c) thirdly, the sum of $47,482 to the respondent together with interest calculated from the due date for the payment, and (d) finally, the balance then remaining to the applicant.   secondly, to discharge the mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the real property, (c) thirdly, the sum of $47,482 to the respondent together with interest calculated from the due date for the payment, and (d) finally, the balance then remaining to the applicant.   thirdly, the sum of $47,482 to the respondent together with interest calculated from the due date for the payment, and (d) finally, the balance then remaining to the applicant.   finally, the balance then remaining to the applicant.   the selling agent be as agreed, and failing agreement, o company, suburb h shall have care and conduct of the sale, (b) the conveyancer for the sale be as agreed between the parties, and if there is no agreement, then a joint conveyance shall be conducted by the parties' existing solicitors, (c) the terms and conditions of the sale, including but not limited to the sale price be as agreed between the parties but if there is no agreement, the sale price shall be pursuant to the sworn valuation of $967,500 or as nominated by the real estate agent from time to time, and (d) the parties shall accept the higher of any offer within $15,000 from the sale price.   the conveyancer for the sale be as agreed between the parties, and if there is no agreement, then a joint conveyance shall be conducted by the parties' existing solicitors, (c) the terms and conditions of the sale, including but not limited to the sale price be as agreed between the parties but if there is no agreement, the sale price shall be pursuant to the sworn valuation of $967,500 or as nominated by the real estate agent from time to time, and (d) the parties shall accept the higher of any offer within $15,000 from the sale price.   the terms and conditions of the sale, including but not limited to the sale price be as agreed between the parties but if there is no agreement, the sale price shall be pursuant to the sworn valuation of $967,500 or as nominated by the real estate agent from time to time, and (d) the parties shall accept the higher of any offer within $15,000 from the sale price.   firstly, payment of all agent's commission, advertising expenses and legal expenses of the sale, (b) secondly, to discharge the mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the real property, and (c) finally, the balance to be paid to the respondent.   secondly, to discharge the mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the real property, and (c) finally, the balance to be paid to the respondent.   finally, the balance to be paid to the respondent.   the respondent is entitled to be paid using the base amount allocated in the immediately preceding order, the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, and (b) the entitlement of the applicant in the fund is correspondingly reduced by the force of this order.   the entitlement of the applicant in the fund is correspondingly reduced by the force of this order.   calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975 the entitlement of the respondent in the immediately preceding clause of this order, and (b) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splittable payment from the applicant's interest in the fund.   pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splittable payment from the applicant's interest in the fund.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account to be divided equally between the parties and thereafter the parties shall do all acts and things required to close any joint bank account, (c) each party forgo any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any credit card debt or other personal liabilities in their names, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of the property to which the party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account to be divided equally between the parties and thereafter the parties shall do all acts and things required to close any joint bank account, (c) each party forgo any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any credit card debt or other personal liabilities in their names, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of the property to which the party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party forgo any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any credit card debt or other personal liabilities in their names, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of the property to which the party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any credit card debt or other personal liabilities in their names, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of the property to which the party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any credit card debt or other personal liabilities in their names, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of the property to which the party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of the property to which the party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for judgment
judge glass:
primary considerations
the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both of her parents
it is hoped that, at [x]’s age, with significant and substantial time with the father, she can continue to develop an independent relationship with the father sufficiently separate to that of the mother’s. as such a fifty-fifty week-about care arrangement is recommended.[4]
on 21 january 2021, [mr lamar] left the former matrimonial property, left [x] in my full-time care, and did not obtain stable or suitable accommodation for around six months. i was not agreeable to [x] being in his care unsupervised at the time, as he had no fixed address, and i understood that he had stopped taking his medication. i was extremely concerned at the time for [x] and her well-being and wanted to ensure she was not exposed to those conditions as she was one (1) year of age at the time and could not self-protect.[5] ... i did not agree to supervised time with [x] because [mr lamar] was not getting the psychological assessment, providing his medical records and had no fixed place of residence. i did not feel that this was in [x]'s best interest and wanted to act protectively.[6]
that’s because my lawyers had sent correspondence to [mr lamar] and [he] had never responded to my lawyers. so i was still waiting to hear back from [him] from my lawyers where i requested certain things because he had gone off his medication, and i didn’t know where he was living, what his mental health was like. he had no fixed residence or no fixed address. so my lawyers wrote to [mr lamar] and [he] has – [he] had never responded to my lawyers.
counsel for [mr lamar]: your request you’re referring to is that my client do all the things you wanted: go to a psychiatrist, provide medical records, get a psych assessment, that’s the list of things you’re referring to? [ms lamar]: well, yeah, because – because my lawyers had written to him.
at one point [x] lost her footing and slipped over near one [tree] but she got straight up and didn't show any signs of discomfort or inability to walk etc. another time when she was running [...] she tripped over and fell flat. she cried loudly when that happened but recovered quickly when her father picked her up and cuddled her. the trips didn't seem out of the ordinary for a toddler.[7]
counsel for [mr lamar]: these incidents about [x] having completely normal toddler falls are the basis on which you suspend the supervised time? [ms lamar]: no, that’s not correct. counsel for [mr lamar]: what is the other incident you say took place that caused the suspension, at this point, of supervised time? [ms lamar]: i didn’t suspend time. i asked [mr lamar] to change supervisors, because i wanted to be informed of when [x] falls, because she can’t self-protect or communicate if i need to watch for a concussion.
... the concerns in this case in terms of the mother’s ability to support the father/child relationship is more to do with the way that she is with [x]. ... the main concern is that the mother could not foresee any potential positive of having the father in [x]'s life, she minimised his role to her and to me, and, quite frankly, you know, to put it quite bluntly, she didn’t want him involved, full stop. she saw him as a very bad man, and it was – she was rigidly fixated on her view of the father as a very bad man, without any real balance to that to understand that there are good parts and bad parts to all people.
... the assessment revealed significant concerns about the mother’s ability to support the father-child relationship. specifically, the mother appeared to have difficulties understanding [x]'s experiences of the father as being independent to those of her own. she does not appear to have prioritised [x]'s time or relationship with him. she has withheld [x] from him due to concerns about the supervisor’s behaviour, and/or vexatious reasons. she was clear that she would not ever communicate directly with the father and/or co-parent. she presented as incredibly anxious (and dysregulated) about even the thought of contact with the father. she identified herself that she would struggle to manage and support [x] if contact with the father resumed, decompensating purely at the thought of it. she remains concerned about matters despite clear evidence to the contrary (i.e., that the father will not feed [x], despite him having done so repeatedly during supervised time). and there remains the aforementioned concern that the mother (or other) may have inculcated the belief in [x] that the father will get angry. it seems hard to imagine a time and set of circumstances where the mother might be able to support [x]'s independent relationship with her father.[9]
... i continued to see [my psychologist] and then my mental health improved as there was a lot more routine and stability. so i got my groove back. [mr lamar] and i were – we knew what we were doing with [x]. what days it would be. it was all written on paper and that helped me get structure. so i feel good when i’ve got structure.
the need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
senior counsel for [ms lamar]: [ms lamar] then goes on to say – she sets out some examples of your family violence during the course of the relationship. and i think you do agree, do you not, that you did perpetrate family violence upon [ms lamar] during the course of the marriage? [mr lamar]: no. senior counsel for [ms lamar]: are you very sure about that? that’s your evidence as you sit here today, that you did not perpetrate family violence during the course of the marriage? [mr lamar]: yes.   lamar]: i’m not sure at what point i should point out to the court that this was a – i wrote this and then showed it to [ms lamar] for approval before sending it off to my mother. ... [senior counsel for ms lamar]’s inferring that i meant or wrote this, which is not necessarily the case. ... well, whatever i wrote had to be approved by [ms lamar] before it went to my mother. ... there were elements that i had to reword. ... i wrote this, which then went through with [ms lamar], and had – and was changed or tweaked.
senior counsel for [ms lamar]: all right. so are you seriously suggesting that you sat down and were forced to write this email which you – which was a lie? you didn’t believe it? [ms lamar]: yes, that was the case. not necessarily didn’t believe everything that was in this but i was – this was written under significant duress.
mum emailed me earlier and i just saw it i’ve replied [screenshot of the email] i hope you can see that i’ve got to run to a meeting i realise my reply is probably not even close to conveying everything but i hope you see i’m really angry[12]   lamar], who was pregnant at the time, stated that [mr lamar] was having a mental health episode and had [held a weapon to his throat]. [mr lamar] had also stated that he would drive his car into random people and then [harm] himself.[15]
she nevertheless maintained that both allegations were true. i am not satisfied that their absence from her affidavit evidence undermines the credibility of her evidence to this court.
wife coaxed him to return home, where they continued to argue. [mr lamar] describes feeling uncontrollable anger, and grabbed a [weapon] in response to this. he however denies any intention of harming himself or his wife.[17]
mr lamar accepted in oral evidence that each of those recorded statements was true.
yesterday went to kitchen draw [sic] and picked up a [weapon], describes that by the time he had grabbed it had calmed down. wife asked him to put it down and he did. describes his aim was to hurt himself, is concerned that in the moment he is not in control. wife called the police. describes after outbursts he is always regretful in retrospect. a couple of times when he has verbalized anger, had threatened that he would harm the baby, says it in the moment and a minute later her [sic] regrets. no plan to harm self, wife or baby.[18] ... reports feelings of guilt and regret for threatening his wife and unborn child, states he was lost in the moment and lost control.[19] ... denies having ongoing suicidal thoughts, states that the threats to harm his wife and baby only when he is angry. would like to think that he would not act on these things when he is angry but also would like to think that he wouldn't say these things at all.[20] ... [mr lamar] spoke fondly of his wife and denied any thoughts or feelings of wanting to hurt her or their unborn daughter, saying he has never had these. [mr lamar] discussed that when he becomes angry he says things in the heat of the moment that he doesn't mean. [mr lamar] acknowledged that his behaviour with a [weapon] was not safe or appropriate for his wife and unborn child, expressing regret stating that he did not think that behaviour would ever be acceptable. [mr lamar] could acknowledge that this would have made his wife feel scared...[21]
because i firmly i believe that everything that was put to me was essentially something i had done or something that was my fault. so i had grabbed the [weapon] and set about [ms lamar] and the baby, that – in the course of these discussions, it was put to me that that – “you have made a threat, that is family violence, you have made a threat.” and, at that point, i said, “well, i suppose it is.” so, when it’s discussed further on the third – second or third day that i’m there, that is what – that’s what i said i had done. so i had threatened that i would harm the baby.   lamar] appeared to have minimised the extent of his emotional dysregulation, and the effect on his family.[25] ... he has displayed a tendency to minimise his level of difficulty, trying to put a good face towards others.[26]
reports leaving the house and while driving in his car informed his wife that he felt like driving into oncoming traffic...poor coping mechanism over the past few years- multiple outbursts, [harms] himself occasionally. reports history of domestic violence in the past, having pushed his wife on a couch after an argument.[27] ... shoved wife by shoulders onto couch a few yaers [sic] ago this promted [sic] seeing a psychologist for the first time, therapy for around 6 months. now he gets physical towards himself [...]... describes always having problems with anger in close relationship, he thinks the frequency of his anger bursts is increasing and in intensity.[28]   mr lamar often used his superior size and stature to overpower ms lamar, grabbing her wrists and pinning her down, causing her to be unable to move freely. on numerous occasions he restrained her against her will. (b) in around mid-2017, mr lamar threw ms lamar onto the sofa causing a large bruise. (c) mr lamar frequently made threats of self-harm, including in the presence of x. he threatened to drive into oncoming traffic, creating an atmosphere of fear. he threatened self-harm in 2020. in early 2021, he constantly spoke about self-harm, including in x’s presence. (d) mr lamar often self-harmed. in mid-2019, he self-harmed causing injury. his self‑harming behaviour increased towards the end of the parties’ relationship. his behaviour after ceasing his medication in late 2020 and early 2021 became increasingly erratic, violent, aggressive, and unstable. (e) mr lamar damaged property, smashed and broke objects, including cracking the stone kitchen benchtop. he threw objects in a rage. (f) mr lamar threw a bag of cold water offered to him by ms lamar, consistent with his psychologist’s advice. (g) mr lamar gaslit, followed and taunted ms lamar, video recording her without her consent, including in x’s presence.   in around mid-2017, mr lamar threw ms lamar onto the sofa causing a large bruise. (c) mr lamar frequently made threats of self-harm, including in the presence of x. he threatened to drive into oncoming traffic, creating an atmosphere of fear. he threatened self-harm in 2020. in early 2021, he constantly spoke about self-harm, including in x’s presence. (d) mr lamar often self-harmed. in mid-2019, he self-harmed causing injury. his self‑harming behaviour increased towards the end of the parties’ relationship. his behaviour after ceasing his medication in late 2020 and early 2021 became increasingly erratic, violent, aggressive, and unstable. (e) mr lamar damaged property, smashed and broke objects, including cracking the stone kitchen benchtop. he threw objects in a rage. (f) mr lamar threw a bag of cold water offered to him by ms lamar, consistent with his psychologist’s advice. (g) mr lamar gaslit, followed and taunted ms lamar, video recording her without her consent, including in x’s presence.   mr lamar frequently made threats of self-harm, including in the presence of x. he threatened to drive into oncoming traffic, creating an atmosphere of fear. he threatened self-harm in 2020. in early 2021, he constantly spoke about self-harm, including in x’s presence. (d) mr lamar often self-harmed. in mid-2019, he self-harmed causing injury. his self‑harming behaviour increased towards the end of the parties’ relationship. his behaviour after ceasing his medication in late 2020 and early 2021 became increasingly erratic, violent, aggressive, and unstable. (e) mr lamar damaged property, smashed and broke objects, including cracking the stone kitchen benchtop. he threw objects in a rage. (f) mr lamar threw a bag of cold water offered to him by ms lamar, consistent with his psychologist’s advice. (g) mr lamar gaslit, followed and taunted ms lamar, video recording her without her consent, including in x’s presence.   mr lamar often self-harmed. in mid-2019, he self-harmed causing injury. his self‑harming behaviour increased towards the end of the parties’ relationship. his behaviour after ceasing his medication in late 2020 and early 2021 became increasingly erratic, violent, aggressive, and unstable. (e) mr lamar damaged property, smashed and broke objects, including cracking the stone kitchen benchtop. he threw objects in a rage. (f) mr lamar threw a bag of cold water offered to him by ms lamar, consistent with his psychologist’s advice. (g) mr lamar gaslit, followed and taunted ms lamar, video recording her without her consent, including in x’s presence.   mr lamar damaged property, smashed and broke objects, including cracking the stone kitchen benchtop. he threw objects in a rage. (f) mr lamar threw a bag of cold water offered to him by ms lamar, consistent with his psychologist’s advice. (g) mr lamar gaslit, followed and taunted ms lamar, video recording her without her consent, including in x’s presence.   mr lamar threw a bag of cold water offered to him by ms lamar, consistent with his psychologist’s advice. (g) mr lamar gaslit, followed and taunted ms lamar, video recording her without her consent, including in x’s presence.   mr lamar gaslit, followed and taunted ms lamar, video recording her without her consent, including in x’s presence.   mr lamar and ms lamar got into scuffles over the course of their marriage during which she was physically violent towards him. they had a scuffle in 2017 in a car park and both hurt each other. (b) during an argument in 2015, ms lamar damaged some items of property of mr lamar’s in anger, including scratching words into furniture. (c) both parties called each other derogatory names. (d) ms lamar checked mr lamar’s social media profile and became angry when she found he had been asked out on a date. she subsequently forced him to change his phone number. (e) ms lamar threatened to harm herself on one occasion by texting mr lamar that she was so stressed, that she wanted to self-harm herself and was going to harm herself in the shower. (f) in early 2021, ms lamar scratched mr lamar on the arms while he was videoing her during an argument. she picked up x’s plastic ride on toy and hit mr lamar with it.   during an argument in 2015, ms lamar damaged some items of property of mr lamar’s in anger, including scratching words into furniture. (c) both parties called each other derogatory names. (d) ms lamar checked mr lamar’s social media profile and became angry when she found he had been asked out on a date. she subsequently forced him to change his phone number. (e) ms lamar threatened to harm herself on one occasion by texting mr lamar that she was so stressed, that she wanted to self-harm herself and was going to harm herself in the shower. (f) in early 2021, ms lamar scratched mr lamar on the arms while he was videoing her during an argument. she picked up x’s plastic ride on toy and hit mr lamar with it.   both parties called each other derogatory names. (d) ms lamar checked mr lamar’s social media profile and became angry when she found he had been asked out on a date. she subsequently forced him to change his phone number. (e) ms lamar threatened to harm herself on one occasion by texting mr lamar that she was so stressed, that she wanted to self-harm herself and was going to harm herself in the shower. (f) in early 2021, ms lamar scratched mr lamar on the arms while he was videoing her during an argument. she picked up x’s plastic ride on toy and hit mr lamar with it.   ms lamar checked mr lamar’s social media profile and became angry when she found he had been asked out on a date. she subsequently forced him to change his phone number. (e) ms lamar threatened to harm herself on one occasion by texting mr lamar that she was so stressed, that she wanted to self-harm herself and was going to harm herself in the shower. (f) in early 2021, ms lamar scratched mr lamar on the arms while he was videoing her during an argument. she picked up x’s plastic ride on toy and hit mr lamar with it.   ms lamar threatened to harm herself on one occasion by texting mr lamar that she was so stressed, that she wanted to self-harm herself and was going to harm herself in the shower. (f) in early 2021, ms lamar scratched mr lamar on the arms while he was videoing her during an argument. she picked up x’s plastic ride on toy and hit mr lamar with it.   in early 2021, ms lamar scratched mr lamar on the arms while he was videoing her during an argument. she picked up x’s plastic ride on toy and hit mr lamar with it.
... it sounded like a highly volatile conflictual relationship where i think it would have been very difficult, probably, at times to decide who was the aggressor and who was the victim. it may have shifted back and forth over time.
additional considerations
any views expressed by x and any factors (such as her maturity or level of understanding) that are relevant to the weight to be given to those views
the nature of x’s relationships with each of her parents and other people, including any grandparent or other relative
the extent to which each of x’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to her, to spend time with her, and to communicate with her
the extent to which each of x’s parents has fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain her
the likely effect of any changes in x’s circumstances, including the likely effect on her of any separation from either of her parents, or any other child or other person, including grandparent or other relative, with whom she has been living
the practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect x’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of each of x’s parents and any other person, including any grandparent or other relative of x’s, to provide for her needs, including emotional and intellectual needs
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of x and of either of x’s parents, and any other relevant characteristics of x
if x is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child, her right to enjoy her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order will have on that right
the attitude to x, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of her parents
any family violence involving x or a member of her family
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to x or a member of her family, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, and any other relevant matter
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to x
any other relevant fact or circumstance
parental responsibility
schooling
parenting conclusions
so i have a bit of an issue with a midway point, generally speaking, because that’s not a child-focused decision, that’s a parent-focused decision. so children have a right to go to the school in their local community to meet friends, to meet other families, to, you know, go to the park after school, to have incidental catchups, play dates, that sort of thing. ideally speaking, we want that to be in the child’s local community. it doesn’t matter what that community is, and, you know, starting with the primary need for children is to have both parents significantly and substantially involved in their care and upbringing. so then you kind of work downwards from that and say, well, practically, how can – you know, how can we come up with a best-case scenario for [x]. she can’t – children shouldn’t be sedentary for more than two hours a day, and this includes time at school, time watching tv, you know, time sitting and eating. and then if you include lengthy periods of travel within that, that’s, you know – we’ve already well and truly hit over the maximum amount that children should be sedentary for each day. so it’s just not practical to move long distances.
well, [40] minutes’ drive is an hour and 1[5] minutes in the car each day, so as i said, you know, you’ve got 5[5] minutes to do all your tabletop school learning and to do all your eating and sitting and watching tv – so, you know, any other screens, for examples. but it’s possible, and as i said, you know, it’s about a balancing act of what needs kind of trump the other. so if that’s an agreement that the parents can come to and one that includes a lack of acrimony and arguments and ongoing for need for – you know, angry, heated, untrusting communication between the parties, then we might say, okay, well, you know that’s the best of a bad lot of options. let’s choose a school that’s not ideal in terms of location, but, you know, if it means the parents stop fighting, then that need for the parents to not fight would trump that. so i’m not saying it’s out of the question. i’m just saying that, ideally, you know, both parents would live in close proximity to each other and to the child’s school.
senior counsel for [ms lamar]: i was asking you to draw on your experience, and qualifications, expertise and your knowledge of the literature to tell me what the indicia are to indicate equal time, especially in, you know, little children. we’re not talking teenagers? [dr q]: in terms of the contraindicators there are a range of things that are contraindicated in this case. (emphasis added) senior counsel for [ms lamar]: no. indicators? [dr q]: well, ideally, we want an amicable co-parenting relationship. we want a positive sharing of information, to hold the other parent in positive regard. you know, fighting about money and other things outside of the child are also a poor prognostic factor. so there are a lot of contraindicators in this case. (emphasis added) senior counsel for [ms lamar]: no, no, we’re looking at indicators. let’s move to contra in a moment. that was a good list, was there any other? [dr q]: well, the – the research is really hard about specific time-spent recommendations. so it’s not about the exact time, but a shared care arrangement. so in terms of what – it will be traumatic for the child, is whether the lack of integration. so that’s the... senior counsel for [ms lamar]: what’s that? [dr q]: kind of – well, we want both parents to support. we want them to support the child’s independent relationship with the other parent. senior counsel for [ms lamar]: sorry, i didn’t understand what “integration” meant. it’s a term i haven’t come across. [dr q]: to move smoothly and synchronously between the two care arrangements. we want there to be some regular – you know, some similarities in terms of boundaries, rules, expectations, bed times, you know, day to day routine. we want synchronous – you know, the fewer changes across the care environment, the better. senior counsel for [ms lamar]: all right. now, you did want to talk about some contraindicators, and i invite you to tell his honour what they are, based on, again, your expertise? [dr q]: yes, sure. yes. so in terms of blockers, if you like, to a shared care arrangement happening smoothly, the presence of acrimony. the presence of arguments, both with the child and outside of the child, you know, so things like i said, financial matters and whatnot, are a poor prognostic factor. as would be a lack of trust and respect in the coparenting relationship, between the two parents, i should say. senior counsel for [ms lamar]: thank you. do you agree with me that in this report you haven’t set out, as far as i can see, the bases upon which you form your opinion for fifty-fifty? the scaffolding, if you like, the indicators and the contraindicators? [dr q]: sure. senior counsel for [ms lamar]: i don’t see that in this report? [dr q]: yes. senior counsel for [ms lamar]: am i right? [dr q]: yes. yes, i trust that i could have done a better job at that.
the mother returns to the office, and [x] says excitedly to the mother, “daddy came!”, “yeah, i told you he would” replied the mother. at the mother’s direction, they spent several minutes tidying up . [x] comments multiple times throughout, “daddy came!!”, “daddy played with me!”, and similar throughout. she appeared to be happily and excitedly sharing her experiences of the father with the mother. however, the mother, seemingly oblivious (and/or ignoring) to [x]’s excitement and desire to share, offered no feedback or conversation with [x] about this, commenting only “mhmm”. on the way out, the assessor asks [x] if she had fun today, and what was the best part, and [x] responds excitedly “daddy’s going to give me a drink of water at the park!”. and the mother responds “is he” (monotonously). [x] spots a car in the car park, and excitedly states that it is her father’s car, and the mother tells her flatly, it is not.[51]
the assessor walked [x] out to the mother at the door. [x] was excited to see her mother, rushing down the steps to get to her, giving her a big cuddle. the mother asked in positive upbeat prosody “did you have fun?” she instructed [x] to thank the assessor, which she did, and the pair left.[52]
the mother’s behaviour (with regards to her limited capacity to regulate her emotions, and to support the father-child relationship) has and will continue to impact not only on [x], but on the father-child relationship... with the resumption of time-spent, [x] will quickly form a belief that her relationship with the father is not accepted by her mother (whose opinion she trusts the most). [x] will be forced to compartmentalise her relationships and beliefs, and will likely begin to contort and adapt her behaviours in attempts to please the mother (i.e. report things that fit with the mother’s experience of the father, rather than that of her own (i.e. report negative things, whether or not true). in addition, [x] is made up of parts of her father, and the mother’s rejection of the father (and all things relevant to him) will be experienced by [x] at some point, as an insult to her identity.[53]
it’s not observable, as in, you know, the behavioural observations. it’s not overly observable at this point in [x]. and typically what would happen in these cases is that that would become more and more obvious as the child is older and able to articulate their experiences.
both parents be restrained from relocating more than 35km from the residential address of the other parent.[60]
he advances no submissions in support of the relief sought. he does not articulate what power is relied on. neither does he articulate why the prescribed distance is appropriate. i am not satisfied that it is in x’s best interests to issue the injunction.
property
property interests
asset
o'ship
value
f street, suburb h victoria
jt
$967,500
less mortgage  19,796)
k street, suburb l
tic
$520,000  87,027)
motor vehicle 1
h
$9,000
student loan  ,050)
loan from maternal grandparents
w  1,508)
total non-superannuation interests
$534,119
super fund 2
$46,174
super fund 1
$104,555
super fund 3
$12,839
$121,662
total superannuation interests
$285,231
total property interests
$819,349
in my early twenties i purchased a property using $110,000 that my father lent me to contribute to the purchase. i was expected to return this loan to my father. i paid him back this money once i sold that apartment around [early] 2021.[63]
there is no evidence provided by the wife that the parties ever had the benefit of these allegedly loaned funds, or that they were even received by the parties during the relationship. nor is there evidence that funds so received by the wife prior to the relationship were allocated toward assets which were held by her at the commencement of the relationship, being the [ag street] property. there is no evidence provided of the alleged agreement between her and [mr ah].[64]
counsel for [mr lamar]: yes. the $51,000 is the position that you’ve put saying that that is the living expenses? [ms lamar]: no. that’s the exact amount of living expenses, based on the bank account that i had that presents the loan, but it’s more complex than that, because i’ve spent, like, a lot more on that, because i was only working two days a week. i had to spend a lot more of the other loan amount on being able to pay for things for [x] and i. so it’s split across two – it’s a three-year process, and it’s not as simplistic as what you’re talking about, because if i answer yes to that question, that’s not the case. so what i’ve written is correct, but it can only be correct if taken into account in the right context, and the question you’re asking me isn’t the right context for me to be able to answer yes or no.
justice and equity
contributions
paragraphs 79(4)(d, e, f and g) and subsection 75(2) factors
property conclusions
associate: dated: 19 march 2024
dated: 19 march 2024
[1] family law act 1975 (cth), s 60b.[2] family law act 1975 (cth), s 60ca. [3] affidavit of dr q filed 3 august 2023, annexure 1 (“second family report”), paragraph 70. [4] second family report, paragraph 71. [5] affidavit of ms lamar filed 19 february 2024, paragraph 53. [6] affidavit of ms lamar filed 19 february 2024, paragraph 123(b). [7] affidavit of ms lamar filed 19 february 2024, annexure l17, pages 106 to 107. [8] affidavit of ms lamar filed 19 february 2024, annexure l17, pages 106 to 107. [9] affidavit of dr q filed 13 december 2022, annexure q2 (“first family report”), paragraph 89. [10] thornton & little (2022) flc 94-082 at [78]. [11] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [26]; mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) flc 93-405 at [115], [121]. [12] exhibit r12. [13] affidavit of ms lamar filed 19 february 2024, paragraph 27. [14] affidavit of ms lamar filed 19 february 2024, paragraph 27.[15] exhibit a5. [16] exhibit a5, page 2. [17] exhibit r11, page 7.[18] exhibit r11, page 14. [19] exhibit r11, page 21.[20] exhibit r11, page 34.[21] exhibit r11, page 40. [22] affidavit of dr g filed 8 december 2022, annexure g1, paragraph 15. [23] first family report, paragraph 26. [24] affidavit of mr lamar filed 26 february 2024, paragraph 8(a). [25] affidavit of dr g filed 8 december 2022, annexure g1, paragraph 61. [26] affidavit of dr g filed 8 december 2022, annexure g1, paragraph 62.[27] exhibit r11, page 7. [28] exhibit r11, page 14.[29] fox v percy (2003) 214 clr 118 at [31] per gleeson cj, gummow & kirby jj. [30] jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298 at 308 per kitto j; asic v hellicar (2012) 247 clr 345 at [167]. [31] blass & blass [2022] fedcfamc1a 63; (2022) flc 94-085 at [26].[32] pearson & pearson (2021) flc 94-008 at [41] and the case there cited. [33] second family report, paragraph 63, [34] second family report, paragraph 64.[35] first family report, paragraph 68. [36] affidavit of mr lamar filed 12 february 2024, paragraph 74. [37] second family report, paragraph 73.[38] affidavit of mr lamar filed 12 february 2024, paragraph 153. [39] lainhart & ellinson [2023] fedcfamc1a 200; (2023) flc 94-166 (“lainhart & ellinson”) at [29]. [40] first family report, paragraph 68. [41] family law act 1975 (cth), s 61da. [42] family law act 1975 (cth), s 65daa.[43] boyle & zahur & another [2017] famcafc 263; (2017) flc 93-814 at [22]. [44] manifold & alderton [2021] famcafc 61; (2021) flc 94-015 at [109] per austin j.[45] family law act 1975 (cth), s 61c; lennon & lennon [2011] famca 571 at [108].[46] affidavit of mr lamar filed 12 february 2024, paragraph 161. [47] maclean & greenwood [2022] fedcfamc1a 200; (2022) flc 94-117 at [33]; vigano & desmond [2012] famcafc 79; (2012) flc 93-509 at [79]. [48] muldoon & carlyle [2012] famcafc 135; (2012) flc 93-513 at [105] and the cases there cited.[49] makita & sprowles [2001] nswca 305; (2001) 52 nswlr 705 at [85]. [50] lainhart & ellinson at [29]. [51] first family report, paragraphs 74-75. [52] second family report, paragraph 66. [53] first family report, paragraph 90. [54] exhibit a1, paragraph 3. [55] exhibit r15.[56] oberlin & infeld [2021] famcafc 66; (2021) flc 94-017 at [51]- [52] and the cases there cited; eastley & eastley [2022] fedcfamc1a 101; (2022) flc 94-094 at [58]. [57] lainhart & ellinson at [26]. [58] lainhart & ellinson at [34]. [59] further amended response of ms lamar filed 19 february 2024, paragraph 25. [60] exhibit a1, paragraph 17. [61] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(2). [62] stanford v stanford (2012) 247 clr 108 (“stanford”) at [37]. [63] affidavit of ms lamar filed 19 february 2024, paragraph 199(a). [64] outline of case of mr lamar filed 29 february 2024, page 14. [65] exhibit r2. [66] dulton & dulton (2020) flc 93-984 at [32] citing trevi & trevi [2018] famcafc 173; (2018) flc 93-858 (“trevi”) at [30] and ajo & gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) flc 93-218 (“ajo & gro”).[67] trevi at [30], citing ajo & gro. [68] marcin & marcin [2020] famcafc 85; (2020) flc 93-956 at [90]. [69] jong & yeng [2014] famcafc 191 at [64]; eufrosin & eufrosin [2014] famcafc 191 at [41]. [70] affidavit of ms lamar filed 19 february 2024, annexure msl19, pages 113 to 114.[71] elliston & dennell (2019) flc 93-903 at [56], citing nhc & rch [2004] famca 633; (2004) flc 93-204 at [55]- [60]. [72] rodgers & rodgers [2016] famcafc 68; (2016) flc 93-703 (“rodgers”) at [22]; prince & prince [1984] famca 7; (1984) flc 91-501 (“prince”) at 79,076. [73] rodgers at [40]. [74] prince at 79,077. [75] family law act 1975 (cth), s 81.[76] russo & wylie [2016] famcafc 227; (2016) flc 93-747 at [54].[77] stanford at [42].[78] family law act 1975 (cth), s 79(4)(a)-(b).[79] family law act 1975 (cth), s 79(4)(c).[80] nhc & rch [2004] famca 633; (2004) flc 93-204 at [33]- [35]. [81] palumbo & mandel [2019] famcafc 228; (2019) flc 93-929 at [56]. [82] exhibit r14.