last updated: 29 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
raine & raine (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 337
orders
the court orders:  that pursuant to section 67zd of the family law act 1975 (cth), the mother deposit with the registry manager of the federal circuit and family court of australia at the adelaide registry any passport that she holds for the child or any other passport which would enable the child to be removed from the commonwealth of australia, (b) that the registry manager must hold any australian passport deposited in safe custody until the mother deposits the sum of fifteen thousand dollars and zero cents ($15,000) into the federal court of australia official spm exempt litigants fund. (c) that upon the registry manager providing written confirmation of the receipt of the payment pursuant to paragraph 1(b) the passport shall be released to the mother.   that the registry manager must hold any australian passport deposited in safe custody until the mother deposits the sum of fifteen thousand dollars and zero cents ($15,000) into the federal court of australia official spm exempt litigants fund. (c) that upon the registry manager providing written confirmation of the receipt of the payment pursuant to paragraph 1(b) the passport shall be released to the mother.   that upon the registry manager providing written confirmation of the receipt of the payment pursuant to paragraph 1(b) the passport shall be released to the mother.   provide the father with a copy of her itinerary for the trip including but not limited to departure and return times and dates, a contact telephone number for her and the child and the address at which they will predominantly be based, at least twenty-eight (28) days prior to scheduled departure, (b) provide to the father a copy of the return air tickets for the child, (c) provide a notarised letter executed by a notary public which states that the child is travelling to country b for the specific travel dates solely for the purpose of a holiday and that the mother and the child are habitual and permanent residents and citizens of australia and accepts that she must return the child to australia by the specified return to date, (d) whilst overseas the mother shall facilitate the child to facetime/telephone the father on at least one occasion per week, and (e) facilitate make up time for the child to spend time with the father as soon as practical upon her return to australia on dates to be agreed between the parties in writing and in default of agreement then during the weekend(s)/school holiday periods immediately following her return to australia.   provide to the father a copy of the return air tickets for the child, (c) provide a notarised letter executed by a notary public which states that the child is travelling to country b for the specific travel dates solely for the purpose of a holiday and that the mother and the child are habitual and permanent residents and citizens of australia and accepts that she must return the child to australia by the specified return to date, (d) whilst overseas the mother shall facilitate the child to facetime/telephone the father on at least one occasion per week, and (e) facilitate make up time for the child to spend time with the father as soon as practical upon her return to australia on dates to be agreed between the parties in writing and in default of agreement then during the weekend(s)/school holiday periods immediately following her return to australia.   provide a notarised letter executed by a notary public which states that the child is travelling to country b for the specific travel dates solely for the purpose of a holiday and that the mother and the child are habitual and permanent residents and citizens of australia and accepts that she must return the child to australia by the specified return to date, (d) whilst overseas the mother shall facilitate the child to facetime/telephone the father on at least one occasion per week, and (e) facilitate make up time for the child to spend time with the father as soon as practical upon her return to australia on dates to be agreed between the parties in writing and in default of agreement then during the weekend(s)/school holiday periods immediately following her return to australia.   whilst overseas the mother shall facilitate the child to facetime/telephone the father on at least one occasion per week, and (e) facilitate make up time for the child to spend time with the father as soon as practical upon her return to australia on dates to be agreed between the parties in writing and in default of agreement then during the weekend(s)/school holiday periods immediately following her return to australia.   facilitate make up time for the child to spend time with the father as soon as practical upon her return to australia on dates to be agreed between the parties in writing and in default of agreement then during the weekend(s)/school holiday periods immediately following her return to australia.
reasons for judgment
judge dickson:
introduction
background
documents relied upon  a minute of order setting out the orders sought at trial marked ‘exhibit ms r2’, (2) a financial statement filed on 21 december 2023, (3) a trial affidavit filed on 22 december 2023 and annexures 46, 47 and 49 respectively, (4) an affidavit in reply filed on 4 february 2024, (5) a costs notice filed 29 january 2024 and (6) an outline of case document tendered on 9 february 2024.   a financial statement filed on 21 december 2023, (3) a trial affidavit filed on 22 december 2023 and annexures 46, 47 and 49 respectively, (4) an affidavit in reply filed on 4 february 2024, (5) a costs notice filed 29 january 2024 and (6) an outline of case document tendered on 9 february 2024.   a trial affidavit filed on 22 december 2023 and annexures 46, 47 and 49 respectively, (4) an affidavit in reply filed on 4 february 2024, (5) a costs notice filed 29 january 2024 and (6) an outline of case document tendered on 9 february 2024.   an affidavit in reply filed on 4 february 2024, (5) a costs notice filed 29 january 2024 and (6) an outline of case document tendered on 9 february 2024.   a costs notice filed 29 january 2024 and (6) an outline of case document tendered on 9 february 2024.   an outline of case document tendered on 9 february 2024.   a trial affidavit filed 30 january 2024, (2) the family report of ms d dated 27 november 2023, (3) a draft minute of order dated 9 february 2024 and marked ‘exhibit mr r3’, (4) a costs notice filed 4 february 2024 and (5) an outline of case document filed 4 february 2024.   the family report of ms d dated 27 november 2023, (3) a draft minute of order dated 9 february 2024 and marked ‘exhibit mr r3’, (4) a costs notice filed 4 february 2024 and (5) an outline of case document filed 4 february 2024.   a draft minute of order dated 9 february 2024 and marked ‘exhibit mr r3’, (4) a costs notice filed 4 february 2024 and (5) an outline of case document filed 4 february 2024.   a costs notice filed 4 february 2024 and (5) an outline of case document filed 4 february 2024.   an outline of case document filed 4 february 2024.   the family report of ms d dated 27 november 2023, (2) a draft minute of order dated 9 february 2024 and marked ‘exhibit icl1’ and (3) an outline of case document filed 2 february 2024.   a draft minute of order dated 9 february 2024 and marked ‘exhibit icl1’ and (3) an outline of case document filed 2 february 2024.   an outline of case document filed 2 february 2024.
orders sought by the parties
the mother
watch list the court direct that forthwith the australian federal police, their agents and servants remove [x] born [in] 2020 (the child) from the family law watchlist in force at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia. passports within seven (7) days of the date of this order, the father do surrender and deliver up to the office of the mother's solicitors all passports held by him for the child.[3] in the event that the father fails to surrender and deliver up to the office of the mother's solicitor all passports held by him for the child within seven (7) days of the date of this order, the mother be and is hereby permitted to direct the department of foreign affairs and trade to immediately cancel any existing australian passport for [x] born [in] 2020 as held by the father and that the requirement of the father to consent to the same is hereby dispensed with. the mother be the sole parent permitted to obtain an australian passport in the name of [x] born [in] 2020 with the department of foreign affairs and trade and to renew any passport for the child at her cost and expense and that she be hereby authorized by virtue of this order to dispense with the need to obtain the father's written consent on any passport application for [x] or application to renew any passport for the child and the mother be at liberty to provide a copy of the un-anonymised version of this order to the passports office of the department of foreign affairs and trade for the purpose of facilitating the same. the child's passport shall be held by the mother unless otherwise ordered by the court. overseas travel for the purposes of section 65y of the family law act the mother be at liberty to travel with the child [x] born [in] 2020 outside the commonwealth of australia for holidays on up to two (2) occasions per year provided that:
6.1. the mother provide the father with no less than sixty (60) days' notice of the intended travel, save and except in the case of an urgent situation including, but not limited to, the serious illness or death of one of the mother's family members and, in such a case, the mother shall give the father as much notice as reasonably possible. 6.2. the mother provide to the father not less than thirty (30) days prior to the intended travel, the following:
6.1.3. written details of the names and places outside of the commonwealth of australia where it is proposed the child will be travelling (being countries, cities and towns) and any addresses at which the child will be staying, and 6.1.2. a copy of all return airline tickets (which is satisfied by the provision of an online screenshot of any e-ticket) for the child evidencing the child's proposed departure and return to the commonwealth of australia. 6.1.3. a notarized letter acknowledging the following: a) that the child [x] born [in] 2020 is an australian citizen, b) that [x]'s habitual place of residence is australia, c) the date on which the child is to leave the commonwealth of australia and date on which he is to return, d) the fact that the travel to [country b] is for the purpose of a holiday, e) that the mother accepts that she must return him to australia at the conclusion of the stated travel period.
a) that the child [x] born [in] 2020 is an australian citizen, b) that [x]'s habitual place of residence is australia, c) the date on which the child is to leave the commonwealth of australia and date on which he is to return, d) the fact that the travel to [country b] is for the purpose of a holiday, e) that the mother accepts that she must return him to australia at the conclusion of the stated travel period.
b) that [x]'s habitual place of residence is australia, c) the date on which the child is to leave the commonwealth of australia and date on which he is to return, d) the fact that the travel to [country b] is for the purpose of a holiday, e) that the mother accepts that she must return him to australia at the conclusion of the stated travel period.
c) the date on which the child is to leave the commonwealth of australia and date on which he is to return, d) the fact that the travel to [country b] is for the purpose of a holiday, e) that the mother accepts that she must return him to australia at the conclusion of the stated travel period.
d) the fact that the travel to [country b] is for the purpose of a holiday, e) that the mother accepts that she must return him to australia at the conclusion of the stated travel period.
e) that the mother accepts that she must return him to australia at the conclusion of the stated travel period.
6.3. the cumulative length of overseas travel (up to two occasions per year) does not exceed a total period of six (6) weeks with the mother to be at liberty to travel with the child during the christmas period (being christmas day, new years eve and the child's birthday) no greater frequency than each second (2nd) year, 6.4. such travel only occur to:
6.4.1. [country b], or 6.4.2. a country that is a member of the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction that is in force with australia (save and except for the purpose of transiting and the mother shall be restrained from leaving the airport in the transit country).
6.5. in the event the mother is travelling with the child to [country b] the mother shall deposit the sum of $10,000 aud as a bond ("the bond") to the federal court litigants bank account to be held on trust by the federal circuit and family court of australia adelaide registry ("the court"), 6.6. the bond paid by the mother in accordance with paragraph 6.5 herein be held by the court until such time as the court receives written confirmation from the mother that the child has returned to the commonwealth of australia together with a copy of the child's boarding pass (or electronic copy equivalent) and thereafter the court, by this order, release the bond to the mother. 6.7. that in the event the mother does not return to the commonwealth of australia within ten (10) days of the scheduled return date, then the court by this order shall release the bond to the father, except in the case where the court is informed in writing supported by written documentation (including electronic documentation) that that the delay of the mother's return to australia is due to a matter outside of her control including but not limited to a natural disaster or a cancelled or delayed flight/s. 6.8. any order providing for [x] to spend time in the father's care pursuant to the order made 5 february 2024 be suspended during any period in which [x] is travelling overseas. 6.9. the mother shall ensure the child communicates with the father on no less than one occasion per week via telephone or other electronic communication, 6.10. the mother shall provide make-up time to the father equivalent to the number of nights missed as a consequence of overseas travel with such make up time to occur on the following basis:
6.10.1. the make-up time occur on dates to be agreed, or failing agreement either in the month immediately prior to or the month following the child's return from overseas, or in the event same is impracticable and the child is of school age, during the next school holiday period, 6.10.2. the make-up time be facilitated in a manner such that the number of consecutive nights in the father's care (by way of make-up time) not exceed the maximum number of consecutive nights the child has spent with the father as at that date pursuant to the orders, noting that several blocks of make-up time might be required to compensate the father for the overall number of nights missed as a consequence of the overseas travel.
6.11. the (sic) for the purposes of section 65y of the family law act the mother be permitted to remove the child from the commonwealth of australia for the purpose of any school overseas trip arranged by the child's school for students, provided the mother give the father not less than 30 days prior written notice and provide to the father information from the school as to the proposed travel location, flights and accommodation (and such travel time shall not be considered part of the six (6) weeks the mother is permitted to travel with the child in accordance with paragraph 1 above) and that for the purpose of such travel the requirements of paragraph 6.5 and 6.10 be dispensed with. that the appointment of the independent children's lawyer be discharged. pursuant to sections 62b and 65da of the family law act 1975 (as amended), the particulars of the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may follow if a person contravenes these orders are set out in the document attached hereto.
the father
the independent children’s lawyer
into the trust account of the father's nominated lawyer. that upon the registry manager receiving written confirmation from the father's nominated lawyers of the receipt of the payment pursuant to paragraph 2 (b) the passport can be released to the mother. that the mother deposit with the registry manager of the court at adelaide the passport released to her for the child within 24 hours of her return to australia that if the mother fails to return to australia on the date stipulated by her without reasonable excuse, that lawyers nominated by the father are authorised to release the money held in the trust account to the father. that the mother shall: provide the father with a copy of her itinerary for the trip including but not limited to departure and return times and dates, a contact telephone number for her and the child and the address at which they will predominantly be based at least 28 days prior to scheduled departure. provided to the father a copy of the return air tickets for the child, provide a notarised letter executed by a notary public which states that the child is travelling to [country b] for the specific travel dates solely for the purpose of a holiday there but is an habitual and permanent resident and citizen of australia and accepts that she must return him to australia by the specified return date during the trip, arrange for the child to face time/telephone the father on at least one occasion per week and keep the father informed of any changes to the travel or flight details (if any), facilitate make up time for the child to spend time with the father as soon as practical upon her return to australia as agreed between the parties and in default of agreement then during the weekend(s)/school holiday periods immediately following her return to australia.
the mother’s position
the father’s position
as to paragraphs 324, 325, 326 and 327, i opposed to the mother travelling to the [country b] with [x]. the mother has previously threatened to flee to [country b] and not return [x]. there is no agreement between australia and [country b] that is capable of ensuring that the child returns once he has left australia.[10]
counsel: i’m putting to you in that process [of discovery] well prior to you issuing the subpoena, my client disclosed bank statements which showed, if you read them, transfers to [country b]. do you accept that? father: yes.[16]
the independent children’s lawyer’s position
the family report dated 27 november 2023
...the continuing demands of moving between two markedly different parents in a high conflict situation, and of having experienced such inconsistent care across his early years, are impacting upon his capacity to cope...[27]
no international travel is supported for either parent in the coming years given the instability in care [x] has already received. if once he is a teenager, the court is satisfied conditions can put in place to ensure his return, it would be supported then that [x] can travel internationally with either parent on an equal basis.[30]
applicable legal principles  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare, and development bracket (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly shared duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare, and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare, and development bracket (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly shared duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare, and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly shared duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare, and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
in my view, the considerations that should be given to an application which involves the custodial parent taking a child out of the jurisdiction, without being exhaustive, would be these: a. the length of the proposed stay out of the jurisdiction, b. the bona fides of the application, c. the effect on the child of any deprivation of access, any threats to the welfare of the child by the circumstances of the proposed environment, and the degree of satisfaction in which the court based its assessment of the parties that a promise of a return to jurisdiction would be honoured.   the existence of otherwise of continuing ties between the departing parent and australia (such as the ownership of real estate, the existence of business interests, or the residence here of close family or friends), (b) the existence and strength of possible motives not to return (including the level of conflict between the parents, particularly over child-related issues), (c) the existence and strength of possible motives to remain in the other nominated country (such as the ownership of real estate, the existence of business interests, the residence of close family and/or personal friends), (d) whether the country of travel is a signatory to the hague convention, and (e) the financial circumstances of the parties.[36]   the existence and strength of possible motives not to return (including the level of conflict between the parents, particularly over child-related issues), (c) the existence and strength of possible motives to remain in the other nominated country (such as the ownership of real estate, the existence of business interests, the residence of close family and/or personal friends), (d) whether the country of travel is a signatory to the hague convention, and (e) the financial circumstances of the parties.[36]   the existence and strength of possible motives to remain in the other nominated country (such as the ownership of real estate, the existence of business interests, the residence of close family and/or personal friends), (d) whether the country of travel is a signatory to the hague convention, and (e) the financial circumstances of the parties.[36]   whether the country of travel is a signatory to the hague convention, and (e) the financial circumstances of the parties.[36]   the financial circumstances of the parties.[36]
decisions about international travel are difficult to make because no one can foretell the future and the decision i have to make here amounts to a leap of faith. the court determines discretionary matters within the framework of the evidence that is presented.
overseas travel, for young children, particularly to a non-hague convention country, is potentially a high-stakes game, with no margin for error. as such, the court, in making its leap of faith should not jump precipitately, into the dark, on the basis of untested or incomplete evidence, particularly if the need for travel in question is not a particularly pressing one.[39]
conclusion   the report writer, ms d did not recommend overseas travel for x given the instability in care x has already received in his short life. once x is a teenager and the court is satisfied conditions can be put in place to ensure his return, then it was supported that x be able to travel internationally with both parents.[40] the unchallenged evidence of the report writer should be given significant weight in my view. whilst the mother’s counsel submits that the recommendation addressing overseas travel is “thinly supported”, the mother did not seek to call ms d to be cross-examined and consented to her report being in evidence without challenge. the mother otherwise supported the recommendations of ms d which provided for x to live with one parent and spend time with the other. the mother cannot in my opinion ‘cherry-pick’ through the recommendations without seeking to put the report writer to proof on this major issue, (b) it is the father’s position that he supports overseas travel commencing when x is 10 years of age. this is three years earlier than the age recommended by the report writer. the fact that a parent who is legally represented supports overseas travel occurring to a country that is not a signatory to the hague convention is a very important concession which cannot go unnoticed by the court, (c) i accept the mother’s evidence that the father was always aware of her money transfers back to family in country b during their relationship and that the contract for the purchase of an apartment has lapsed, (d) the involvement of ms f as a benevolent financial benefactor for the mother remains opaque and unclear. despite being foreshadowed as a witness by the mother, ms f was not called at trial. her personal relationship with the mother is unexplained but she has clearly had the motivation and resources to support the mother. this is demonstrated in ms f’s communications with the father, in being a point of contact for the mother in relation to email communication for country b property purchase and, most obviously, in the payment of very large sums of money for legal fees without any formal loan documentation or security. the court has been unable to independently assess ms f because she was not made available at trial. the father remains highly suspicious over ms f’s motives and the lengths that she may go to in assisting the mother, (e) i accept that ultimately it will be a wonderful opportunity for x to meet his country b family and to experience his cultural background. meeting family especially in a cultural context can be an enriching experience with memories to last a lifetime. in this case, x is only three years old. any visit to country b is likely to be enhanced when he is older and able to immerse himself in those experiences. in his short life until this point, he has been subjected to multiple changes in his care whilst his parents were engaged in a highly conflicted court proceedings. i agree with the observations made by the report writer that what x needs now is stability, (f) the mother’s proposed travel is not pressing in the sense of needing to visit a dying relative or some culturally significant event such as a wedding or funeral. i am not so satisfied on the evidence that the maternal grandmother could not travel to australia to meet x. there was no medical evidence produced at trial. alternatively, the mother could travel alone to visit her mother and x remain behind cared for by his maternal uncle and his father. there is no impediment to the mother returning to country b if her mother’s health deteriorates should she so choose, (g) whilst i assess the risk of the mother not returning to australia as being slight, it is not however, non-existent. there are some ‘pull’ factors, the main one being the presence of the mother’s large and extended family who live there. there has been no occasion since x’s birth that the mother has travelled back to country b and then returned to australia. there is no specific course of conduct for the court to utilise as a benchmark to assess the mother’s promise to return, (h) further, the security offered by the mother is, even on her own case, likely to be insufficient to cover the father’s expenses should she overstay with x. nor is the sum suggested by her of $10,000 in my view, of sufficient magnitude to compel her return. the mother owns no property here and has no other ties apart from her brother whose visa status in australia has not been confirmed. she apparently owes an enormous amount of money to ms f although stated in her evidence that some her settlement sum would also be used towards the purchase of a home. the court observes that the mother’s settlement sum would not even go close to discharging the fees advanced by ms f in these proceedings as set out in the mother’s costs notice, (i) the parties co-parenting relationship is atrocious. they have limited capacity to communicate and view the other through a lens of suspicion and mistrust. the mother’s residential address is not known to the father, and she opposes it being disclosed. the father obtained an interim intervention order against the mother which he was prepared to withdraw as part of the final consent orders for x. there was a sense that the parties had ultimately reached final consent orders in spite of (and not because of) themselves, and (j) i have no confidence that the parties could communicate over make-up time to the father or to negotiate any last-minute travel rearrangements if the mother was permitted to travel now. the evidence supports a finding that the question of make-up time would become a source of contention and frustration between the parties.   it is the father’s position that he supports overseas travel commencing when x is 10 years of age. this is three years earlier than the age recommended by the report writer. the fact that a parent who is legally represented supports overseas travel occurring to a country that is not a signatory to the hague convention is a very important concession which cannot go unnoticed by the court, (c) i accept the mother’s evidence that the father was always aware of her money transfers back to family in country b during their relationship and that the contract for the purchase of an apartment has lapsed, (d) the involvement of ms f as a benevolent financial benefactor for the mother remains opaque and unclear. despite being foreshadowed as a witness by the mother, ms f was not called at trial. her personal relationship with the mother is unexplained but she has clearly had the motivation and resources to support the mother. this is demonstrated in ms f’s communications with the father, in being a point of contact for the mother in relation to email communication for country b property purchase and, most obviously, in the payment of very large sums of money for legal fees without any formal loan documentation or security. the court has been unable to independently assess ms f because she was not made available at trial. the father remains highly suspicious over ms f’s motives and the lengths that she may go to in assisting the mother, (e) i accept that ultimately it will be a wonderful opportunity for x to meet his country b family and to experience his cultural background. meeting family especially in a cultural context can be an enriching experience with memories to last a lifetime. in this case, x is only three years old. any visit to country b is likely to be enhanced when he is older and able to immerse himself in those experiences. in his short life until this point, he has been subjected to multiple changes in his care whilst his parents were engaged in a highly conflicted court proceedings. i agree with the observations made by the report writer that what x needs now is stability, (f) the mother’s proposed travel is not pressing in the sense of needing to visit a dying relative or some culturally significant event such as a wedding or funeral. i am not so satisfied on the evidence that the maternal grandmother could not travel to australia to meet x. there was no medical evidence produced at trial. alternatively, the mother could travel alone to visit her mother and x remain behind cared for by his maternal uncle and his father. there is no impediment to the mother returning to country b if her mother’s health deteriorates should she so choose, (g) whilst i assess the risk of the mother not returning to australia as being slight, it is not however, non-existent. there are some ‘pull’ factors, the main one being the presence of the mother’s large and extended family who live there. there has been no occasion since x’s birth that the mother has travelled back to country b and then returned to australia. there is no specific course of conduct for the court to utilise as a benchmark to assess the mother’s promise to return, (h) further, the security offered by the mother is, even on her own case, likely to be insufficient to cover the father’s expenses should she overstay with x. nor is the sum suggested by her of $10,000 in my view, of sufficient magnitude to compel her return. the mother owns no property here and has no other ties apart from her brother whose visa status in australia has not been confirmed. she apparently owes an enormous amount of money to ms f although stated in her evidence that some her settlement sum would also be used towards the purchase of a home. the court observes that the mother’s settlement sum would not even go close to discharging the fees advanced by ms f in these proceedings as set out in the mother’s costs notice, (i) the parties co-parenting relationship is atrocious. they have limited capacity to communicate and view the other through a lens of suspicion and mistrust. the mother’s residential address is not known to the father, and she opposes it being disclosed. the father obtained an interim intervention order against the mother which he was prepared to withdraw as part of the final consent orders for x. there was a sense that the parties had ultimately reached final consent orders in spite of (and not because of) themselves, and (j) i have no confidence that the parties could communicate over make-up time to the father or to negotiate any last-minute travel rearrangements if the mother was permitted to travel now. the evidence supports a finding that the question of make-up time would become a source of contention and frustration between the parties.   i accept the mother’s evidence that the father was always aware of her money transfers back to family in country b during their relationship and that the contract for the purchase of an apartment has lapsed, (d) the involvement of ms f as a benevolent financial benefactor for the mother remains opaque and unclear. despite being foreshadowed as a witness by the mother, ms f was not called at trial. her personal relationship with the mother is unexplained but she has clearly had the motivation and resources to support the mother. this is demonstrated in ms f’s communications with the father, in being a point of contact for the mother in relation to email communication for country b property purchase and, most obviously, in the payment of very large sums of money for legal fees without any formal loan documentation or security. the court has been unable to independently assess ms f because she was not made available at trial. the father remains highly suspicious over ms f’s motives and the lengths that she may go to in assisting the mother, (e) i accept that ultimately it will be a wonderful opportunity for x to meet his country b family and to experience his cultural background. meeting family especially in a cultural context can be an enriching experience with memories to last a lifetime. in this case, x is only three years old. any visit to country b is likely to be enhanced when he is older and able to immerse himself in those experiences. in his short life until this point, he has been subjected to multiple changes in his care whilst his parents were engaged in a highly conflicted court proceedings. i agree with the observations made by the report writer that what x needs now is stability, (f) the mother’s proposed travel is not pressing in the sense of needing to visit a dying relative or some culturally significant event such as a wedding or funeral. i am not so satisfied on the evidence that the maternal grandmother could not travel to australia to meet x. there was no medical evidence produced at trial. alternatively, the mother could travel alone to visit her mother and x remain behind cared for by his maternal uncle and his father. there is no impediment to the mother returning to country b if her mother’s health deteriorates should she so choose, (g) whilst i assess the risk of the mother not returning to australia as being slight, it is not however, non-existent. there are some ‘pull’ factors, the main one being the presence of the mother’s large and extended family who live there. there has been no occasion since x’s birth that the mother has travelled back to country b and then returned to australia. there is no specific course of conduct for the court to utilise as a benchmark to assess the mother’s promise to return, (h) further, the security offered by the mother is, even on her own case, likely to be insufficient to cover the father’s expenses should she overstay with x. nor is the sum suggested by her of $10,000 in my view, of sufficient magnitude to compel her return. the mother owns no property here and has no other ties apart from her brother whose visa status in australia has not been confirmed. she apparently owes an enormous amount of money to ms f although stated in her evidence that some her settlement sum would also be used towards the purchase of a home. the court observes that the mother’s settlement sum would not even go close to discharging the fees advanced by ms f in these proceedings as set out in the mother’s costs notice, (i) the parties co-parenting relationship is atrocious. they have limited capacity to communicate and view the other through a lens of suspicion and mistrust. the mother’s residential address is not known to the father, and she opposes it being disclosed. the father obtained an interim intervention order against the mother which he was prepared to withdraw as part of the final consent orders for x. there was a sense that the parties had ultimately reached final consent orders in spite of (and not because of) themselves, and (j) i have no confidence that the parties could communicate over make-up time to the father or to negotiate any last-minute travel rearrangements if the mother was permitted to travel now. the evidence supports a finding that the question of make-up time would become a source of contention and frustration between the parties.   the involvement of ms f as a benevolent financial benefactor for the mother remains opaque and unclear. despite being foreshadowed as a witness by the mother, ms f was not called at trial. her personal relationship with the mother is unexplained but she has clearly had the motivation and resources to support the mother. this is demonstrated in ms f’s communications with the father, in being a point of contact for the mother in relation to email communication for country b property purchase and, most obviously, in the payment of very large sums of money for legal fees without any formal loan documentation or security. the court has been unable to independently assess ms f because she was not made available at trial. the father remains highly suspicious over ms f’s motives and the lengths that she may go to in assisting the mother, (e) i accept that ultimately it will be a wonderful opportunity for x to meet his country b family and to experience his cultural background. meeting family especially in a cultural context can be an enriching experience with memories to last a lifetime. in this case, x is only three years old. any visit to country b is likely to be enhanced when he is older and able to immerse himself in those experiences. in his short life until this point, he has been subjected to multiple changes in his care whilst his parents were engaged in a highly conflicted court proceedings. i agree with the observations made by the report writer that what x needs now is stability, (f) the mother’s proposed travel is not pressing in the sense of needing to visit a dying relative or some culturally significant event such as a wedding or funeral. i am not so satisfied on the evidence that the maternal grandmother could not travel to australia to meet x. there was no medical evidence produced at trial. alternatively, the mother could travel alone to visit her mother and x remain behind cared for by his maternal uncle and his father. there is no impediment to the mother returning to country b if her mother’s health deteriorates should she so choose, (g) whilst i assess the risk of the mother not returning to australia as being slight, it is not however, non-existent. there are some ‘pull’ factors, the main one being the presence of the mother’s large and extended family who live there. there has been no occasion since x’s birth that the mother has travelled back to country b and then returned to australia. there is no specific course of conduct for the court to utilise as a benchmark to assess the mother’s promise to return, (h) further, the security offered by the mother is, even on her own case, likely to be insufficient to cover the father’s expenses should she overstay with x. nor is the sum suggested by her of $10,000 in my view, of sufficient magnitude to compel her return. the mother owns no property here and has no other ties apart from her brother whose visa status in australia has not been confirmed. she apparently owes an enormous amount of money to ms f although stated in her evidence that some her settlement sum would also be used towards the purchase of a home. the court observes that the mother’s settlement sum would not even go close to discharging the fees advanced by ms f in these proceedings as set out in the mother’s costs notice, (i) the parties co-parenting relationship is atrocious. they have limited capacity to communicate and view the other through a lens of suspicion and mistrust. the mother’s residential address is not known to the father, and she opposes it being disclosed. the father obtained an interim intervention order against the mother which he was prepared to withdraw as part of the final consent orders for x. there was a sense that the parties had ultimately reached final consent orders in spite of (and not because of) themselves, and (j) i have no confidence that the parties could communicate over make-up time to the father or to negotiate any last-minute travel rearrangements if the mother was permitted to travel now. the evidence supports a finding that the question of make-up time would become a source of contention and frustration between the parties.   i accept that ultimately it will be a wonderful opportunity for x to meet his country b family and to experience his cultural background. meeting family especially in a cultural context can be an enriching experience with memories to last a lifetime. in this case, x is only three years old. any visit to country b is likely to be enhanced when he is older and able to immerse himself in those experiences. in his short life until this point, he has been subjected to multiple changes in his care whilst his parents were engaged in a highly conflicted court proceedings. i agree with the observations made by the report writer that what x needs now is stability, (f) the mother’s proposed travel is not pressing in the sense of needing to visit a dying relative or some culturally significant event such as a wedding or funeral. i am not so satisfied on the evidence that the maternal grandmother could not travel to australia to meet x. there was no medical evidence produced at trial. alternatively, the mother could travel alone to visit her mother and x remain behind cared for by his maternal uncle and his father. there is no impediment to the mother returning to country b if her mother’s health deteriorates should she so choose, (g) whilst i assess the risk of the mother not returning to australia as being slight, it is not however, non-existent. there are some ‘pull’ factors, the main one being the presence of the mother’s large and extended family who live there. there has been no occasion since x’s birth that the mother has travelled back to country b and then returned to australia. there is no specific course of conduct for the court to utilise as a benchmark to assess the mother’s promise to return, (h) further, the security offered by the mother is, even on her own case, likely to be insufficient to cover the father’s expenses should she overstay with x. nor is the sum suggested by her of $10,000 in my view, of sufficient magnitude to compel her return. the mother owns no property here and has no other ties apart from her brother whose visa status in australia has not been confirmed. she apparently owes an enormous amount of money to ms f although stated in her evidence that some her settlement sum would also be used towards the purchase of a home. the court observes that the mother’s settlement sum would not even go close to discharging the fees advanced by ms f in these proceedings as set out in the mother’s costs notice, (i) the parties co-parenting relationship is atrocious. they have limited capacity to communicate and view the other through a lens of suspicion and mistrust. the mother’s residential address is not known to the father, and she opposes it being disclosed. the father obtained an interim intervention order against the mother which he was prepared to withdraw as part of the final consent orders for x. there was a sense that the parties had ultimately reached final consent orders in spite of (and not because of) themselves, and (j) i have no confidence that the parties could communicate over make-up time to the father or to negotiate any last-minute travel rearrangements if the mother was permitted to travel now. the evidence supports a finding that the question of make-up time would become a source of contention and frustration between the parties.   the mother’s proposed travel is not pressing in the sense of needing to visit a dying relative or some culturally significant event such as a wedding or funeral. i am not so satisfied on the evidence that the maternal grandmother could not travel to australia to meet x. there was no medical evidence produced at trial. alternatively, the mother could travel alone to visit her mother and x remain behind cared for by his maternal uncle and his father. there is no impediment to the mother returning to country b if her mother’s health deteriorates should she so choose, (g) whilst i assess the risk of the mother not returning to australia as being slight, it is not however, non-existent. there are some ‘pull’ factors, the main one being the presence of the mother’s large and extended family who live there. there has been no occasion since x’s birth that the mother has travelled back to country b and then returned to australia. there is no specific course of conduct for the court to utilise as a benchmark to assess the mother’s promise to return, (h) further, the security offered by the mother is, even on her own case, likely to be insufficient to cover the father’s expenses should she overstay with x. nor is the sum suggested by her of $10,000 in my view, of sufficient magnitude to compel her return. the mother owns no property here and has no other ties apart from her brother whose visa status in australia has not been confirmed. she apparently owes an enormous amount of money to ms f although stated in her evidence that some her settlement sum would also be used towards the purchase of a home. the court observes that the mother’s settlement sum would not even go close to discharging the fees advanced by ms f in these proceedings as set out in the mother’s costs notice, (i) the parties co-parenting relationship is atrocious. they have limited capacity to communicate and view the other through a lens of suspicion and mistrust. the mother’s residential address is not known to the father, and she opposes it being disclosed. the father obtained an interim intervention order against the mother which he was prepared to withdraw as part of the final consent orders for x. there was a sense that the parties had ultimately reached final consent orders in spite of (and not because of) themselves, and (j) i have no confidence that the parties could communicate over make-up time to the father or to negotiate any last-minute travel rearrangements if the mother was permitted to travel now. the evidence supports a finding that the question of make-up time would become a source of contention and frustration between the parties.   whilst i assess the risk of the mother not returning to australia as being slight, it is not however, non-existent. there are some ‘pull’ factors, the main one being the presence of the mother’s large and extended family who live there. there has been no occasion since x’s birth that the mother has travelled back to country b and then returned to australia. there is no specific course of conduct for the court to utilise as a benchmark to assess the mother’s promise to return, (h) further, the security offered by the mother is, even on her own case, likely to be insufficient to cover the father’s expenses should she overstay with x. nor is the sum suggested by her of $10,000 in my view, of sufficient magnitude to compel her return. the mother owns no property here and has no other ties apart from her brother whose visa status in australia has not been confirmed. she apparently owes an enormous amount of money to ms f although stated in her evidence that some her settlement sum would also be used towards the purchase of a home. the court observes that the mother’s settlement sum would not even go close to discharging the fees advanced by ms f in these proceedings as set out in the mother’s costs notice, (i) the parties co-parenting relationship is atrocious. they have limited capacity to communicate and view the other through a lens of suspicion and mistrust. the mother’s residential address is not known to the father, and she opposes it being disclosed. the father obtained an interim intervention order against the mother which he was prepared to withdraw as part of the final consent orders for x. there was a sense that the parties had ultimately reached final consent orders in spite of (and not because of) themselves, and (j) i have no confidence that the parties could communicate over make-up time to the father or to negotiate any last-minute travel rearrangements if the mother was permitted to travel now. the evidence supports a finding that the question of make-up time would become a source of contention and frustration between the parties.   further, the security offered by the mother is, even on her own case, likely to be insufficient to cover the father’s expenses should she overstay with x. nor is the sum suggested by her of $10,000 in my view, of sufficient magnitude to compel her return. the mother owns no property here and has no other ties apart from her brother whose visa status in australia has not been confirmed. she apparently owes an enormous amount of money to ms f although stated in her evidence that some her settlement sum would also be used towards the purchase of a home. the court observes that the mother’s settlement sum would not even go close to discharging the fees advanced by ms f in these proceedings as set out in the mother’s costs notice, (i) the parties co-parenting relationship is atrocious. they have limited capacity to communicate and view the other through a lens of suspicion and mistrust. the mother’s residential address is not known to the father, and she opposes it being disclosed. the father obtained an interim intervention order against the mother which he was prepared to withdraw as part of the final consent orders for x. there was a sense that the parties had ultimately reached final consent orders in spite of (and not because of) themselves, and (j) i have no confidence that the parties could communicate over make-up time to the father or to negotiate any last-minute travel rearrangements if the mother was permitted to travel now. the evidence supports a finding that the question of make-up time would become a source of contention and frustration between the parties.   the parties co-parenting relationship is atrocious. they have limited capacity to communicate and view the other through a lens of suspicion and mistrust. the mother’s residential address is not known to the father, and she opposes it being disclosed. the father obtained an interim intervention order against the mother which he was prepared to withdraw as part of the final consent orders for x. there was a sense that the parties had ultimately reached final consent orders in spite of (and not because of) themselves, and (j) i have no confidence that the parties could communicate over make-up time to the father or to negotiate any last-minute travel rearrangements if the mother was permitted to travel now. the evidence supports a finding that the question of make-up time would become a source of contention and frustration between the parties.   i have no confidence that the parties could communicate over make-up time to the father or to negotiate any last-minute travel rearrangements if the mother was permitted to travel now. the evidence supports a finding that the question of make-up time would become a source of contention and frustration between the parties.
associate: dated: 20 march 2024
dated: 20 march 2024
[1] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023.[2] the father was represented by a solicitor and not sapol in the intervention order proceedings. [3] it was an agreed position at trial that x does not have an australian passport.[4] see the trial affidavit of ms raine filed 22 december 2023 at paragraph 326.[5] see the trial affidavit of ms raine filed 22 december 2023 at annexure ms r47.[6] annexure ms r46 to the trial affidavit of ms raine filed 22 december 2023 states a total of $35,897.69 and the trial affidavit of mr raine filed 30 january 2024 states the sum of $88,98.[7] see the trial affidavit of ms raine filed 22 december 2023 at paragraph 407.[8] see the trial affidavit of ms raine filed 22 december 2023 at paragraph 407.[9] see the trial affidavit of ms raine filed 22 december 2023 at paragraph 408.[10] see the trial affidavit of mr raine filed 30 january 2024 at paragraph 591.[11] the court does not accept this evidence. the father had ample time to prepare his trial documents.[12] see the trial affidavit of mr raine filed 30 january 2024 at paragraph 155.[13] see the trial affidavit of mr raine filed 30 january 2024 paragraph 647.[14] see the trial affidavit of ms raine filed 22 december 2023 at annexure ms r47.[15] see the trial affidavit of mr raine filed 30 january 2024 at paragraph 157.[16] taken from transcript of the hearing on 9 february 2024.[17] this answer ignored the fact that the father had no application to travel overseas at trial.[18] see the outline of case document filed by the independent children’s lawyer on 2 february 2024 at paragraph 5. (f).[19] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 2.[20] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 4[21] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 13.[22] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 14.[23] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 14.[24] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 14.[25] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 15.[26] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 16.[27] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 17.[28] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 17.[29] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 17.[30] see the family assessment report prepared by ms d dated 27 november 2023 at page 19.[31] evidence act 1995 (cth).[32] family law act 1975 (cth) s 64b(2)(h) and (i).[33] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca.[34] kuebler & kuebler [1978] famca 26, [15] (ache sj).[35] line & line [1996] famca 145.[36] line & line [1996] famca 145, [4.49] - [4.51].[37] gin & hang [2010] famca 617.[38] kaur & kaur [2014] fcca 2843.[39] kaur & kaur [2014] fcca 2843, [143].[40] see the psychological report dated 27 november 2023 at page 19.