last updated: 29 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
railton & railton [2024] fedcfamc2f 394
orders
the court orders that:
pursuant to section 102na(1)(c)(iv) of the family law act 1975, the requirements of section 102na(2) of the act are to apply and the parties are prohibited from personally cross-examining each other at trial.   leave given to the parties to jointly approach chambers via email (...@...) to vacate the hearing if prior to the email being sent the parties have filed and served a certificate of compliance in the approved form certificate of readiness | federal circuit and family court of australia (fcfcoa.gov.au) which may be amended (as required) to reflect that the relevant trial directions have been complied with, (b) the parties being on notice that there may be costs implications if the hearing has to proceed because of a failure by a party/ies to comply with all the relevant trial directions, (c) the chambers of judge kearney to electronically inform the parties of the dial‑in details for their audio-visual appearance via ms teams.   the parties being on notice that there may be costs implications if the hearing has to proceed because of a failure by a party/ies to comply with all the relevant trial directions, (c) the chambers of judge kearney to electronically inform the parties of the dial‑in details for their audio-visual appearance via ms teams.   the chambers of judge kearney to electronically inform the parties of the dial‑in details for their audio-visual appearance via ms teams.
final hearing date/s:
liaising with the court child expert / family report writer and any applicable single expert witness:  they will be required for cross-examination on the last day of the hearing, (b) they are to give evidence in person or may give their evidence by videolink.   they are to give evidence in person or may give their evidence by videolink.
filing and service of trial material:  any amended initiating application or amended response to initiating application setting out with precision the final orders sought, and (b) one (1) updated and consolidated trial affidavit of each party, (c) one (1) updated and consolidated trial affidavit of any witness/es whose evidence the party intends to rely upon,   one (1) updated and consolidated trial affidavit of each party, (c) one (1) updated and consolidated trial affidavit of any witness/es whose evidence the party intends to rely upon,   one (1) updated and consolidated trial affidavit of any witness/es whose evidence the party intends to rely upon,
with all such affidavits to comply with the requirements of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules, including as to spacing and font sizes.
the term “consolidated trial affidavit” is defined in notation f.   a list of the documents to be relied upon by that party, (b) a list of the issues for determination, (c) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (d) in a parenting case, a brief summary of that party’s contentions with respect to ss.60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 which are said to be relevant to the orders proposed by that party, (e) a list of authorities which that party intends to cite to the court during the presentation of any arguments, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended to refer, (f) a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.   a list of the issues for determination, (c) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (d) in a parenting case, a brief summary of that party’s contentions with respect to ss.60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 which are said to be relevant to the orders proposed by that party, (e) a list of authorities which that party intends to cite to the court during the presentation of any arguments, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended to refer, (f) a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.   a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (d) in a parenting case, a brief summary of that party’s contentions with respect to ss.60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 which are said to be relevant to the orders proposed by that party, (e) a list of authorities which that party intends to cite to the court during the presentation of any arguments, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended to refer, (f) a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.   in a parenting case, a brief summary of that party’s contentions with respect to ss.60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 which are said to be relevant to the orders proposed by that party, (e) a list of authorities which that party intends to cite to the court during the presentation of any arguments, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended to refer, (f) a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.   a list of authorities which that party intends to cite to the court during the presentation of any arguments, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended to refer, (f) a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.   a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.
parties are not obliged to use the approved form for the outline of case document but may do so if they wish.
objections to evidence:
subpoenas & tender bundles:  the parties’ legal representatives and the independent children lawyer (if appointed) are granted leave to copy all material marked as a subpoena packet in the proceedings. this leave does not extend to a self-represented litigant or to a party personally, (b) the documents are to be indexed, arranged chronologically and paginated, with the index to identify for each document the subpoena packet number, and the page number for the packet, (c) whenever practical, the bundle is to be filed electronically and in a text-searchable pdf format, (d) the tender bundle is to remain in the possession of legal representatives only and no documents from the bundle are to be released directly to the parties or to any witnesses without an order of the court, (e) if either party becomes self-represented they may contact the registry after today’s date they may arrange to view the tender bundle in the subpoena viewing room prior to the final hearing, (f) the tender bundle will be initially marked for identification only. documents from the bundle will only be admitted into evidence as directed by the trial judge in the course of the hearing.   the documents are to be indexed, arranged chronologically and paginated, with the index to identify for each document the subpoena packet number, and the page number for the packet, (c) whenever practical, the bundle is to be filed electronically and in a text-searchable pdf format, (d) the tender bundle is to remain in the possession of legal representatives only and no documents from the bundle are to be released directly to the parties or to any witnesses without an order of the court, (e) if either party becomes self-represented they may contact the registry after today’s date they may arrange to view the tender bundle in the subpoena viewing room prior to the final hearing, (f) the tender bundle will be initially marked for identification only. documents from the bundle will only be admitted into evidence as directed by the trial judge in the course of the hearing.   whenever practical, the bundle is to be filed electronically and in a text-searchable pdf format, (d) the tender bundle is to remain in the possession of legal representatives only and no documents from the bundle are to be released directly to the parties or to any witnesses without an order of the court, (e) if either party becomes self-represented they may contact the registry after today’s date they may arrange to view the tender bundle in the subpoena viewing room prior to the final hearing, (f) the tender bundle will be initially marked for identification only. documents from the bundle will only be admitted into evidence as directed by the trial judge in the course of the hearing.   the tender bundle is to remain in the possession of legal representatives only and no documents from the bundle are to be released directly to the parties or to any witnesses without an order of the court, (e) if either party becomes self-represented they may contact the registry after today’s date they may arrange to view the tender bundle in the subpoena viewing room prior to the final hearing, (f) the tender bundle will be initially marked for identification only. documents from the bundle will only be admitted into evidence as directed by the trial judge in the course of the hearing.   if either party becomes self-represented they may contact the registry after today’s date they may arrange to view the tender bundle in the subpoena viewing room prior to the final hearing, (f) the tender bundle will be initially marked for identification only. documents from the bundle will only be admitted into evidence as directed by the trial judge in the course of the hearing.   the tender bundle will be initially marked for identification only. documents from the bundle will only be admitted into evidence as directed by the trial judge in the course of the hearing.
payment of hearing fee  the applicant is to pay to the family law courts at city j the setting down fee/and the fee for day three of hearing, by no later than seven (7) days prior to the final hearing, (b) the respondent is required to pay the daily hearing fee for the second day of hearing/and the fee for day four of the hearing, by no later than seven (7) days prior to the final hearing, (c) if the final hearing runs for longer than four (4) days, the applicant is to pay the fee for day five (5) of hearing, the respondent is to pay the hearing fee for day six (6) of hearing and so on.   the respondent is required to pay the daily hearing fee for the second day of hearing/and the fee for day four of the hearing, by no later than seven (7) days prior to the final hearing, (c) if the final hearing runs for longer than four (4) days, the applicant is to pay the fee for day five (5) of hearing, the respondent is to pay the hearing fee for day six (6) of hearing and so on.   if the final hearing runs for longer than four (4) days, the applicant is to pay the fee for day five (5) of hearing, the respondent is to pay the hearing fee for day six (6) of hearing and so on.
costs notices  the client’s actual costs, both paid and owing, up to and including the final hearing. in the case of paid costs, the costs notice is to identify the source of the funds, (b) the estimated final costs of the party up to and including the final hearing, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of expenses.   the estimated final costs of the party up to and including the final hearing, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of expenses.   any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of expenses.
the court notes that:
example
a consolidated trial affidavit cannot be in these terms:
“i repeat and rely upon my earlier affidavit filed on dd/mm/yy” or “this affidavit is to be read with my earlier affidavit of dd/mm/yy”.
the court will not read that earlier affidavit. relevant content from an earlier affidavit must instead be incorporated into the consolidated affidavit.
reasons for judgment
judge betts
given the recent withdrawal by the mother’s solicitor appointed pursuant to section 102na of the family law act, the court has suggested the mother urgently approach legal aid new south wales to seek alternative legal representation if available.
i consider, with some regret, that although i have had the conduct of this proceeding for quite some time, that in reality it should be looked at with a fresh pair of eyes. the evidence will remain the same, but if it assists in the orderly continuation of this matter for a fresh set of judicial eyes to look at the matter, then i consider that in the interests of justice, i should simply assign the matter to a different judge. and in the circumstances, i’m specifically listing it before her honour judge kearney.
associate: dated: 21 march 2024
dated: 21 march 2024