last updated: 4 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
channing & channing (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 413
orders
the court orders that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge obradovic:
1. i am the respondent’s solicitor in these proceedings. on 7 march 2024, her honour judge obradovic made orders and published a judgment in [channing & channing] [2024] fedcfamc2f 293. annexed hereto and marked “a” is a copy of the said judgment. on 8 march 2024, an amended judgment was issued by the court to the parties to the proceedings. on 12 march 2024, i was instructed to file an appeal and i caused to be filed an appeal against the decision of judge obradovic made on 7 march 2024. 5. annexed hereto and marked “b” is a copy of the said notice of appeal. the proceedings which are listed for hearing on 21 & 22 march 2024 should be vacated. the orders vacating the hearing date should be made in chambers by her honour. 8. i swear that this affidavit is true and correct.
the father’s contention in [sic] that her honour the primary judge failed to recuse her honour and that a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend the primary judge might not bring impartial and unprejudice [sic] mind to the resolution of the question her honour is required to decide. if leave is not granted in these circumstances the father would suffer a substantial injustice.
that her honour the primary judge erred in failing to correctly apply the established principals [sic] in respect to apprehended bias to the facts and, as a result, refuse the father’s application that her honour recuse herself from further hearing and determing [sic] the matter.   the onus to establish a proper basis for a stay is on the applicant for the stay, (b) it is not necessary for the applicant to demonstrate any special or exceptional circumstances, (c) a person who has obtained judgment is entitled to the benefit of that judgment, (d) a person who has obtained judgment is entitled to presume that the judgment is correct. the mere filing of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay, (e) the bona fides of the applicant, (f) the stay may be granted on terms that are fair to all of the parties, and this may involve the court weighing the balance of convenience and the competing rights of the parties, (g) whether not granting the stay would render the appeal nugatory. this is, at all times, a substantial factor in determining whether or not the stay should be granted, (h) there should be some preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal, that is, whether the appellant has an arguable case, and (i) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time.   it is not necessary for the applicant to demonstrate any special or exceptional circumstances, (c) a person who has obtained judgment is entitled to the benefit of that judgment, (d) a person who has obtained judgment is entitled to presume that the judgment is correct. the mere filing of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay, (e) the bona fides of the applicant, (f) the stay may be granted on terms that are fair to all of the parties, and this may involve the court weighing the balance of convenience and the competing rights of the parties, (g) whether not granting the stay would render the appeal nugatory. this is, at all times, a substantial factor in determining whether or not the stay should be granted, (h) there should be some preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal, that is, whether the appellant has an arguable case, and (i) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time.   a person who has obtained judgment is entitled to the benefit of that judgment, (d) a person who has obtained judgment is entitled to presume that the judgment is correct. the mere filing of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay, (e) the bona fides of the applicant, (f) the stay may be granted on terms that are fair to all of the parties, and this may involve the court weighing the balance of convenience and the competing rights of the parties, (g) whether not granting the stay would render the appeal nugatory. this is, at all times, a substantial factor in determining whether or not the stay should be granted, (h) there should be some preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal, that is, whether the appellant has an arguable case, and (i) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time.   a person who has obtained judgment is entitled to presume that the judgment is correct. the mere filing of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay, (e) the bona fides of the applicant, (f) the stay may be granted on terms that are fair to all of the parties, and this may involve the court weighing the balance of convenience and the competing rights of the parties, (g) whether not granting the stay would render the appeal nugatory. this is, at all times, a substantial factor in determining whether or not the stay should be granted, (h) there should be some preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal, that is, whether the appellant has an arguable case, and (i) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time.   the bona fides of the applicant, (f) the stay may be granted on terms that are fair to all of the parties, and this may involve the court weighing the balance of convenience and the competing rights of the parties, (g) whether not granting the stay would render the appeal nugatory. this is, at all times, a substantial factor in determining whether or not the stay should be granted, (h) there should be some preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal, that is, whether the appellant has an arguable case, and (i) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time.   the stay may be granted on terms that are fair to all of the parties, and this may involve the court weighing the balance of convenience and the competing rights of the parties, (g) whether not granting the stay would render the appeal nugatory. this is, at all times, a substantial factor in determining whether or not the stay should be granted, (h) there should be some preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal, that is, whether the appellant has an arguable case, and (i) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time.   whether not granting the stay would render the appeal nugatory. this is, at all times, a substantial factor in determining whether or not the stay should be granted, (h) there should be some preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal, that is, whether the appellant has an arguable case, and (i) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time.   there should be some preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal, that is, whether the appellant has an arguable case, and (i) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time.   the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time.
the test [for apprehended bias] ...must be applied in the context of modern litigation, taking account of the need for active case management which demands that judges no longer remain as detached as a cricket umpire or “as inscrutable as a sphynx” until pronouncing the judgment. exchanges between judges and counsel “are not, on that account alone, to be taken as indicative of prejudgment”, indeed, “counsel are usually assisted by hearing those opinions.” in the context of [the federal circuit and family court (division 1)], the government has placed considerable importance [and, indeed, in the context of this court, the government has placed considerable importance] ...upon “achieving timely and efficient outcomes for litigants” by making this an “overriding principle” [of the act] and in parenting cases requiring the court “to actively direct, control and manage the conduct of the proceedings”. of course, this does not derogate from the fundamental requirement that cases be determined according to law. the basis requirement that there be a just resolution according to the law remains and would be constitutionally demanded... in any event.  ations omitted)
the pivotal stage in the analysis on this strand of the appellant's argument lies in the assessment of the reasonableness, in the circumstances of the case, of an apprehension of that kind from the perspective of a fair-minded lay observer. in undertaking that assessment, “it is the court's view of the public's view, not the court's own view, which is determinative.” the hypothetical fair-minded lay observer is a deliberate and necessary construct which tethers the court's analysis to the ultimate purpose of maintaining public confidence in the impartiality of the judicial system. the construct provides “the standard by which the courts address what may appear to the public served by the courts to be a departure from standards of impartiality and independence which are essential to the maintenance of public confidence in the judicial system.” (citations omitted)  ] it is, however,... important to add, contrary to what was said in the court of appeal, that an application for leave to appeal against the rejection of an application that a judge not hear a matter due to apprehended bias may well be a case where the usual criteria would require leave to be granted, at least if a long and costly trial would be wasted if the judge's decision were incorrect.   the court is not satisfied as to the father’s bona fides of the application, noting that the delay in filing the recusal application was without adequate explanation initially. the court, however, accepts that the notice of appeal was filed promptly after the recusal decision was handed down. (b) the court is not able to form the view that the appeal has merit, given the lack of particulars and the lack of any submissions in respect of why the appeal has merit. although this is only to be a preliminary assessment of the strength of the appeal, a mere assertion that a judge has failed to do something is not sufficient to ground a finding that there is merit in the appeal. (c) the mother is entitled to the benefit of the judgment, and the judgment is presumed to be correct. (d) while strictly correct that the appeal will be rendered nugatory in the sense that the final hearing will proceed, the father’s appeal rights with respect to any final orders will remain and he will not be estopped from arguing procedural unfairness in respect of the application for recusal. at most, all that will be wasted are two days of hearing time. in the context of the matter already being part heard and having previously had four days of hearing time: if the appeal is successful and the matter proceeds today to final hearing, with a further two days, it will be six days of hearing time that will be wasted, in their entirety, and if a stay is granted and the appeal is successful, it will still be four days of final hearing that would have been wasted. (e) there is no evidence as to when the leave to appeal and the appeal will be heard, or if they will be heard together. as i have already noted, there is no application to expedite the appeal. (f) lastly, the best interests of the children are yet to be determined, and no final decision has yet been made.   the court is not able to form the view that the appeal has merit, given the lack of particulars and the lack of any submissions in respect of why the appeal has merit. although this is only to be a preliminary assessment of the strength of the appeal, a mere assertion that a judge has failed to do something is not sufficient to ground a finding that there is merit in the appeal. (c) the mother is entitled to the benefit of the judgment, and the judgment is presumed to be correct. (d) while strictly correct that the appeal will be rendered nugatory in the sense that the final hearing will proceed, the father’s appeal rights with respect to any final orders will remain and he will not be estopped from arguing procedural unfairness in respect of the application for recusal. at most, all that will be wasted are two days of hearing time. in the context of the matter already being part heard and having previously had four days of hearing time: if the appeal is successful and the matter proceeds today to final hearing, with a further two days, it will be six days of hearing time that will be wasted, in their entirety, and if a stay is granted and the appeal is successful, it will still be four days of final hearing that would have been wasted. (e) there is no evidence as to when the leave to appeal and the appeal will be heard, or if they will be heard together. as i have already noted, there is no application to expedite the appeal. (f) lastly, the best interests of the children are yet to be determined, and no final decision has yet been made.   the mother is entitled to the benefit of the judgment, and the judgment is presumed to be correct. (d) while strictly correct that the appeal will be rendered nugatory in the sense that the final hearing will proceed, the father’s appeal rights with respect to any final orders will remain and he will not be estopped from arguing procedural unfairness in respect of the application for recusal. at most, all that will be wasted are two days of hearing time. in the context of the matter already being part heard and having previously had four days of hearing time: if the appeal is successful and the matter proceeds today to final hearing, with a further two days, it will be six days of hearing time that will be wasted, in their entirety, and if a stay is granted and the appeal is successful, it will still be four days of final hearing that would have been wasted. (e) there is no evidence as to when the leave to appeal and the appeal will be heard, or if they will be heard together. as i have already noted, there is no application to expedite the appeal. (f) lastly, the best interests of the children are yet to be determined, and no final decision has yet been made.   while strictly correct that the appeal will be rendered nugatory in the sense that the final hearing will proceed, the father’s appeal rights with respect to any final orders will remain and he will not be estopped from arguing procedural unfairness in respect of the application for recusal. at most, all that will be wasted are two days of hearing time. in the context of the matter already being part heard and having previously had four days of hearing time: if the appeal is successful and the matter proceeds today to final hearing, with a further two days, it will be six days of hearing time that will be wasted, in their entirety, and if a stay is granted and the appeal is successful, it will still be four days of final hearing that would have been wasted. (e) there is no evidence as to when the leave to appeal and the appeal will be heard, or if they will be heard together. as i have already noted, there is no application to expedite the appeal. (f) lastly, the best interests of the children are yet to be determined, and no final decision has yet been made.   there is no evidence as to when the leave to appeal and the appeal will be heard, or if they will be heard together. as i have already noted, there is no application to expedite the appeal. (f) lastly, the best interests of the children are yet to be determined, and no final decision has yet been made.   lastly, the best interests of the children are yet to be determined, and no final decision has yet been made.
associate: dated: 3 april 2024
dated: 3 april 2024
[1] with a correction to the reasons for judgment being made on 8 march 2024; see channing & channing [2024] fedcfamc2f 293.[2] [2009] famcafc 106.[3] macris & galanis [2015] fcca 2623.[4] acheson & begbie (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc1a 21 per riethmuller j at [130].[5] [2023] hca 15 at [45].[6] [2024] fedcfamc1a 21.[7] per riethmuller j at [129]; the appeal being decided on a different basis by the majority.[8] michael wilson & partners ltd v nicholls & ors [2011] hca 48 at [86].[9] acheson & begbie (no 2) riethmuller j in the minority judgment said at [121]: “if apprehended bias is established by the appellant, the result is a failure to afford procedural fairness when determining the parenting issues. the requirement for leave to appeal from a disqualification decision made during a trial does not prevent the appellant from relying upon apprehended bias grounds in his appeal against final orders, in order to attempt to establish a lack of procedural fairness with respect to the final orders (as it could not be said that it was unreasonable not to appeal the ruling during the course of the trial in this case): as discussed in michael wilson & partners ltd v nicholls (2011) 244 clr 427 at [85] and see generally gerlach v clifton bricks pty ltd (2002) 209 clr 458.”