last updated: 20 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
carano & carano (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 461
orders
the court orders that:  the sum of $2,500 to smr legal in payment of the tax invoice issued to the wife for the wife’s half share of the costs of the court book in accordance with order 6 of the orders made on 16 february 2024 by this court, and (b) the balance (about $4,433) as directed by the wife.   the balance (about $4,433) as directed by the wife.   the wife withdraw at her expense caveat lodged on the real property situate at and known as f street, town g in the state of victoria being the whole of the land more particularly described in certificate of title volume ... folio ... (“the farm”), and (b) the husband do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be required to transfer to the wife, at the expense of the wife, resource licences being id ... (“the resource licences”).   the husband do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be required to transfer to the wife, at the expense of the wife, resource licences being id ... (“the resource licences”).   first to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale, (b) secondly to discharge any encumbrance affecting the real property, (c) thirdly, so much of the payment as is then outstanding together with interest thereon at the rate prescribed by the applicable rules calculated monthly from the date to the wife, and (d) fourthly, the balance to the husband.   secondly to discharge any encumbrance affecting the real property, (c) thirdly, so much of the payment as is then outstanding together with interest thereon at the rate prescribed by the applicable rules calculated monthly from the date to the wife, and (d) fourthly, the balance to the husband.   thirdly, so much of the payment as is then outstanding together with interest thereon at the rate prescribed by the applicable rules calculated monthly from the date to the wife, and (d) fourthly, the balance to the husband.   fourthly, the balance to the husband.   the husband have the sole right to occupy the farm and during such right of occupation the husband pay all rates and taxes and like apportionable outgoings of or with respect to the real farm as they fall due, (b) the husband and the wife hold their respective interests in the farm upon trust pursuant to these orders, and (c) neither the husband nor the wife encumber the farm without the consent in writing of the other.   the husband and the wife hold their respective interests in the farm upon trust pursuant to these orders, and (c) neither the husband nor the wife encumber the farm without the consent in writing of the other.   neither the husband nor the wife encumber the farm without the consent in writing of the other.   the wife (or such other person to whom a splittable payment is payable) is entitled to be paid, using the base amount allocated in the immediately preceding order, the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, (b) the entitlement of the husband in the fund (or the entitlement of such other person who becomes entitled to receive a payment out of the husband’s superannuation interest) is correspondingly reduced by force of this order.   the entitlement of the husband in the fund (or the entitlement of such other person who becomes entitled to receive a payment out of the husband’s superannuation interest) is correspondingly reduced by force of this order.   calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975, the entitlement awarded to the wife in the immediately preceding clause of the order (“the entitlement”), and (b) pay the entitlement to the wife from the husband’s interest in the fund, and (c) make a corresponding reduction in the entitlement that the husband would otherwise have in the fund but for these orders.   pay the entitlement to the wife from the husband’s interest in the fund, and (c) make a corresponding reduction in the entitlement that the husband would otherwise have in the fund but for these orders.   make a corresponding reduction in the entitlement that the husband would otherwise have in the fund but for these orders.   the wife serve a sealed copy of these orders upon the trustee, and (b) the wife give notice in writing to the trustee pursuant to regulation 72 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001.   the wife give notice in writing to the trustee pursuant to regulation 72 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action) owned by or in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders (the furniture, personal possessions and like chattels in the real property being deemed to be in the possession of the husband), (b) each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
annexure “a”
items in possession of husband to be retained by the wife
asset number
item
valuation amount
4
motor vehicle
$15,000.00
75
$1,800.00
76
$6,500.00
77
item of furniture
$200.00
78
$500.00
80
child’s push bike
81
$300.00
84
$800.00
127
$140.00
129
130
crockery
$1,000.00
133
137
$60.00
139
140
$100.00
228
$1,600.00
388
422
$3,500.00
total value
$33,600.00
annexure “b”
items in possession of wife that were valued
67
$7,200
366
$40
367
$880
368
$120
369
$3,500
370
$220
371
ornaments
$50
372
$200
373
figurines
374
$250
375
376
377
collectible ornaments
378
$80
379
$110
380
games
381
382
$100
383
384
$350
385
$1,500
386
$2,200
total
$17,790
a)
annexure “c”
solely owned by mr c carano & ms b carano
asset
5
10
11
13
14
37
39
lawn mower
40
41
42
43
44
45
farm machinery
46
47
48
49
tools
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
74
79
83
88
116
117
120
121
147
153
158
164
165
166
167
169
mower
173
175
176
179
180
181
183
185
186
187
188
189
190
194
195
196
197
198
199
201
205
206
208
209
210
211
212
215
217
218
219
220
221
222
224
225
227
235
243
244
245
246
247
248
250
255
256
258
264
266
270
286
291
294
299
300
303
310
312
313
315
319
324
333
341
346
387
389
391
395
399
400
402
403
404
407
408
409
410
415
416
417
419
420
427
430
431
434
annexure “d”
items owned by mr c & ms b carano jointly with the husband
asset number on h company report
valuation amount of item
2nd & 3rd respondent’s % share of items jointly owned with the husband
9
$2,000
aos 50%
20
$8,000
50%
26
$1,600
65
$1,800
72
$12,000
71%
111
154
$5,500
66%
162
$20,000
163
$7,000
170
191
192
$400
214
249
$500
$3,000
267
35%
428
annexure “e”
mr e’s items coffee table removed by wife from the real property mr e’s ornaments mr e’s small item of furniture small item of furniture belonging to mr e table made by mr e item of furniture tools made by mr e ornament made by mr e totalling $700 mr e’s school personal items mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
coffee table removed by wife from the real property mr e’s ornaments mr e’s small item of furniture small item of furniture belonging to mr e table made by mr e item of furniture tools made by mr e ornament made by mr e totalling $700 mr e’s school personal items mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
mr e’s ornaments mr e’s small item of furniture small item of furniture belonging to mr e table made by mr e item of furniture tools made by mr e ornament made by mr e totalling $700 mr e’s school personal items mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
mr e’s small item of furniture small item of furniture belonging to mr e table made by mr e item of furniture tools made by mr e ornament made by mr e totalling $700 mr e’s school personal items mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
small item of furniture belonging to mr e table made by mr e item of furniture tools made by mr e ornament made by mr e totalling $700 mr e’s school personal items mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
table made by mr e item of furniture tools made by mr e ornament made by mr e totalling $700 mr e’s school personal items mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
item of furniture tools made by mr e ornament made by mr e totalling $700 mr e’s school personal items mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
tools made by mr e ornament made by mr e totalling $700 mr e’s school personal items mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
ornament made by mr e totalling $700 mr e’s school personal items mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
mr e’s school personal items mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
mr e’s books mr e’s personal items
mr e’s personal items
reasons for judgmentres tempore
introduction
background
farmers & machinery & collecting old farming machinery
the questions to be answered
what property should be considered and at what value[4]?  whether the senior caranos still owned the 100 items and partly owned the other items? (2) whether after separation and before valuation the husband had dismantled items (‘the dismantled items’). it was alleged he dishonestly did this for the purpose of reducing the value of those items and hence reducing the quantum of the wife’s property settlement. the wife alleges these items should be regarded as having a value of $152,000 in total. (3) whether there were items included in the valuation that did not belong to any of the parties? i will refer to these items as the ‘other peoples’ items. (4) whether, after separation, the husband had removed many items of value from the farm to prevent their valuation? (5) whether, after separation, the wife had broken into the sheds on the property and removed items of value? it was alleged she did this dishonestly and for the purpose of reducing the value of those items and hence reducing the quantum of the husband’s property settlement. (6) whether there should be “add backs” of money on the husband’s side because of product and resource sales not made and other such matters.[5]
the contribution assessment[6]   the extent of each parents’ initial contribution and the extent to which the parties’ contributions in the pre marriage “dating” period of their relationship and the weight to be given to that given the myriad of other contributions over the 23 years of marriage and the 2 ½ years since separation. (8) the weight to be given to all of the parents’ different contributions over many years at the second or contribution step of the orthodox ‘preferred approach’.[7] the wife asserts contribution should be regarded as 44/55 percent in her favour and the husband asserts contribution should be assessed at 45/55 percent in his favour. within that question the following disputes or issues are pressed:
8.1 the extent of the husband’s common ground illness of depression and the reliability of the assessment of his condition by his treating psychiatrist and within that question the issue of the reliability of the husband’s account over many years to his treating psychiatrist of his condition and compliance with medication. the husband’s circumstances are also at issue in the section 75(2) third step analysis. 8.2 the extent of the wife’s involvement in and support of the husband the many years of his treatment for depression. 8.3 whether events that the husband alleges triggered his depression occurred. 8.4 whether the family went without because of the husband’s interest or obsession with collecting old farming machinery. 8.5 the extent of the wife’s involvement in and support of the husband in the farming machinery collecting over the years. 8.6 the extent or consequences of x’s diagnosis of attention deficit disorder and autism spectrum disorder, and the impact of that on the parties’ contributions. x’s circumstances are also at issue in the section 75(2) third step analysis.
the prospective section 75(2) factor analysis  whether any adjustment should be made, and in which parties’ favour, when considering the prospective factors set out in section 75(2) of the act or the section 75(2) step of the orthodox preferred approach. within that question the following disputes or issues are pressed:
9.1 the extent or consequences of x’s diagnosis of attention deficit disorder and autism spectrum disorder and the impact of that on the wife’s capacity and opportunity for paid employment. 9.2 the extent or consequences the husband’s depressive illness on his future income and capacity for paid employment.
what just and equitable orders resolve the dispute ) which of the parties should retain the farm and hence pay out the other, and what amount should be paid? (11) how the items of mostly farming machinery, that are owned by the husband, or the husband and wife, should be divided between the husband and wife? that comes down to whether, regardless of who retains the farm, the wife should retain the $218,000 bundle of items and or be paid or receive what sum of money instead?
standard of proof: burden of proof  in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.  ] the grave allegation of untruthfulness and its concomitant finding of abuse of child x as essential aspects of the determination of the case constituted, in accordance with s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), a factual conclusion that required persuasion, itself, on the balance of probabilities. it was not established on the mere failure by the appellant to prove that the behaviours had in fact occurred to that same standard. [40] while the failure to accept a witness’s evidence is a necessary component of a finding of untruthfulness or fabrication, such mere failure is less than a finding of untruthfulness, untruthfulness is a further fact that is required to be found.
in the full court of the federal court judgment of communications, electrical, electronic, energy, information, postal, plumbing & allied services union of australia v australian competition & consumer commission (2007) 162 fcr 466, 242 alr 643, [2007] fcafc 132 (weinberg, bennett and rares jj) it was observed at [31]:
even though he spoke of the common law position, dixon j’s classic discussion in briginshaw v briginshaw (1938) 60 clr 336, [1938] hca 34 at 361–363 of how the civil standard of proof operates appositely expresses the considerations which s 140(2) of the evidence act now requires a court to take into account. dixon j emphasised that when the law requires proof of any fact, the tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence before it can be found. he pointed out that a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities independent of any belief in its reality, cannot justify the finding of a fact.
...subsequently, in qantas airways ltd v gama (2008) 167 fcr 537, 247 alr 273, [2008] fcafc 69, branson j (with whom french and jacobson jj agreed at [110]) simply observed at [139] that:
references to, for example, "the briginshaw standard" or "the onerous briginshaw test" ... have a tendency to lead a trier of facts into error. the correct approach to the standard of proof in a civil proceeding in a federal court is that for which s 140 of the evidence act provides.
... ...in 2010, the court of appeal in morley v australian securities & investments commission (2010) 247 flr 140, 5 bfra 364, [2010] nswca 331 stated at [750]–[753]:
references in the authorities to "actual persuasion" should be understood as equivalent to the state of "satisfaction", as that word is used in s 140. it should not be understood as requiring a subjective "belief". ... in order to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities, within the meaning of s 140, the tribunal of fact must reach an affirmative conclusion, or a definite conclusion, or an actual persuasion.
... similarly, the victorian court of appeal has emphatically adopted the view that this provision [section 140] embraces the "briginshaw principle", notwithstanding the language used and the clearly stated view of the alrc to the contrary. in nom v director of public prosecutions (2012) 38 vr 618, [2012] vsca 198, redlich ja, harper ja and curtain aja, after a discussion of the authorities, concluded at [124] that there is now a "settled" view that a "[m]ere mechanical comparison of probabilities independent of a reasonable satisfaction will not justify a finding of fact. the fact finder must feel an actual persuasion of the occurrence or existence of the fact in issue before it can be found”.
how is the gravity of the matters alleged to be taken into account?
... the strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts on the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature of what it is sought to prove. thus, authoritative statements have often been made to the effect that clear or cogent or strict proof is necessary “where so serious a matter as fraud is to be found”. statements to that effect should not, however, be understood as directed to the standard of proof. rather, they should be understood as merely reflecting a conventional perception that members of our society do not ordinarily engage in fraudulent or criminal conduct and a judicial approach that a court should not lightly make a finding that, on the balance of probabilities, a party to civil litigation has been guilty of such conduct.
while these observations related to the common law, they are applicable to s 140. the full court of the family court has emphasised that the gravity of allegations of sexual abuse of children mean that, in applying the test in this provision, the evidence must be “very carefully evaluated” and “[i]nexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences are insufficient to ground a finding of abuse”. similar observations have been made in respect of other kinds of “grave” allegations. the standard of proof remains the same but the court should not be satisfied that the allegation has been proved on the balance of probabilities until it has exercised the caution appropriate to the issue in the particular circumstances by a careful examination of the whole f the evidence. that the standard of proof remains the same was made clear by the nsw court of appeal in palmer v dolman [2005] nswca 361 when it summarised the position where fraud is sought to be inferred from circumstantial evidence: “the inquiry is simply, taking due account of what was said in neat holdings, has the allegation been proved on a balance of probabilities”. similarly, in qantas airways ltd v gama [2008] fcafc 69, (2008) 167 fcr 537, branson j observed at [139] that the correct approach to the standard of proof in a civil proceeding under s 140 is, “adopting the language of the high court in neat holdings”, one that recognises that “the strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact in issue on the balance of probabilities will vary according to the nature of what is sought to be proved.”
the placement of the burden of proof is uncompromising and unable to be ameliorated by any “conventional perception that members of our society do not ordinarily engage in fraudulent or criminal conduct”.
... a presumption that individuals do not engage in criminal activity ... is inconsistent with the allocation of the burden of proof.
failure to consider whole evidence we now turn to deal with the appellant’s contention that...her honour failed to have regard to the whole of the evidence, or its cumulative effect, and instead analysed each document separately and in isolation from other relevant material... ... ...in the civil and criminal law context, the evidence in question must be evaluated as a whole and that the object of the exercise in a case such as the present, where direct proof of the disposition contended for is not available, is to ascertain “whether the evidence paints a picture to be derived from an accumulation of detail. the overall effect of the detailed picture can sometimes be best appreciated by standing back and viewing it from a distance, making an informed, considered, qualitative appreciation of the whole. the overall effect of the detail is not necessarily the same as the sum total of the individual details.” thus, it seems plain enough that, when a court is asked to infer a fact from various items of indirect evidence, it must consider the combined or cumulative effect of the evidence... ... reference should also be made to the observation of buchanan, j.a. (with whom phillips, c.j. and charles, j.a. agreed) in r. v. huisman & shiells that “the distinction between the evidence founding a chain of sequential reasoning and an accumulation of circumstances from which a fact may be inferred was explained metaphorically in wigmore on evidence, vol.9 para. 2487, as the distinction between links in a chain and strands in a cable. see shepherd v. r.” and in r. v. ng the court of appeal held: “it is the very essence of a circumstantial case that the items of evidence should not be examined in isolation, but must be considered in their totality.”
reliability of parts of the parties’ evidence.
motor vehicle serial numbers mean a motor vehicle exists and not made available st of motor vehicles]
i have been through the lists and worked out what i maintain the missing items are worth. i say that at auction they should achieve $152,000. this is based on my experience as a collector over the past 20 years and my involvement in the business.
this is a receipt that [mr carano] had put in. it shows the [motor vehicles] or wrecks what we have brought, and the serial numbers of those [motor vehicles]. (emphasis added)
x’s employment prospects
17 .54 as to the contents of paragraph 44: [x] likes cooking and wants to be a chef.
ms taylor: what sort of job do you think he will be able to get in the future, if everything goes to plan? mrs [carano]: i don’t know, it’s what [x] wants to do in the future. ms taylor: well, does he have plans when he finishes school? mrs [carano]: no, not really. ... ms taylor: do you think he could work as a chef in the future? mrs [carano]: i don’t know. ms taylor: well, you know him, you live with him, he’s your son. surely you would know the answer to that question. what do you think he will be capable of doing for work? mrs [carano]: i don’t know. ...
issue of motor vehicle 1 ownership
ms taylor: do you have [motor vehicle 1]? [ms carano]: no, i don’t. ms taylor: does your mother own one? [ms carano]: my mother does. ... ms taylor: okay. do you expect to receive the [motor vehicle] as a gift in the future? [ms carano]: no. ms taylor: upon the death of your mother? [ms carano]: no. ms taylor: no? are you sure? okay. well, there was a letter that was sent by [mr carano]’s lawyers to your lawyers,[17] ... [in early] 2022, and under the heading, list of items removed by the wife from the real property, included details of the [motor vehicle 1]. do you recall that? [ms carano]: sorry? ... ms taylor: there was a letter sent from [mr carano]’s lawyers to your lawyers, [in early] 2022, and one of the things that was identified as removed from the property by you was a [motor vehicle 1]. do you recall that letter? [ms carano]: no, i don’t. [copy of letter handed to [ms carano] in the witness box] ... his honour: you read it, [ms carano]. [ms carano]: it says, “[motor vehicle 1] purchased by your client from her mother and” - - - ... - - - “motor vehicle purchased by your client from her mother and stored at your – at your client’s mother’s house.” ms taylor: and do you recall that letter coming from [mr carano]’s lawyer? [ms carano]: that one i do. yes. ms taylor: yes, and there’s a response, isn’t there, from your lawyers? do you recall their response? [ms carano]: not really. no. ... ms taylor: - - - and this is a response from your lawyers [in early] 2022, and item number 5 says:
our client is to receive this vehicle on her mother’s death. it was registered in her mother’s name until 2008. no funds have changed hands.
your lawyers were acting on your instructions? [ms carano]: yes. ms taylor: yes. so, what do you say now? do you expect to receive that vehicle in the future? [ms carano]:: there was talk that my eldest nephew was going to receive it if anything happens to mum. ms taylor: and that is not anywhere in your affidavit material? [ms carano]: no. ms taylor: it is not in your mum’s affidavit material? [ms carano]: no. ms taylor: why not? [ms carano]: sorry? ms taylor: why not? why is it not in your affidavit? [ms carano]: my nephew flew over from [city m] to see her recently...- - - and he asked for the car. ms taylor: what date did your nephew come over? [ms carano]: [late 2022]. ms taylor: and so, you say since [late 2022], now your mum has changed her mind? [ms carano]: well, there was talk of it. i don’t know if she has told him he could have it or not. i don’t know. he could have it. his honour: have you spoken to your mum about the vehicle? [ms carano]: sorry? his honour: have you had a conversation with your mum about the vehicle? [ms carano]: no. his honour: surely you must have spoken to her about it. if it was promised to you at one point, as shown by this correspondence, surely you must have had a conversation about it? [ms carano]: no. his honour: well, why would you tell your lawyers to write a letter that says, “i’m going to receive it upon her death”? you must have had a conversation? [ms carano]: well, that was back then, when that letter was written. ... ms taylor: ...one of the things that [mr carano] has sought was for that vehicle to be valued, hasn’t he? [ms carano]: sorry? ms taylor: [mr carano] sought for that vehicle to be valued. he wanted it valued, didn’t he? [ms carano]: yes. ms taylor: and you didn’t want it to be valued? [ms carano]: well, the court orders was, he had to provide proof that i owned it. ... ms taylor: and so now you say that the situation has changed, and your mother may have changed her mind about giving you that vehicle in the future, but you’re not sure. and what we’re left with, is no value being attributed to that car, right? [ms carano]: yes. ...
issue of whether the wife’s mother was terminally ill
ms taylor: did you tell the court at the end of last year that she was terminally ill? [ms carano]: i did. [the wife then went on to say that her mother had been misdiagnosed.] ms taylor: it would be unusual, wouldn’t it, to be 93, and terminally ill and not have a will? [ms carano]: well, she was misdiagnosed, but yes, you’re right. ... ms taylor: what has your mother been diagnosed with? ... [ms carano]: do you mean from the start? she was diagnosed with [a terminal illness], and it was a mistake. she – when she went in that night, they said that she had a [an injury], and they did testing on – on the next day, they informed me that they believed she had [a terminal illness]. upon further testing, she doesn’t. she said she doesn’t have [a terminal illness]... ms taylor: okay. and so, she’s not terminally ill? [ms carano]: no.
missing or broken devices and meta-data from images
ms taylor: now, [mr carano] attaches to his affidavit photos of two... [motor vehicles]... is that right? [ms carano]: in that picture? ms taylor: yes? [ms carano]: i think it’s the same [motor vehicles]. ms taylor: well, those are photos taken by you, aren’t they? [ms carano]: it’s actually video footage my daughter took. ms taylor: okay. and when did she take that video footage? [ms carano]: i believe it was a week or two weeks before separation. ms taylor: before separation. do you agree those photos look like they’ve been taken at night or that video looks like it has been taken at night? [ms carano]: well, i suppose with the doors closed you could say that. yes. ... ms taylor: these photos appear to be taken at night in the dark shed, and i seek that the wife produce the electronic document for these photos to confirm the time and date they were taken. now, [mr carano] asked you to produce copies of these photos of the [motor vehicles] and the signs as well as the metadata that’s attached, didn’t he? [ms carano]: well, it says there in his writing. yes. ms taylor: yes, yes, he asked for it, and did you produce it? [ms carano]: no. ms taylor: why not? [ms carano]: i don’t know. i just screenshotted the photos, and [ms n] has the photos. - - - i can’t remember if they’re – i’ve downloaded a lot of the photos and printed them off and gave them to [ms n] that way, and then i’ve deleted the photos as i haven’t needed them because they’re in photocopy. ms taylor: and so, what device do you say these photos were taken on? [ms carano]: sorry? ms taylor: what device do you say these were taken on? [ms carano]: [ms k]’s phone. ms taylor: okay. you didn’t ask [ms k] for a copy of the photos from her phone? [ms carano]: no, and it won’t go on my phone. ... ms taylor: did you ask – they were taken on [ms k]’s phone, is what you said? [ms carano]: yes. ms taylor: and have you asked [ms k] for a copy from her phone? [ms carano]: i tried to download them onto my phone, and it wouldn’t work. [ms k] now has a new phone. ... ms taylor: yes. and so, you say those photos have now been deleted? [ms carano]: yes. ms taylor: okay, from your phone. and what date did you take the screenshot? his honour: hang on. now deleted from your phone. what’s the answer to that question? [ms carano]: yes. i don’t remember. ms taylor: well, do you have your phone here? can you check? [ms carano]: no, i have a new phone. ms taylor: you have a new phone as well. okay? [ms carano]: well, its smashed. i dropped it and it smashed. ms taylor: see, what your lawyers say in the last few days leading up to this trial is they respond and they say: some of the photos requested not able to be retrieved, due to being deleted in the years they were taken. but you’ve provided the images that you have access to. that’s what your lawyers say that are currently on the record? [ms carano]: yes. ms taylor: yes. they don’t say your phone is broken, do they? [ms carano]: well, i didn’t tell them it was broken. ms taylor: why not? [ms carano]: i just told them what i thought they needed to know. ... ms taylor: well, its not just that they’ve been deleted. your evidence was that you now have a new phone and [ms k] has a new phone, and you can’t access them? [ms carano]: i had – some of those photos were on a usb. what i had, i supplied to [mr carano]. ... [ms carano]: well, i said i had some saved. i don’t know why, but they were – i found them on the laptop. ... ms taylor: see, what i don’t understand, ms [carano], is this. these are crucial photos, aren’t they, to your case? you say that my client has taken these items and they’re missing and here’s the evidence that you’ve got that they existed. why would you delete them? [ms carano]: well, ms – well, again, i’ve supplied the photos to [my previous solicitor]. i just assumed she had them. she didn’t tell me not to delete them so - - -
the wife’s witnesses[19]
aspects of the husband’s evidence
no finding of ‘lying’
the proceedings
the farming machinery valuation
property alteration
the applicable law
section 79 alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or
... including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order requiring:  either or both of the parties to the marriage,... ... to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.
...   the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.
section 75 matters to be taken into consideration in relation to spousal maintenance (2) the matters to be so taken into account are:   the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and (ii) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and  ) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia, and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  ) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and
... (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and ...  ) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and   in exercising its jurisdiction under section 74, a court shall disregard any entitlement of the party whose maintenance is under consideration to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   in this section:
"party" means a party to the marriage concerned.
section 80 general powers of court   the court, in exercising its powers under this part, may do any or all of the following: (a) order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,   order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,   order payment of a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic sum, (ba) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a marriage, (c) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order, (e) appoint or remove trustees, (f) order that payments be made direct to a party to the marriage, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the marriage, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order, (i) impose terms and conditions, (j) make an order by consent, (k) make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, and (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.  ) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a marriage, (c) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payments be made direct to a party to the marriage, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the marriage, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, and (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.   subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.  the making of an order of a kind referred to in paragraph (1)(ba), or of any other order under this part, in relation to the maintenance of a party to a marriage does not prevent a court from making a subsequent order in relation to the maintenance of the party.
stanford ] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife... hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4).
the preferred approach ] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79. that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) (“the other factors”) including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case. (citations omitted and emphasis added)
application of the preferred approach
step one: identify the property and liabilities
wife’s ‘pool’ of assets & liabilities
description
ownership
wife asserts
husband asserts
assets
1
funds in d law firm trust account
joint
$6,933
2
sundry plant and equipment at town g property (joint valuation prepared by h company dated mid-2022) note: e$27,000 of this was sold by husband as deposed in his trial affidavit at page 66.
note: e$27,000 of this was sold by husband as deposed in his trial affidavit at page 66.
$679,350 (of this amount the wife values the item she seeks to retain at $218,525[22]
$431,524
3
joint valuation dated mid-2023 including the condition of equipment as asserted by the wife in her affidavit filed 9 december 2022
$83,000
nil
farming machine in shed
$2,750
$2.750 580,000
580,000
real property situated at town g (joint valuation prepared early 2022, updated valuation prepared mid-2023)
$660,000
$580,000
6
resource licence 1
respondent
$91,430
$81,500
7
resource licence 2
$10,100
$9,191
8
wife part settlement
applicant
$40,000
husband part settlement
proceeds of sale of product
payment for work rendered before separation
$1,700
12
funds removed from acc ...55 post separation
$10,432
cash retained
$2,500
r company and s company shares
15
foregone temporary resource sales
$15,000
16
missing antiques & collectables
$152,000
17
resource licence sold by the applicant husband as per the respondent’s solicitor’s email on 8 march 2023 (annexure a)
$4,390
assets subtotal
$1,804,885
$1,191,898
liabilities
n/a
superannuation
fund
type of interest
applicant’s value
respondent’s value
the husband’s super fund
accumulation
$331,694.14 as of 28 february 2024
$310,644
the wife’s super fund
$5,600
superannuation subtotal
$337,294.14
$316,244
total (assets – liabilities)
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation)
$2,142,179.14
$1,508,142
the husband’s ‘pool’ of assets and liabilities
applicants value
respondents value
town g property
husband
resource licence – 1 and 2
$101,530
$97,280
carryover
money in t trust account
$6,933.07
$,933.07
part property settlement
wife
plant & equipment owned by husband in possession of husband
$662,360
$378,505
subtract asset ... wife now concedes is owned by ms aa
ms aa
-$8,000
nk
husband’s share of plant & equipment jointly owned with his parents
$29,285
chattels in possession of wife inc motor vehicle 2
$16,990
increased value of p&e if not dismantled by husband
$83,300
farm machinery – in shed
$2.750
shares
$1,493.94
funds removed from account post separation
cash retained at separation
sale of resource allocation x 2 years
18
missing antiques, machinery & collectables in possession of husband
19
missing antiques, machinery & collectables in possession of wife
$1,784,295.07
$1,274,037.01
repairs required to asset ... (motor vehicle 2)
$10,000
liabilities subtotal
$331,694
$5,916
$337,610
$1,784,295,07
$1,264,037.01
$2,121,905.07
$1,601,647.01
financial resources
wife’s interest in estate of her terminally ill mother ms q
financial resources subtotal
pool
wife to receive
farm
$600,000
$93,330
husband agrees to wife’s values of $4,100 per unit for hr and $1,000 per unit for lr
resource licence 2 unit hr to stay with property
$8,200
money in trust
part property settlement payment
p&e owned by husband in possession of husband
$378,505.00
husband share of p&e joint owned with parents
$29,285.00
p&e in wife’s possession inc motor vehicle 1
$17,790.00
farming machinery – item 32.22
$2,750.00
assets subtotal $1,278,287.01
$158,053
repairs required to motor vehicle 2 asset ...
value
$331,694.00
$5,916.00
$337,610.00
split required for super equalisation
$162,889.00
$1,268,287.01
$1,605,897.01
40% of pool to the wife
value of assets wife is retaining as per above
$158,053.07
plus items in annexure a to husband’s minute of orders sought that husband agreed to wife retaining
$33,600[26]
payment for wife to received 40% of the pool – this is adjusted from minute to reflect change resource values.
$315,661.73
total to the wife
$507,314.80
with the wife to pay her share of the court book costs in sum of $2,500 from the funds in trust
senior carano’s’ assets and liabilities
applicant asserts
respondent asserts
plant equipment, farming items and memorabilia as per schedule a of the statement of claim
second and third respondent
$180,205
plant equipment, farming items and memorabilia as per schedule b of the statement of claim
first, second and third respondent
$68,450
whether the senior caranos still owned the 132 items and partly owned the 17 items  at the time of selling their own farm back in 1995 and before the marriage of the parties, mr c carano moved the senior caranos’ farming machinery, or most of it, to the farm. this was said to constitute ‘delivery’, and the delivery necessary to complete a gift of personal property at law. (2) after 1995, the senior caranos did not store any of the 100 items or the other items on their own property, but on the farm owned by the husband, (3) motor vehicles, of the 100 items or the other items were recorded in the ‘australian register’, kept since 2007 by the husband, under or with the husband's name, not the name of either of the senior caranos, (4) the alleged rare occasions mr c carano attended the farm and the alleged rare occasions he worked on the 100 or other items, (5) the descriptions of items alleged to be owned by the senior carano’s had not been entirely consistent during the proceedings, (6) that money of the husband and wife had been spent by the husband on some of the 100 and on some of the other items, (7) that the husband worked on some of the 100 and the other items, (8) clause 3 of the husband's 2004 will, which stated:   after 1995, the senior caranos did not store any of the 100 items or the other items on their own property, but on the farm owned by the husband, (3) motor vehicles, of the 100 items or the other items were recorded in the ‘australian register’, kept since 2007 by the husband, under or with the husband's name, not the name of either of the senior caranos, (4) the alleged rare occasions mr c carano attended the farm and the alleged rare occasions he worked on the 100 or other items, (5) the descriptions of items alleged to be owned by the senior carano’s had not been entirely consistent during the proceedings, (6) that money of the husband and wife had been spent by the husband on some of the 100 and on some of the other items, (7) that the husband worked on some of the 100 and the other items, (8) clause 3 of the husband's 2004 will, which stated:   motor vehicles, of the 100 items or the other items were recorded in the ‘australian register’, kept since 2007 by the husband, under or with the husband's name, not the name of either of the senior caranos, (4) the alleged rare occasions mr c carano attended the farm and the alleged rare occasions he worked on the 100 or other items, (5) the descriptions of items alleged to be owned by the senior carano’s had not been entirely consistent during the proceedings, (6) that money of the husband and wife had been spent by the husband on some of the 100 and on some of the other items, (7) that the husband worked on some of the 100 and the other items, (8) clause 3 of the husband's 2004 will, which stated:   the alleged rare occasions mr c carano attended the farm and the alleged rare occasions he worked on the 100 or other items, (5) the descriptions of items alleged to be owned by the senior carano’s had not been entirely consistent during the proceedings, (6) that money of the husband and wife had been spent by the husband on some of the 100 and on some of the other items, (7) that the husband worked on some of the 100 and the other items, (8) clause 3 of the husband's 2004 will, which stated:   the descriptions of items alleged to be owned by the senior carano’s had not been entirely consistent during the proceedings, (6) that money of the husband and wife had been spent by the husband on some of the 100 and on some of the other items, (7) that the husband worked on some of the 100 and the other items, (8) clause 3 of the husband's 2004 will, which stated:   that money of the husband and wife had been spent by the husband on some of the 100 and on some of the other items, (7) that the husband worked on some of the 100 and the other items, (8) clause 3 of the husband's 2004 will, which stated:   that the husband worked on some of the 100 and the other items, (8) clause 3 of the husband's 2004 will, which stated:   clause 3 of the husband's 2004 will, which stated:
i devise to my trustee my collection of [motor vehicles] to permit my said father [mr c carano] to have the use and enjoyment thereof during his lifetime, during that time my said father to be responsible for attending to, and the cost of: insuring any [motor vehicles] insured by me at the date of my death, maintaining the [farming motor vehicles], and in the event that my said wife sells the property on which the [motor vehicles] are stored or garaged at the date of my death, the removal, storage, and garaging of the [motor vehicles] at alternate premises of my said father’s choosing. i direct that on the death of my said father that my collection of [motor vehicles] shall fall into and form part of my residuary estate.   centrelink records show that centrelink does not have a record of the senior caranos owning any of the 100 or other items, notwithstanding their legal obligation to disclose all of their property to centrelink. (10) the husband and the senior caranos have not properly disclosed documents. (11) the wife's evidence as to the allegation of gift and ownership of the 100 items and the other items included[27] the following: paragraph 56 of the trial affidavit, paragraphs of her 9 december 2022 affidavit, at paragraph 4 and paragraphs 17.27311 and 17.274 and the other paragraphs of the wife's reply material dealing with those matters.
17.273.11 [mr carano] throughout his response refers to his father ([mr c carano]) working on machinery at our home. [mr c carano] was interested in what [mr carano] was doing but i deny that [mr c carano] worked on the machinery. i further say [mr carano] never claimed his father owned any items at our property until separation. 17.274 i deny the contents of paragraph 89.1 which refers to asset number [...] – [motor vehicle] and i deny the contents of d816' and say:- 17.27 4.1 we put money into this [motor vehicle]. we ordered some new and some second hand parts [from overseas]. we further paid for oil for the [motor vehicle]. the only receipts provided by [mr c carano] in relation to oil are in 1994. this was prior to [mr c carano] selling the farm when i concede he was an active farmer. [mr carano] claimed this [motor vehicle] on [marketplace]. 17.274.2 the [motor vehicle] was taken to the [event] at our cost. [mr carano] worked on the [motor vehicle], made sure it was in running order and could be properly displayed. we displayed this [motor vehicle] at [car events] on several occasions. the [motor vehicle] was just one of a number that we took to [events] at different times. we borrowed a semi-truck to take the items to the [event] and we put fuel in the [vehicle]. [mr c carano] did not attend at the property to help get these items ready for the [event], nor did he help load these items at our property, or bring them back to our home. [mr c carano] did not give us funds to pay to transport the items to [car events]. [mr c carano] attended [car events] separately. 17.274.3 the [motor vehicle] was moved around the property and was going. [mr c carano] did not work on this [motor vehicle]. 17.274.4 there was a friend from [overseas] who visited our farm. [mr c carano] concedes he bought some reproduction parts, which were used for the [motor vehicle] which also belongs to [mr carano]. i do not claim that this [motor vehicle] had been restored. i claim that it was complete.
... in all the time i have known [mr c carano] first as a neighbour and then as a friend after he sold his farm [28] years ago, he has always been collecting old [motor vehicles] and machinery and continues to do so. some of [mr c carano]’s old items were stored at my farm for nearly [28] years. i have never heard him say or suggest that he had given away ownership of any part of his collection and could never imagine him doing so. he refers to his collection being stored at his son's property. equally i have never heard [mr carano] say or infer that [mr c carano]’s collection belong to him or that he had any entitlement to it. there would be no basis for him doing so.
67.1 my parents did not give me any of their plant and equipment collection when the sold their farm. i agreed to store it on the farm as dad and i share our interest in [motor vehicles] and have continued to today to be involved together in this hobby... 67.2 at no time did dad say to me or my siblings that "everything has to go" or "you kids take whatever you want as it all has to go" at no time did dad say that if the items were not cleaned up and taken from the farm then they would be left there. my sister did take some family heirloom type items and one of my brothers took some old bikes. nothing was taken to the tip. i did take some items to the scrap metal dealer and gave dad the money. at the same time i took some of my scrap and i retained the money from this scrap. 67.3 [ms carano] and i had not even met, never mind married at the time that dad and i started moving the plant and equipment that we owned to the farm. after we met, [ms carano] rarely attended the farm until the house was built. ... 67.6 [ms carano] has never had a key to the sheds and rarely went in the sheds. a bulk set of spare keys for the sheds was hidden in the house. [ms carano] has little knowledge of what is stored in the sheds or what work dad and 1 have done in and around the sheds. 67.7 to my knowledge, [ms carano] has never let people into the sheds to look at the collection. i always told her not to. occasionally dad and/or i would let in a visitor to look at the collection.
lists of items in the plant & equipment collections a valuation has been conducted, by [mr z] of [h company] (the valuer), of a total of [over 400] assets (the valuation). some assets include more than one item. the assets in the valuation are items of plant and equipment and other collectable items, including items owned by me and [ms carano], items owned by my parents and items that are jointly owned by me and my parents. a number of items owned by third parties were also included in the valuation. i made available to be valued by the valuer all items in my possession. [ms carano] failed to make numerous items in her possession available to be valued by the valuer. annexed hereto and marked with the letters "[mrc8]" are copies of lists showing the division of ownership of the items using the asset numbers from the valuation. the items owned by third parties are listed at paragraph 85 of this affidavit. [ms carano] has made various allegations about anomalies in the lists and failure by me and dad to provide complete lists. in response to these allegations, i say as follows:
69.1 since legal proceedings commenced in late 2021 various lists of the items in the collections have been prepared and provided to [ms carano] and the valuer as the proceedings progressed. the more time dad and i spent working on the matter, the more we were able to refine the lists and provide further details about the items and locate various receipts and other documents. this has been onerous task given the extensive number of items and the many years over which the items and have been collected by dad and me. at no time did dad and i alter the lists after [ms carano] issued a subpoena to [a] real estate. 69.2 lists were first provided to [ms carano]'s lawyer in an email on 2 january 2022... 69.3 on 2 march 2022, prior to becoming a party to the proceedings, dad swore an affidavit which was filed on my behalf. annexed to dad's affidavit was a more detailed list of the items owned by him and the jointly owned items. 69.4 i attempted to ensure that prior to the valuation the valuer was provided with numbered lists so that errors in identifying the various items and their ownership could be avoided. unfo1iunately, [ms carano] would not agree to these lists being provided and errors were made by the valuer in relation to the ownership of some of the items. 69.5 a further factor complicating and altering the lists is that the valuer has valued many individual items as part of a "job lot", as is common practice in valuing items of plant and equipment. as a result, some items that dad and l listed separately have been valued together as one lot, such as groups of spare parts and groups of scrap metal. 69.6 after receiving a copy of the valuation, i went through the document and worked out the errors in the valuation in relation to ownership of the assets listed in the valuation, using the numbering of the assets as set out in the valuation. prior to the mediation in [late] 2022, an email was sent to [ms carano]'s lawyer with lists of the assets detailing the correct ownership of the assets. annexed hereto [...] is a copy of the email and lists emailed to [ms carano]'s lawyer on 21 october 2022. unfortunately due to the time pressures of preparing for the mediation a couple of items were missed and i have corrected these items in the lists showing the division of ownership of the items which is annexed at "[mrc]". i also note that asset 282 needs to be deleted as it is a repeat of asset 279. 69.7 unfortunately, when dad's lawyer prepared the statement of claim for my parents, a number of assets were listed incorrectly and i refer to these specifically below as each asset is dealt with in response to [ms carano]'s allegations. there are two other minor errors which have been picked up when preparing my trial affidavit. these items are asset i 82 worth only $ 150 and asset 203 worth only $50 that arc owned by my parents but i have corrected the lists for the sake of completeness given the allegations made by [ms carano]. ... 71.2 in response to (c)(i) i say that dad has been a collector of [...] machinery and other items since he was a boy. dad shared his interact in [...] machine1y with me when i was a boy and as a result i began my own collection. from when i was a young boy dad and i have attended together on a regular basis swap meets, garage sales, clearance sales, auctions and field days, both buying items either separately or together to add to our collections. we have continued to do so since separation.
social media posts in the husband’s name: no finding
whether the husband dismantled items
17.275.1 the [motor vehicle] was to be a combination of three [motor vehicles]. two were purchased for parts which [mr carano] now acknowledges. the intention was, as discussed between [mr carano] and i, to use the three [motor vehicles] and have one good restored [motor vehicle]. we had all the parts. the valuer was not made aware that we had a complete [motor vehicle]. the other parts from the [motor vehicles] were spread out over the property and not valued.
whether any items included in the valuation did not belong to any of the parties
has the husband had removed any items of value to prevent their valuation?
17.41 ... the interim order was put in place from around 15 november 2021. i believe the final order was put in place on 18 august 2022 and i have complied with the order. [mr carano] put the order in place to prevent me from going to the property. i had attended the property after being contacted by neighbours who told me [mr carano] was trucking items off the property. i was concerned about what would happen if the items went missing. these were our major investments. 17.42 ... [mr carano] has removed and dismantled assets from our home in breach of the intervention order and in breach of the federal circuit and family court of australia orders. ...   ... restrained from removing any property including but not limited to items of plant, equipment, vehicles, antiques and collectables (the business stock) from ...
had the wife broken into the sheds on the property and removed items of value?
‘add backs’ on the husband’s side, product sales, resource sales not made and other matters[34].
husband and wife’s potential entitlement under their parents’ wills
conclusion as to the ‘pool’
finding
resource licence – 1 and 2 resource licence- sought to be retained
resource licence- sought to be retained
husband husband
$93,330 $8,200
money in t trust account (rounded)
$378,505[36]
subtract asset 178 wife now concedes is owned by ms aa
$29,285[37]
increased value of p&e if not dismantled by husband and if #6 valued as 3 into 1
not included
shares (about)
$1,500[38]
$1,278,293
$10,000 repairs required to asset 69 (motor vehicle 1)
net non superannuation assets
wife’s interest in estate of her mother ms q
step two: section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) contributions
dickons [24] there can be little doubt that the classification of contributions by reference to terms such as “initial contributions”, “contributions during the relationship”, and “post-separation contributions”, can be helpful as a convenient means of giving coherent expression to the evidence in a s 79 case and to giving coherence to the nature, form and extent of the parties’ respective contributions. however, the task of assessing contributions is holistic and but part of a yet further holistic determination of what orders, if any, represent justice and equity in the particular circumstances of this particular relationship. so much is clear from the terms of s 79 itself and, in particular, s 79(2). the essential task is to assess the nature, form and extent of the contributions of all types made by each of the parties within the context of an analysis of their particular relationship. ... hurst [23] the direct financial contribution of the suburb c property by the husband some 14 years before trial is, of course, a significant direct financial contribution weighing in his favour (s 79(4)(a)) and her honour correctly so found. but, as the authorities earlier cited make clear, a separate question within the assessment of contributions is, relevantly, the contributions made by both parties indirectly other than financially (s 79(4)(b)) and contributions to the welfare of the family including in the capacity of homemaker and parent (s 79(4)(c)). ... lovine & connor [40] contribution, either direct or indirect and financial or non-financial, to any of acquisition and/or conservation and/or improvement to property (whether or not such property has ceased to be held) or to the welfare of the family or children, falls for consideration. no order of priority is attached to individual elements. the evaluation occurs often, as in this case, with respect to such disparate kinds of contribution made over a substantial period. such evaluation, having regard to its subject matter, inevitably involves value judgments and matters of impression. [41] it follows that the assessment involves matters of estimation and is not, and cannot be, a mathematical exercise. no amount of devotion to mathematics is capable of transforming a discretionary exercise involving many component parts, each mostly unamenable to precise computation, into one of aggregating separately finely calculated components to reach an overall outcome. [42] as part of the process of ultimately determining just and equitable orders under s 79 there is included a complex of discretionary assessments and judgments of many components of contribution, only some of which are capable of measurement in money terms and then often only in historical, rather than present, money terms. any dictate to the effect that in the course of assessment each disparate component part or kind of contribution must be assigned a discrete and identifiable value or percentage is antithetical to the nature of the discretion involved.  ] ... all contributions must be weighed collectively and so it is an error to segment or compartmentalise the various contributions and weigh one again the remainder. [36] that principle has a counterpart in the application factors prescribed in section 75(2) or section 90sm(3) of the act. any adjustment to the parties contribution-based- entitlements should be determined inclusively after considering all relevant factors, not by aggregating incremental adjustment in respect of each relevant factor. [citations omitted]
the length of the marriage can be seen to be of considerable importance in the assessment of contributions.
step three: section 75(2) factors
reasons for conclusion of question 9
as such, it is in my opinion it will be devastating and has serious effect on [mr carano] mental health and wellbeing if he is unable to retain his farming property at [town g].
ms taylor: [dr bb], you gave evidence that [mr carano] enjoys fixing and working on [motor vehicles] and machinery and that that has a therapeutic antidepressant effect for him. in your view, what would be the effect if he wasn’t able to continue to do that type of work?--- the witness: it would be devastating. he will relapse. his illness will be seriously affected, because that is how – his way of enjoying life, and that’s a hobby he had for years.
reverse conundrum in this case.
75(2) factors to be considered
step four: just and equitable conclusion
which of the parties should retain the farm?
which parties retain the farming machinery?
conclusion as to calculations
resource licence- sought to be retained by husband
part property settlement (wife)
part property settlement (husband)
plant & equipment owned by husband in possession of husband $378,505[44] less that to be retained by wife annexure ‘a’- $33,600
$378,505[44] less that to be retained by wife annexure ‘a’- $33,600
$344,905
asset 178 wife now concedes is owned by ms aa
husband’s plant & equipment jointly owned with his parents
$29,285[45]
increased value of p&e: not included
farming equipment– in shed
$1,500[46]
payment to the wife  47,493.50)
total to husband
$639,146.50
superannuation
husband’s super’n $331,694 less payment split $162,889-
$168,805
payment from husband
$447,493.50
annexure a plant & equipment to be retained by wife
$33,600
total to wife
wife’s super’n $5,916 + $162,889 split
mr e’s items
for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.
associate: dated: 17 april 2024
dated: 17 april 2024
appendix 1
asset number motor vehicle[49] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $500 and revised value of $1,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 6 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: at separation this [motor vehicle] was intact. all parts, including the radiator were attached. the [motor vehicle] needed more work. at the time the valuer attended at the property all items around the engine had been removed and it looked like a complete wreck. the photo taken for the valuation..., shows that the [motor vehicle] was pulled apart. the pieces appear to be on the ground. my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle came from a property at town ee. the family there had used this type of motor vehicle for many years. dad & i had purchased some motor vehicles from this family beforehand, and this particular one was sitting in a paddock surrounded by bush on its own, in the current condition it is now, but didn't have any wheels on it or a front axle, and had the engine pulled apart and radiator and other parts etc all removed. there were 2 brothers that lived on the property and the brother that owned this motor vehicle wouldn't sell it in the past, but when the whole property was eventually sold, the remaining scrap metal laying around in old cars and machinery was cleaned up by a local scrap dealer at the time and he also got the motor vehicle, which when back at his scrap yard, i saw it and knowing him well and that i collected motor vehicles, sold it on to myself, i went back to the property it came from, & knowing one of the brothers that mostly owned the property, let me gather up a few remaining parts that were in an old shed belonging to this motor vehicle, that were removed from it years earlier, in poor condition, but still worth getting instead of being scrapped. it was not a complete motor vehicle or even close to complete when i bought it. this would be around late 1992 that this occurred, and the motor vehicle sat at my parents' farm until i built the shed on my property. when i got the motor vehicle home to parents' farm initially, i fitted a set of wheels to it to enable it to be shifted around by towing it, supporting the front of another motor vehicle. whilst sitting in my shed in its current location, it had a radiator just sitting on the front of the motor vehicle chassis, not bolted from underneath, & the motor vehicles bonnet on top with a rusted out fuel tank underneath the bonnet held in place with wire. the reason the old rusted fuel tank was put inside the underside of the bonnet is the rear support for the bonnet rests against the bottom of the fuel tank which the support is bolted to the top of the housing. the bonnet gave support at the other radiator end to help hold the radiator vertical in position and looked a bit better in the shed and had these larger parts off the shed floor... (a further 9 pages of information is omitted) asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $500 and revised value of $1,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 6 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: at separation this [motor vehicle] was intact. all parts, including the radiator were attached. the [motor vehicle] needed more work. at the time the valuer attended at the property all items around the engine had been removed and it looked like a complete wreck. the photo taken for the valuation..., shows that the [motor vehicle] was pulled apart. the pieces appear to be on the ground. my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle came from a property at town ee. the family there had used this type of motor vehicle for many years. dad & i had purchased some motor vehicles from this family beforehand, and this particular one was sitting in a paddock surrounded by bush on its own, in the current condition it is now, but didn't have any wheels on it or a front axle, and had the engine pulled apart and radiator and other parts etc all removed. there were 2 brothers that lived on the property and the brother that owned this motor vehicle wouldn't sell it in the past, but when the whole property was eventually sold, the remaining scrap metal laying around in old cars and machinery was cleaned up by a local scrap dealer at the time and he also got the motor vehicle, which when back at his scrap yard, i saw it and knowing him well and that i collected motor vehicles, sold it on to myself, i went back to the property it came from, & knowing one of the brothers that mostly owned the property, let me gather up a few remaining parts that were in an old shed belonging to this motor vehicle, that were removed from it years earlier, in poor condition, but still worth getting instead of being scrapped. it was not a complete motor vehicle or even close to complete when i bought it. this would be around late 1992 that this occurred, and the motor vehicle sat at my parents' farm until i built the shed on my property. when i got the motor vehicle home to parents' farm initially, i fitted a set of wheels to it to enable it to be shifted around by towing it, supporting the front of another motor vehicle. whilst sitting in my shed in its current location, it had a radiator just sitting on the front of the motor vehicle chassis, not bolted from underneath, & the motor vehicles bonnet on top with a rusted out fuel tank underneath the bonnet held in place with wire. the reason the old rusted fuel tank was put inside the underside of the bonnet is the rear support for the bonnet rests against the bottom of the fuel tank which the support is bolted to the top of the housing. the bonnet gave support at the other radiator end to help hold the radiator vertical in position and looked a bit better in the shed and had these larger parts off the shed floor... (a further 9 pages of information is omitted) asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $500 and revised value of $1,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 6 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: at separation this [motor vehicle] was intact. all parts, including the radiator were attached. the [motor vehicle] needed more work. at the time the valuer attended at the property all items around the engine had been removed and it looked like a complete wreck. the photo taken for the valuation..., shows that the [motor vehicle] was pulled apart. the pieces appear to be on the ground. my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle came from a property at town ee. the family there had used this type of motor vehicle for many years. dad & i had purchased some motor vehicles from this family beforehand, and this particular one was sitting in a paddock surrounded by bush on its own, in the current condition it is now, but didn't have any wheels on it or a front axle, and had the engine pulled apart and radiator and other parts etc all removed. there were 2 brothers that lived on the property and the brother that owned this motor vehicle wouldn't sell it in the past, but when the whole property was eventually sold, the remaining scrap metal laying around in old cars and machinery was cleaned up by a local scrap dealer at the time and he also got the motor vehicle, which when back at his scrap yard, i saw it and knowing him well and that i collected motor vehicles, sold it on to myself, i went back to the property it came from, & knowing one of the brothers that mostly owned the property, let me gather up a few remaining parts that were in an old shed belonging to this motor vehicle, that were removed from it years earlier, in poor condition, but still worth getting instead of being scrapped. it was not a complete motor vehicle or even close to complete when i bought it. this would be around late 1992 that this occurred, and the motor vehicle sat at my parents' farm until i built the shed on my property. when i got the motor vehicle home to parents' farm initially, i fitted a set of wheels to it to enable it to be shifted around by towing it, supporting the front of another motor vehicle. whilst sitting in my shed in its current location, it had a radiator just sitting on the front of the motor vehicle chassis, not bolted from underneath, & the motor vehicles bonnet on top with a rusted out fuel tank underneath the bonnet held in place with wire. the reason the old rusted fuel tank was put inside the underside of the bonnet is the rear support for the bonnet rests against the bottom of the fuel tank which the support is bolted to the top of the housing. the bonnet gave support at the other radiator end to help hold the radiator vertical in position and looked a bit better in the shed and had these larger parts off the shed floor... (a further 9 pages of information is omitted) asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 6 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: at separation this [motor vehicle] was intact. all parts, including the radiator were attached. the [motor vehicle] needed more work. at the time the valuer attended at the property all items around the engine had been removed and it looked like a complete wreck. the photo taken for the valuation..., shows that the [motor vehicle] was pulled apart. the pieces appear to be on the ground. my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle came from a property at town ee. the family there had used this type of motor vehicle for many years. dad & i had purchased some motor vehicles from this family beforehand, and this particular one was sitting in a paddock surrounded by bush on its own, in the current condition it is now, but didn't have any wheels on it or a front axle, and had the engine pulled apart and radiator and other parts etc all removed. there were 2 brothers that lived on the property and the brother that owned this motor vehicle wouldn't sell it in the past, but when the whole property was eventually sold, the remaining scrap metal laying around in old cars and machinery was cleaned up by a local scrap dealer at the time and he also got the motor vehicle, which when back at his scrap yard, i saw it and knowing him well and that i collected motor vehicles, sold it on to myself, i went back to the property it came from, & knowing one of the brothers that mostly owned the property, let me gather up a few remaining parts that were in an old shed belonging to this motor vehicle, that were removed from it years earlier, in poor condition, but still worth getting instead of being scrapped. it was not a complete motor vehicle or even close to complete when i bought it. this would be around late 1992 that this occurred, and the motor vehicle sat at my parents' farm until i built the shed on my property. when i got the motor vehicle home to parents' farm initially, i fitted a set of wheels to it to enable it to be shifted around by towing it, supporting the front of another motor vehicle. whilst sitting in my shed in its current location, it had a radiator just sitting on the front of the motor vehicle chassis, not bolted from underneath, & the motor vehicles bonnet on top with a rusted out fuel tank underneath the bonnet held in place with wire. the reason the old rusted fuel tank was put inside the underside of the bonnet is the rear support for the bonnet rests against the bottom of the fuel tank which the support is bolted to the top of the housing. the bonnet gave support at the other radiator end to help hold the radiator vertical in position and looked a bit better in the shed and had these larger parts off the shed floor... (a further 9 pages of information is omitted) asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 6 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: at separation this [motor vehicle] was intact. all parts, including the radiator were attached. the [motor vehicle] needed more work. at the time the valuer attended at the property all items around the engine had been removed and it looked like a complete wreck. the photo taken for the valuation..., shows that the [motor vehicle] was pulled apart. the pieces appear to be on the ground. my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle came from a property at town ee. the family there had used this type of motor vehicle for many years. dad & i had purchased some motor vehicles from this family beforehand, and this particular one was sitting in a paddock surrounded by bush on its own, in the current condition it is now, but didn't have any wheels on it or a front axle, and had the engine pulled apart and radiator and other parts etc all removed. there were 2 brothers that lived on the property and the brother that owned this motor vehicle wouldn't sell it in the past, but when the whole property was eventually sold, the remaining scrap metal laying around in old cars and machinery was cleaned up by a local scrap dealer at the time and he also got the motor vehicle, which when back at his scrap yard, i saw it and knowing him well and that i collected motor vehicles, sold it on to myself, i went back to the property it came from, & knowing one of the brothers that mostly owned the property, let me gather up a few remaining parts that were in an old shed belonging to this motor vehicle, that were removed from it years earlier, in poor condition, but still worth getting instead of being scrapped. it was not a complete motor vehicle or even close to complete when i bought it. this would be around late 1992 that this occurred, and the motor vehicle sat at my parents' farm until i built the shed on my property. when i got the motor vehicle home to parents' farm initially, i fitted a set of wheels to it to enable it to be shifted around by towing it, supporting the front of another motor vehicle. whilst sitting in my shed in its current location, it had a radiator just sitting on the front of the motor vehicle chassis, not bolted from underneath, & the motor vehicles bonnet on top with a rusted out fuel tank underneath the bonnet held in place with wire. the reason the old rusted fuel tank was put inside the underside of the bonnet is the rear support for the bonnet rests against the bottom of the fuel tank which the support is bolted to the top of the housing. the bonnet gave support at the other radiator end to help hold the radiator vertical in position and looked a bit better in the shed and had these larger parts off the shed floor... (a further 9 pages of information is omitted) asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 6 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: at separation this [motor vehicle] was intact. all parts, including the radiator were attached. the [motor vehicle] needed more work. at the time the valuer attended at the property all items around the engine had been removed and it looked like a complete wreck. the photo taken for the valuation..., shows that the [motor vehicle] was pulled apart. the pieces appear to be on the ground. my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle came from a property at town ee. the family there had used this type of motor vehicle for many years. dad & i had purchased some motor vehicles from this family beforehand, and this particular one was sitting in a paddock surrounded by bush on its own, in the current condition it is now, but didn't have any wheels on it or a front axle, and had the engine pulled apart and radiator and other parts etc all removed. there were 2 brothers that lived on the property and the brother that owned this motor vehicle wouldn't sell it in the past, but when the whole property was eventually sold, the remaining scrap metal laying around in old cars and machinery was cleaned up by a local scrap dealer at the time and he also got the motor vehicle, which when back at his scrap yard, i saw it and knowing him well and that i collected motor vehicles, sold it on to myself, i went back to the property it came from, & knowing one of the brothers that mostly owned the property, let me gather up a few remaining parts that were in an old shed belonging to this motor vehicle, that were removed from it years earlier, in poor condition, but still worth getting instead of being scrapped. it was not a complete motor vehicle or even close to complete when i bought it. this would be around late 1992 that this occurred, and the motor vehicle sat at my parents' farm until i built the shed on my property. when i got the motor vehicle home to parents' farm initially, i fitted a set of wheels to it to enable it to be shifted around by towing it, supporting the front of another motor vehicle. whilst sitting in my shed in its current location, it had a radiator just sitting on the front of the motor vehicle chassis, not bolted from underneath, & the motor vehicles bonnet on top with a rusted out fuel tank underneath the bonnet held in place with wire. the reason the old rusted fuel tank was put inside the underside of the bonnet is the rear support for the bonnet rests against the bottom of the fuel tank which the support is bolted to the top of the housing. the bonnet gave support at the other radiator end to help hold the radiator vertical in position and looked a bit better in the shed and had these larger parts off the shed floor... (a further 9 pages of information is omitted) asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle came from a property at town ee. the family there had used this type of motor vehicle for many years. dad & i had purchased some motor vehicles from this family beforehand, and this particular one was sitting in a paddock surrounded by bush on its own, in the current condition it is now, but didn't have any wheels on it or a front axle, and had the engine pulled apart and radiator and other parts etc all removed. there were 2 brothers that lived on the property and the brother that owned this motor vehicle wouldn't sell it in the past, but when the whole property was eventually sold, the remaining scrap metal laying around in old cars and machinery was cleaned up by a local scrap dealer at the time and he also got the motor vehicle, which when back at his scrap yard, i saw it and knowing him well and that i collected motor vehicles, sold it on to myself, i went back to the property it came from, & knowing one of the brothers that mostly owned the property, let me gather up a few remaining parts that were in an old shed belonging to this motor vehicle, that were removed from it years earlier, in poor condition, but still worth getting instead of being scrapped. it was not a complete motor vehicle or even close to complete when i bought it. this would be around late 1992 that this occurred, and the motor vehicle sat at my parents' farm until i built the shed on my property. when i got the motor vehicle home to parents' farm initially, i fitted a set of wheels to it to enable it to be shifted around by towing it, supporting the front of another motor vehicle. whilst sitting in my shed in its current location, it had a radiator just sitting on the front of the motor vehicle chassis, not bolted from underneath, & the motor vehicles bonnet on top with a rusted out fuel tank underneath the bonnet held in place with wire. the reason the old rusted fuel tank was put inside the underside of the bonnet is the rear support for the bonnet rests against the bottom of the fuel tank which the support is bolted to the top of the housing. the bonnet gave support at the other radiator end to help hold the radiator vertical in position and looked a bit better in the shed and had these larger parts off the shed floor... (a further 9 pages of information is omitted) asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
this motor vehicle came from a property at town ee. the family there had used this type of motor vehicle for many years. dad & i had purchased some motor vehicles from this family beforehand, and this particular one was sitting in a paddock surrounded by bush on its own, in the current condition it is now, but didn't have any wheels on it or a front axle, and had the engine pulled apart and radiator and other parts etc all removed. there were 2 brothers that lived on the property and the brother that owned this motor vehicle wouldn't sell it in the past, but when the whole property was eventually sold, the remaining scrap metal laying around in old cars and machinery was cleaned up by a local scrap dealer at the time and he also got the motor vehicle, which when back at his scrap yard, i saw it and knowing him well and that i collected motor vehicles, sold it on to myself, i went back to the property it came from, & knowing one of the brothers that mostly owned the property, let me gather up a few remaining parts that were in an old shed belonging to this motor vehicle, that were removed from it years earlier, in poor condition, but still worth getting instead of being scrapped. it was not a complete motor vehicle or even close to complete when i bought it. this would be around late 1992 that this occurred, and the motor vehicle sat at my parents' farm until i built the shed on my property. when i got the motor vehicle home to parents' farm initially, i fitted a set of wheels to it to enable it to be shifted around by towing it, supporting the front of another motor vehicle. whilst sitting in my shed in its current location, it had a radiator just sitting on the front of the motor vehicle chassis, not bolted from underneath, & the motor vehicles bonnet on top with a rusted out fuel tank underneath the bonnet held in place with wire. the reason the old rusted fuel tank was put inside the underside of the bonnet is the rear support for the bonnet rests against the bottom of the fuel tank which the support is bolted to the top of the housing. the bonnet gave support at the other radiator end to help hold the radiator vertical in position and looked a bit better in the shed and had these larger parts off the shed floor... (a further 9 pages of information is omitted) asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
when i got the motor vehicle home to parents' farm initially, i fitted a set of wheels to it to enable it to be shifted around by towing it, supporting the front of another motor vehicle. whilst sitting in my shed in its current location, it had a radiator just sitting on the front of the motor vehicle chassis, not bolted from underneath, & the motor vehicles bonnet on top with a rusted out fuel tank underneath the bonnet held in place with wire. the reason the old rusted fuel tank was put inside the underside of the bonnet is the rear support for the bonnet rests against the bottom of the fuel tank which the support is bolted to the top of the housing. the bonnet gave support at the other radiator end to help hold the radiator vertical in position and looked a bit better in the shed and had these larger parts off the shed floor... (a further 9 pages of information is omitted) asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)  further 9 pages of information is omitted) asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
asset number motor vehicle[50] valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
valuation report below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
below are details from the valuation report with the original valuation of $2,000 and revised value of $5,000 if in condition as alleged by the wife: ... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
... allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
allegations by wife the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
the wife has made the following allegations in relation to this asset in paragraph 7 of her affidavit filed 9 december 2022: when the valuer attended the property some of the panel work was missing. the motor vehicle at separation was in good running order a complete. it had not been started for at least 12 months, but all the parts were on the motor vehicle. attached hereto and marked with the letters ‘mrc-4' is a photo of a similar motor vehicle taken from the internet. we had all the panels for this motor vehicle, the same as in the photo. there is a collector from overseas who has visited our property every 2 or 3 years just to look at this motor vehicle and hear it run. he has said that he wants to buy it and take it back to his country. it should be valued as 100% complete and in running order my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
my response to wife's allegations this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)
this motor vehicle is not in running condition. below are pictures of the motor vehicle taken at different times from 1989 not long after first purchased until about 2002 approx as there is no concrete floor in shed in background. in all these pictures, it is evident that this motor vehicle was never complete with certain parts and also shows it has not got another part all these parts are extremely rare. you cannot buy these parts second hand even overseas. one part is available overseas without attachments fitted, just basically a shell for around $750.00 plus shipping. then you need special material to purchase on top of that. another item has to be hand made and are around $4000.00 for the pair plus shipping, expensive also due to weight. the correct radiator caps are special to this model only, and unless you can get someone to use theirs as a pattern and get one cast up for you, there is then still the closing mechanism to be fabricated and made up. prices to acquire these parts are all reproductions a couple of years ago when the aussie dollar was about 0.72 cent and overseas currency was just over $10,000.00 plus all the shipping cost on top. unfortunately this motor vehicle never had those parts fitted when the previous owner bought it back in the day to use it. dad and i certainly asked him at the time because of how unique they are to this model only and would be very lucky to find some in australia. when this motor vehicle was purchased, it was half pulled apart sitting under a tree. the bonnet had been flattened out and used as a sheet of tin, the fuel tank was laying out in a paddock and various other parts lying in the dirt.... (proceeds for another page of information)  oceeds for another page of information)
appendix 2
section 139 determination of matter completely and finally in every matter before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), the court must grant, either: (a) absolutely, or (b) on such terms and conditions as the court thinks just, all remedies to which any of the parties appears to be entitled in respect of a legal or equitable claim properly brought forward by a party in the matter, so that, as far as possible: (c) all matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and finally determined, and (d) all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters may be avoided.
in every matter before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), the court must grant, either: (a) absolutely, or (b) on such terms and conditions as the court thinks just, all remedies to which any of the parties appears to be entitled in respect of a legal or equitable claim properly brought forward by a party in the matter, so that, as far as possible: (c) all matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and finally determined, and (d) all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters may be avoided.   absolutely, or (b) on such terms and conditions as the court thinks just, all remedies to which any of the parties appears to be entitled in respect of a legal or equitable claim properly brought forward by a party in the matter, so that, as far as possible: (c) all matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and finally determined, and (d) all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters may be avoided.   on such terms and conditions as the court thinks just, all remedies to which any of the parties appears to be entitled in respect of a legal or equitable claim properly brought forward by a party in the matter, so that, as far as possible: (c) all matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and finally determined, and (d) all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters may be avoided.
all remedies to which any of the parties appears to be entitled in respect of a legal or equitable claim properly brought forward by a party in the matter, so that, as far as possible: (c) all matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and finally determined, and (d) all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters may be avoided.   all matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and finally determined, and (d) all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters may be avoided.   all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters may be avoided.
[1] passages of legislation, authorities (that is precedent or helpful decisions of earlier cases) and evidence were not read out in the oral reasons but were referred to and usually referred to as “the settled reasons will insert...”[2] the oral reasons commenced at this point.[3] in the oral reasons the age of mr e was by a slip uttered as “17” not 18.[4] also known as (‘aka’) the first or the identify the property step of the preferred approach described in keskin & keskin cited later. [5] these allegations are described at items ? to ? of the husband’s outline of case and items ? to ? of the wife’s outline of case.[6] aka the second or contribution step of the preferred approach described in keskin v keskin.[7] as discussed in keskin & keskin discussed later.[8] odgers s, thomson reuters 18th edition.[9] and i refer to the discussion at 140.60 on this point in odgers, opere citato, aka in the work cited and abbreviated as “op cit”.[10]nolan v lady nolan [2004] vsca 109[11] the following passages and my findings under this heading were not recited in the oral reasons.[12] meaning page 201 of the 2125 court book of documents.[13] all annexures to all affidavits were tendered as exhibits with the exhibit number being the same as the annexure number. [14] the wife’s affidavits twice annexed the receipt as genuine and no attempt was made to discredit it when mr l was cross examined.[15] all letters refer to [83]: (j) 11793 is the 5th item of w10, (m) 20363 is the 7th item of w10, (n) 21317 is the 6th item of w10, (o) 7031564 is the 4th item of w10, (q) 8202547 is the 1st item of w10, (r) 7326552 is the 3rd item of w10, (s) 7326569 is the 2nd item of w10. [16] unequivocal as to both the serial number representing a “[motor vehicle]” and “not made available for inspection”.[17] exhibit w5. [18] the issue of missing or lost devices and meta data from images was also discussed in relation to images the wife claims she retrieved from the husband’s laptop, from p 250 of the transcript for 14 march 2024. [19] the settled reasons include these paragraphs that were not read out in the oral reasons.[20] this legislation was not read out in the oral reasons but referred to as “the settled reasons will insert...”[21] from the wife’s outline of case. the tables of assets were not read out in the oral reasons but referred to as “the settled reasons will insert”. [22] previously $267,865 but as varied on day 6 of hearing to $218,525 and the maths behind this figure were not controversial.[23] from the husband’s outline of case. the tables of assets were not read out in the oral reasons but referred to as “the settled reasons will insert”. [24] the calculations behind the figure the husband pressed he pay the wife if he retained the farm.[25] after this concession, item 3 of the wife’s table, carryover resources, was not further addressed.[26] this value is common ground[27] it is unnecessary to recite all her evidence.[28] wife’s affidavit filed 16 june 2023.[29] affidavit of mr u filed on 12 may 2023.[30] second & third (respondents).[31] of the machinery valuation[32] see appendix 1 [33] order 6 of the minute of order annexed to the 19 november 2021 orders.[34] these allegations are described at items 14 to 17 of the husband’s outline of case and items 14 to 17 of the wife’s outline of case.[35] but not re-ordered into assets to divided and the husband’s ‘keep’ and the wife’s ‘keep’[36] i have relied upon the figure in the husband’s outline of case that was not controversial as to the actual arithmetic.[37] ibidem (or as above) [38] accept wife’s rounding not husband’s figure of $1,493.94[39]funder a, wifedom. penguin books australia. see discussion of the invisibility of women’s domestic work and support of male partners in the 1930’s.[40] see discussion of the invisibility of domestic work and child care in wifedom by anna funder referred to earlier.[41] within the oral reasons mr e was mistakenly portrayed as 17 years old[42] within the oral reasons mr e was mistakenly portrayed as 17 years old[43] $1,278,293 at 50% = $639,146.50 less $191,653 leaves a payment of $447,493.50.[44] i have relied upon the figure in the husband’s outline of case that was not controversial as to the actual arithmetic.[45] ibidem (or as above) [46] accept wife’s rounding not husband’s figure of $1,493.94[47] see the high court of australia in dougherty and dougherty v dougherty [1987] hca 33, (1987) flc 91-823 (‘dougherty’) at 76,194. i was satisfied the controversy arose from the matrimonial dispute between the child’s parents and that the child should be regarded as contributing to the conservation of those personal items. ] see section 139 recited in appendix 2.
[49] found at page 199 of the husbands affidavit of 26 july 2023[50] page 211 of the husbands trial affidavit of 26 june 2023.