last updated: 4 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
brochard & chaucer [2024] fedcfamc2f 370
orders
the court orders that:  during school terms: (i) in week 1 from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm on a non-school day) on friday until the commencement of school (or 5.00 pm on a non‑school day) on monday, and (ii) in week 2 from the conclusion of school wednesday until 7.30 pm. (b) for one half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods as agreed between the parents and in default of agreement for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years with the school holidays deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the final day of school for the child that finishes school last, (c) in the long christmas school holiday period as agreed between the parents and in default of agreement, for the first, fourth and fifth weeks of the holidays in even numbered years and the second, third and sixth weeks in odd numbered years with the school holidays deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the final day of school for the child that finishes school last, (d) as otherwise agreed in writing between the parents.   in week 1 from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm on a non-school day) on friday until the commencement of school (or 5.00 pm on a non‑school day) on monday, and (ii) in week 2 from the conclusion of school wednesday until 7.30 pm.  ) in week 2 from the conclusion of school wednesday until 7.30 pm.   for one half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods as agreed between the parents and in default of agreement for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years with the school holidays deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the final day of school for the child that finishes school last, (c) in the long christmas school holiday period as agreed between the parents and in default of agreement, for the first, fourth and fifth weeks of the holidays in even numbered years and the second, third and sixth weeks in odd numbered years with the school holidays deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the final day of school for the child that finishes school last, (d) as otherwise agreed in writing between the parents.   in the long christmas school holiday period as agreed between the parents and in default of agreement, for the first, fourth and fifth weeks of the holidays in even numbered years and the second, third and sixth weeks in odd numbered years with the school holidays deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the final day of school for the child that finishes school last, (d) as otherwise agreed in writing between the parents.   as otherwise agreed in writing between the parents.
christmas   with the mother on christmas eve from 12:00pm until 12:00pm on christmas day in odd numbered years, (b) with the father on christmas day from 12:00pm until 12:00pm on boxing day in odd numbered years, (c) with the father on christmas eve from 12:00pm until 12:00pm on christmas day in even number years, (d) with the mother on christmas day from 12:00pm until 12:00pm on boxing day in even numbered years.   with the father on christmas day from 12:00pm until 12:00pm on boxing day in odd numbered years, (c) with the father on christmas eve from 12:00pm until 12:00pm on christmas day in even number years, (d) with the mother on christmas day from 12:00pm until 12:00pm on boxing day in even numbered years.   with the father on christmas eve from 12:00pm until 12:00pm on christmas day in even number years, (d) with the mother on christmas day from 12:00pm until 12:00pm on boxing day in even numbered years.   with the mother on christmas day from 12:00pm until 12:00pm on boxing day in even numbered years.
new years   with the mother from 12:00pm on new year's eve to 12:00pm on new year's day in 2024/2025 and alternate years thereafter, (f) with the father from 12:00pm on new year's day to 12:00pm on 2 january in 2024/2025 and alternate years thereafter, (g) with the father from 12:00pm on new year's eve to 12:00pm on new year's day in 2025/2026 and alternate years thereafter, (h) with the mother from 12:00pm on new year's day to 12:00pm on 2 january in 2025/2026 and alternate years thereafter.   with the father from 12:00pm on new year's day to 12:00pm on 2 january in 2024/2025 and alternate years thereafter, (g) with the father from 12:00pm on new year's eve to 12:00pm on new year's day in 2025/2026 and alternate years thereafter, (h) with the mother from 12:00pm on new year's day to 12:00pm on 2 january in 2025/2026 and alternate years thereafter.   with the father from 12:00pm on new year's eve to 12:00pm on new year's day in 2025/2026 and alternate years thereafter, (h) with the mother from 12:00pm on new year's day to 12:00pm on 2 january in 2025/2026 and alternate years thereafter.   with the mother from 12:00pm on new year's day to 12:00pm on 2 january in 2025/2026 and alternate years thereafter.
easter   with the mother from the conclusion of school on easter thursday until 12:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, (j) with the father from 12:00pm on easter saturday to 12:00pm on easter monday in even numbered years, (k) with the father from the conclusion of school on easter thursday until 12:00 pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years, (l) with the mother from 12:00 pm on easter saturday to 12:00 pm on easter monday in odd numbered years.   with the father from 12:00pm on easter saturday to 12:00pm on easter monday in even numbered years, (k) with the father from the conclusion of school on easter thursday until 12:00 pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years, (l) with the mother from 12:00 pm on easter saturday to 12:00 pm on easter monday in odd numbered years.   with the father from the conclusion of school on easter thursday until 12:00 pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years, (l) with the mother from 12:00 pm on easter saturday to 12:00 pm on easter monday in odd numbered years.   with the mother from 12:00 pm on easter saturday to 12:00 pm on easter monday in odd numbered years.
mother’s day/father’s day   with the mother from 9:00 am until 5:00 pm on mother's day, (n) with the father from 9:00 am until 5:00 pm on father's day.   with the father from 9:00 am until 5:00 pm on father's day.
birthdays   with the mother on the mother's birthday from 9:00 am until 8:00 pm on a non‑school day or from the conclusion of school until the commencement of school (or 9:00 am on a non-school day) the following day. (p) with the father on the father's birthday from 9:00 am until 8:00 pm on a non‑school day or from the conclusion of school until the commencement of school (or 9:00 am on a non-school day) the following day. (q) on each of the children's birthdays, with the parent who is not otherwise caring for the children from 10:00 am until 4:00 pm on a non-school day or from the conclusion of school until 7:00 pm on a school day.   with the father on the father's birthday from 9:00 am until 8:00 pm on a non‑school day or from the conclusion of school until the commencement of school (or 9:00 am on a non-school day) the following day. (q) on each of the children's birthdays, with the parent who is not otherwise caring for the children from 10:00 am until 4:00 pm on a non-school day or from the conclusion of school until 7:00 pm on a school day.   on each of the children's birthdays, with the parent who is not otherwise caring for the children from 10:00 am until 4:00 pm on a non-school day or from the conclusion of school until 7:00 pm on a school day.
other special events   for other special events, (being specifically immediate family member's birthdays, funerals, weddings, baptisms, holy communions, first reconciliations and confirmations) the children may spend time with the parent who is not already caring for the children, as agreed upon by both parents. the requesting parent provide the other parent with the following information as soon as practical: (i) the date of the event, (ii) the location of the event. (iii) times the children are to be picked up and dropped off. (s) for other special events for the children not listed in the preceding paragraphs, including holy communions, first reconciliations and confirmations, the parents are at liberty to attend any such special events.   the date of the event, (ii) the location of the event. (iii) times the children are to be picked up and dropped off. (s) for other special events for the children not listed in the preceding paragraphs, including holy communions, first reconciliations and confirmations, the parents are at liberty to attend any such special events.  ) the location of the event. (iii) times the children are to be picked up and dropped off. (s) for other special events for the children not listed in the preceding paragraphs, including holy communions, first reconciliations and confirmations, the parents are at liberty to attend any such special events.  i) times the children are to be picked up and dropped off. (s) for other special events for the children not listed in the preceding paragraphs, including holy communions, first reconciliations and confirmations, the parents are at liberty to attend any such special events.   for other special events for the children not listed in the preceding paragraphs, including holy communions, first reconciliations and confirmations, the parents are at liberty to attend any such special events.
changeover   by the mother and/or her nominee delivering the children to the hungry jacks at suburb b at the commencement of the father's time with the children, and (b) by the father and/or his nominee delivering the children to the hungry jacks at suburb b at the conclusion of the father's time with the children, or (c) as otherwise agreed in writing between the parents.   by the father and/or his nominee delivering the children to the hungry jacks at suburb b at the conclusion of the father's time with the children, or (c) as otherwise agreed in writing between the parents.   as otherwise agreed in writing between the parents.
travel   both parents shall do all acts and things and sign all such documents necessary to obtain and/or renew the children's passports from time to time, (b) either parent wishing to travel with the children must first provide the other parent with (unless a shorter period is agreed) not less than 60 days' notice in writing of their intention to travel with the children, (c) each parent shall provide not less than 30 days' notice in writing of (unless compliance with this order is not reasonably practicable, then the parent shall comply as soon as reasonably practicable): (i) their intended travel dates with the children, (ii) their intended travel destinations and itinerary, (iii) the particulars of the addresses, phone numbers and other contact information for the accommodation in which the children will stay during such travel, (d) the travel shall not impact upon the children's time with the other parent during any of the special occasions referred to in these orders unless agreed in writing between the parents, (e) the parent wishing to take the children overseas shall physically accompany the children during such travel, (f) if either parent wishes to travel during the school holiday time that the other parent would ordinarily spend with the children then the travelling parent shall provide make-up time to the non-travelling parent during the next school holiday period equal to the amount of time missed by the non-travelling parent and such make-up time shall be agreed between the parents at the time that the notice of the proposed travel is proposed. (g) the parents are only permitted to travel with the children for a maximum of two weeks respectively each calendar year, unless agreed in writing between the parents.   either parent wishing to travel with the children must first provide the other parent with (unless a shorter period is agreed) not less than 60 days' notice in writing of their intention to travel with the children, (c) each parent shall provide not less than 30 days' notice in writing of (unless compliance with this order is not reasonably practicable, then the parent shall comply as soon as reasonably practicable): (i) their intended travel dates with the children, (ii) their intended travel destinations and itinerary, (iii) the particulars of the addresses, phone numbers and other contact information for the accommodation in which the children will stay during such travel, (d) the travel shall not impact upon the children's time with the other parent during any of the special occasions referred to in these orders unless agreed in writing between the parents, (e) the parent wishing to take the children overseas shall physically accompany the children during such travel, (f) if either parent wishes to travel during the school holiday time that the other parent would ordinarily spend with the children then the travelling parent shall provide make-up time to the non-travelling parent during the next school holiday period equal to the amount of time missed by the non-travelling parent and such make-up time shall be agreed between the parents at the time that the notice of the proposed travel is proposed. (g) the parents are only permitted to travel with the children for a maximum of two weeks respectively each calendar year, unless agreed in writing between the parents.   each parent shall provide not less than 30 days' notice in writing of (unless compliance with this order is not reasonably practicable, then the parent shall comply as soon as reasonably practicable): (i) their intended travel dates with the children, (ii) their intended travel destinations and itinerary, (iii) the particulars of the addresses, phone numbers and other contact information for the accommodation in which the children will stay during such travel, (d) the travel shall not impact upon the children's time with the other parent during any of the special occasions referred to in these orders unless agreed in writing between the parents, (e) the parent wishing to take the children overseas shall physically accompany the children during such travel, (f) if either parent wishes to travel during the school holiday time that the other parent would ordinarily spend with the children then the travelling parent shall provide make-up time to the non-travelling parent during the next school holiday period equal to the amount of time missed by the non-travelling parent and such make-up time shall be agreed between the parents at the time that the notice of the proposed travel is proposed. (g) the parents are only permitted to travel with the children for a maximum of two weeks respectively each calendar year, unless agreed in writing between the parents.   their intended travel dates with the children, (ii) their intended travel destinations and itinerary, (iii) the particulars of the addresses, phone numbers and other contact information for the accommodation in which the children will stay during such travel,  ) their intended travel destinations and itinerary, (iii) the particulars of the addresses, phone numbers and other contact information for the accommodation in which the children will stay during such travel,  i) the particulars of the addresses, phone numbers and other contact information for the accommodation in which the children will stay during such travel,   the travel shall not impact upon the children's time with the other parent during any of the special occasions referred to in these orders unless agreed in writing between the parents, (e) the parent wishing to take the children overseas shall physically accompany the children during such travel, (f) if either parent wishes to travel during the school holiday time that the other parent would ordinarily spend with the children then the travelling parent shall provide make-up time to the non-travelling parent during the next school holiday period equal to the amount of time missed by the non-travelling parent and such make-up time shall be agreed between the parents at the time that the notice of the proposed travel is proposed. (g) the parents are only permitted to travel with the children for a maximum of two weeks respectively each calendar year, unless agreed in writing between the parents.   the parent wishing to take the children overseas shall physically accompany the children during such travel, (f) if either parent wishes to travel during the school holiday time that the other parent would ordinarily spend with the children then the travelling parent shall provide make-up time to the non-travelling parent during the next school holiday period equal to the amount of time missed by the non-travelling parent and such make-up time shall be agreed between the parents at the time that the notice of the proposed travel is proposed. (g) the parents are only permitted to travel with the children for a maximum of two weeks respectively each calendar year, unless agreed in writing between the parents.   if either parent wishes to travel during the school holiday time that the other parent would ordinarily spend with the children then the travelling parent shall provide make-up time to the non-travelling parent during the next school holiday period equal to the amount of time missed by the non-travelling parent and such make-up time shall be agreed between the parents at the time that the notice of the proposed travel is proposed. (g) the parents are only permitted to travel with the children for a maximum of two weeks respectively each calendar year, unless agreed in writing between the parents.   the parents are only permitted to travel with the children for a maximum of two weeks respectively each calendar year, unless agreed in writing between the parents.
information sharing and communication   immediately notify the other of any medical emergency, serious illness or injury experienced by the children or either of them, requiring medical treatment or hospitalisation whilst the children are in their care respectively, (b) forthwith inform the other of any medical, dental or other health practitioner with whom either of the children are scheduled to consult with or have consulted with and authorise the other parent to make all reasonable enquiries of such practitioner(s) in respect of matters considering the children's health save that the father be restrained from being physically in attendance at any medical, dental or other health appointments for the children at which the mother is in attendance, (c) forthwith provide the other with copies of any reports or records provided to them respectively by any medical, dental or other health professional attended by the children or either of them, (d) be and are hereby authorised to provide a copy of these orders to any medical, dental or other health professional attended by the children, (e) make available to the other parent within 7 days of a request any identity documents, medical documents, or other documents relating to the children.   forthwith inform the other of any medical, dental or other health practitioner with whom either of the children are scheduled to consult with or have consulted with and authorise the other parent to make all reasonable enquiries of such practitioner(s) in respect of matters considering the children's health save that the father be restrained from being physically in attendance at any medical, dental or other health appointments for the children at which the mother is in attendance, (c) forthwith provide the other with copies of any reports or records provided to them respectively by any medical, dental or other health professional attended by the children or either of them, (d) be and are hereby authorised to provide a copy of these orders to any medical, dental or other health professional attended by the children, (e) make available to the other parent within 7 days of a request any identity documents, medical documents, or other documents relating to the children.   forthwith provide the other with copies of any reports or records provided to them respectively by any medical, dental or other health professional attended by the children or either of them, (d) be and are hereby authorised to provide a copy of these orders to any medical, dental or other health professional attended by the children, (e) make available to the other parent within 7 days of a request any identity documents, medical documents, or other documents relating to the children.   be and are hereby authorised to provide a copy of these orders to any medical, dental or other health professional attended by the children, (e) make available to the other parent within 7 days of a request any identity documents, medical documents, or other documents relating to the children.   make available to the other parent within 7 days of a request any identity documents, medical documents, or other documents relating to the children.   receive information, notices, reports, class lists and photographs directly from any school, kindergarten and/or provider of childcare, extra-curricular or sporting activities attended by the children, (b) attend all events parents are invited to and permitted to attend, including but not limited to, open days, concerts, parent teacher interviews, sports days and like events, and (c) provide a copy of these orders to any school, kindergarten and/or provider of childcare, extra-curricular or sporting activities attended by the children.   attend all events parents are invited to and permitted to attend, including but not limited to, open days, concerts, parent teacher interviews, sports days and like events, and (c) provide a copy of these orders to any school, kindergarten and/or provider of childcare, extra-curricular or sporting activities attended by the children.   provide a copy of these orders to any school, kindergarten and/or provider of childcare, extra-curricular or sporting activities attended by the children.
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins:
brief background
the evidence
the issues in this case
what are the legal principles the court applies in determining where a child should live?
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.
how does the court determine what is in the children's best interests?
ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child.
allegations that the mother neglected z’s medical care
father to the mother at 9.00 pm btw, [z] has [symptoms], and keeps waking up every hour. father to the mother at 9.01 pm what’s happening with her hospital appointment? this is urgent. mother to father at 9.02 pm her specialist appt [sic] is on the [...]. take her to the gp tomorrow and see what they say. they will have all her recent results on their system. mother to father at 4.15 am is [z] ok? my dad is thinking i should take her to the hospital. but if she’s sleeping. i can wait until the morning. father to mother at 6.03 am she is ok for now. sleeping. just wait till[sic] later. [6]
...i appreciate you have taken all the relevant test[s] you needed for [z].[7]
i love you and the kids soo [sic] much that i have put everything here on the line. like i said im not expecting miracles but pls [sic] keep an open mind[8]
...the sooner you accept that we are getting a divorce, the better and the easier it will be for everyone to move on and adjust.[9]
can we still try out marriage counselling together?[10]us t
please try to understand and accept this because you are just making it harder for yourself. i do not want to try marriage counselling. i do not want to be married to you or be with you. i do want to try to be civil for the sake of the kids. but i can’t while you are still hoping that there is a chance that we’ll get back together, because there is no chance.[11]
we’ll be away from saturday afternoon for an overnight only and be back on monday. i need her [z’s] medication instructions aswell [sic] please. is the medication once a day only? urine test once a day?[12]
medication: [medication] in the morning with food [another medication] in the morning with food. [z] knows. just catch her morning wee in a cup and dip the dipstick in it and check the colour of the protein line. it should show up as negative now. you’ll need to bring scales with you to weigh her in the morning. i’ll give you the booklet to record the date, protein result from her wee, and weight. it’s fine to take them away for the weekend but just don’t over exert them please because [...] is sick and [z] can get tired easily.[13]
if you don’t already have some, please get nurofen and paracetamol (don’t get the panadol brand).[14]
please drop off and get nurofen b [sic] paracetamol thanks[15]
...if you had waited for [z]’s scheduled appointment, [z] would have suffered and would have been in an agonising pain, and god forbid possible [illness] causing death! you were irresponsible not taking her directly and urgently to the hospital, even when you knew that she had the symptoms months back! you jeopardised her life, health and well-being![16]
risk to the children in the mother’s care after the events of september 2022
i want the kids to stay with me during the week all the time. i never chose this arrangement. i am more than happy [to] have the kids with me fulltime.[17]
...as far as [sic] i know we made no such arrangements on which days of the week or weekend where/whom the kids will be staying with. you have no rights on this. thank you[18]  e father] disclosed that, while attempting to enter [the mother’s] address he was told to stop and that he could not enter 3 times, as [the father] ignored [the mother] and walked towards her, [the mother] used two open hands on [the father’s] shoulders, to as [the father] described is “tried to move me out and block me.” this was assessed to not constitute and [sic] assault, it was noted in the police report but no criminal investigation was required.[20]
please do not make contact with me. i am afraid, traumatised, scared for my life and kids’s [sic] well being and safety, by your physical and emotional abuse towards me. you have made [x] witness your physical and verbal inflicting abuse on your own husband. she and i will be forever be [sic] scarred, afraid and traumatised by you for the emotional and physical abuse you have inflicted towards me. please do not make contact with me.[22]
risk to the children due to the father’s lack of insight into their emotional well being
leave [music] book and their school bags at mailbox area. do not enter pass [sic] mailbox. do not [sic] our property. do not enter our property. [24]   became anxious and worried when his father came back without [x] and stated, “i got a bit worried when dad came back without [x]. he looked upset, and the next day dad took the phone off me when i was talking to mum. he asked me what i was talking about, i was really worried, and then he told the principal not to let mum pick us up from school. i was really worried at the time.”[25]  . never message and/or communicate us any correspondence[s] regarding such things. such [sic] as relaying information to us. this is not your duty or job, is not your responsibility and duty. do not communicate such information, you are not responsible for such things...[27]
risk to the children because of the father’s temper
other relevant matters under section 60cc
the views of the children
does each parent have the capacity to meet the children's needs?
practical difficulties
attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood
what are the orders that are in the children's best interests? e mother] presents as highly organised, with a focus on structure and routine. she is conservative in her values and holds those around her to the same standards she sets for herself. [the mother] demands transparency and accountability in her relationships, and has the propensity to be reactive when her values and expectations are not met. in the alternative, [the father] struggles with open and authentic communication in circumstances that conflict with his perceived interests. he can be impulsive and reactive in his decision-making and responses and avoidant and ambiguous when challenged around his behaviour.  e father] appears to have reacted impulsively to a variety of stressors relative to his adjustment to the separation and has overheld the children. he has attempted to manage his feelings of disempowerment and loss by imposing his will on the arrangements, and has acted impulsively and without due regard for the children's feelings. ln these circumstances, it is recommended that [the father] pursue a gp-referred mental health plan and engage in supportive counselling to assist with his adjustment to the separation.
associate: dated: 26 march 2024
dated: 26 march 2024
[1] joint exhibit 3, page 55.[2] adamson & adamson [2014] famcafc 232 at [89]- [90], quoting carlson & fluvium [2012] famca 32 at [165]- [169]. [3] family report prepared by mr d, paragraph 67.[4] family report prepared by mr d, paragraph 68.[5] father's amended outline of case filed 15 november 2023 , paragraph 30.[6] joint exhibit 3, pages 41 – 42. [7] joint exhibit 3, page 45.[8] joint exhibit 3, page 49.[9] joint exhibit 3, page 49. [10] joint exhibit 3, page 50. [11] joint exhibit 3, page 50. [12] joint exhibit 3, pages 51 – 52. [13] joint exhibit 3, page 52. [14] joint exhibit 3, page 53. [15] joint exhibit 3, page 53. [16] joint exhibit, page 55.[17] joint exhibit 3, page 53.[18] joint exhibit 3, page 55. [19] mother’s exhibit 9, page 1.[20] mother’s exhibit 8, page 1. [21] family report prepared by mr d, paragraph 59. [22] joint exhibit 3, page 55. [23] mother’s exhibit 12, pages 1 -3.[24] joint exhibit 3, page 57.[25] family report prepared by mr d, paragraph 59. [26] mother’s exhibit 13, pages 1 -2. [27] mother's exhibit 1, page 3.[28] mother’s exhibit 5, page 7.[29] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph 52. [30] father’s trial affidavit filed 3 november 2023, paragraphs 93 – 94. [31] father's amended outline of case filed 15 november 23, page 3. [32] family report prepared by mr d, paragraph 68. [33] father’s trial affidavit filed 3 november 2023, paragraph 111.[34] family report prepared by mr d, paragraph 65. [35] father's exhibit 6, page 1.[36] family report prepared by mr d, paragraph 29.[37] joint exhibit 3, page 1.[38] joint exhibit 3[39]joint exhibit 2. [40] family report prepared by mr d, paragraph 69.[41] family report prepared by mr d, paragraph 70.