last updated: 4 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
poulson & gadal [2024] fedcfamc2f 392
orders
the court orders that:  all of the proceeds of sale of the b street property, (b) her motor vehicle 1, (c) all bank accounts held in her name, (d) furniture and effects in her possession or control, (e) her superannuation entitlements, (f) all credit cards held in her name, (g) the motor vehicle 1 car loan, and (h) all other debts in her name.   her motor vehicle 1, (c) all bank accounts held in her name, (d) furniture and effects in her possession or control, (e) her superannuation entitlements, (f) all credit cards held in her name, (g) the motor vehicle 1 car loan, and (h) all other debts in her name.   all bank accounts held in her name, (d) furniture and effects in her possession or control, (e) her superannuation entitlements, (f) all credit cards held in her name, (g) the motor vehicle 1 car loan, and (h) all other debts in her name.   furniture and effects in her possession or control, (e) her superannuation entitlements, (f) all credit cards held in her name, (g) the motor vehicle 1 car loan, and (h) all other debts in her name.   her superannuation entitlements, (f) all credit cards held in her name, (g) the motor vehicle 1 car loan, and (h) all other debts in her name.   all credit cards held in her name, (g) the motor vehicle 1 car loan, and (h) all other debts in her name.   the motor vehicle 1 car loan, and (h) all other debts in her name.   all other debts in her name.   the real property situate at e street, suburb f, (b) his motor vehicle 2, (c) all bank accounts held in his name, (d) furniture and effects in his possession or control, (e) his superannuation entitlements, (f) all credit cards held in his name, (g) the mortgage over the suburb f property, and (h) all other debts in his name.   his motor vehicle 2, (c) all bank accounts held in his name, (d) furniture and effects in his possession or control, (e) his superannuation entitlements, (f) all credit cards held in his name, (g) the mortgage over the suburb f property, and (h) all other debts in his name.   all bank accounts held in his name, (d) furniture and effects in his possession or control, (e) his superannuation entitlements, (f) all credit cards held in his name, (g) the mortgage over the suburb f property, and (h) all other debts in his name.   furniture and effects in his possession or control, (e) his superannuation entitlements, (f) all credit cards held in his name, (g) the mortgage over the suburb f property, and (h) all other debts in his name.   his superannuation entitlements, (f) all credit cards held in his name, (g) the mortgage over the suburb f property, and (h) all other debts in his name.   all credit cards held in his name, (g) the mortgage over the suburb f property, and (h) all other debts in his name.   the mortgage over the suburb f property, and (h) all other debts in his name.   all other debts in his name.   all personal property now in his/her respective possession or control, (b) all interests in life insurance policies standing in his/her sole name respectively.   all interests in life insurance policies standing in his/her sole name respectively.   each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other, to all property, including choses-in-action and financial resource, in the possession and /or control of such party as at the dates of these orders, (b) all insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named, (c) each party forgoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits or other employment related benefits belonging to or earned by the other or any future inheritances received, (d) each party is solely responsible for any liability of whatsoever nature and kind in their respective names, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   all insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named, (c) each party forgoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits or other employment related benefits belonging to or earned by the other or any future inheritances received, (d) each party is solely responsible for any liability of whatsoever nature and kind in their respective names, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   each party forgoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits or other employment related benefits belonging to or earned by the other or any future inheritances received, (d) each party is solely responsible for any liability of whatsoever nature and kind in their respective names, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   each party is solely responsible for any liability of whatsoever nature and kind in their respective names, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   an affidavit by the compliant party and/or their solicitor setting out the noncompliant party’s failure to comply with these orders will be sufficient evidence of non-compliance.
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
the parties’ positions
evidence relied upon  further amended application filed 20 february 2024, (b) trial affidavit of ms poulson filed 20 february 2024, (c) affidavit in reply of ms poulson filed 5 march 2024, (d) financial statement filed 20 february 2024, (e) affidavit of x’s psychologist, ms h filed 24 may 2023 who was not required for cross-examination, and (f) outline of case filed 6 march 2024.   trial affidavit of ms poulson filed 20 february 2024, (c) affidavit in reply of ms poulson filed 5 march 2024, (d) financial statement filed 20 february 2024, (e) affidavit of x’s psychologist, ms h filed 24 may 2023 who was not required for cross-examination, and (f) outline of case filed 6 march 2024.   affidavit in reply of ms poulson filed 5 march 2024, (d) financial statement filed 20 february 2024, (e) affidavit of x’s psychologist, ms h filed 24 may 2023 who was not required for cross-examination, and (f) outline of case filed 6 march 2024.   financial statement filed 20 february 2024, (e) affidavit of x’s psychologist, ms h filed 24 may 2023 who was not required for cross-examination, and (f) outline of case filed 6 march 2024.   affidavit of x’s psychologist, ms h filed 24 may 2023 who was not required for cross-examination, and (f) outline of case filed 6 march 2024.   outline of case filed 6 march 2024.   response to initiating application filed 27 february 2024, (b) trial affidavit of mr gadal filed 27 february 2024, (c) financial statement filed 27 february 2024, (d) affidavit of mr k filed 5 march 2023 who was required for cross-examination, and (e) outline of case filed 6 march 2024.   trial affidavit of mr gadal filed 27 february 2024, (c) financial statement filed 27 february 2024, (d) affidavit of mr k filed 5 march 2023 who was required for cross-examination, and (e) outline of case filed 6 march 2024.   financial statement filed 27 february 2024, (d) affidavit of mr k filed 5 march 2023 who was required for cross-examination, and (e) outline of case filed 6 march 2024.   affidavit of mr k filed 5 march 2023 who was required for cross-examination, and (e) outline of case filed 6 march 2024.   outline of case filed 6 march 2024.
legal principles
it will be recalled that s 79(2) provides that "[t]he court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. section 79(4) prescribes matters that must be taken into account in considering what order (if any) should be made under the section. the requirements of the two sub-sections are not to be conflated. in every case in which a property settlement order under s 79 is sought, it is necessary to satisfy the court that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. the expression “just and equitable” is a qualitative description of a conclusion reached after examination of a range of potentially competing considerations. it does not admit of exhaustive definition. it is not possible to chart its metes and bounds. [footnotes omitted]
issues in dispute  the length of the relationship, (g) the extent and/or existence of family violence and whether or not there should be an adjustment because of that, (h) the financial contributions the parties made to the purchase of the land situate at j street, suburb c in 2017, (i) whether or not various assets are held for the husband beneficially, (j) whether the wife is successful in her application for addbacks, (k) whether the husband owes $120,000 in loans for the purchase of the suburb f property, (l) the weight to be given to the parties’ respective contributions, and (m) the relevant s75(2) factors.   the extent and/or existence of family violence and whether or not there should be an adjustment because of that, (h) the financial contributions the parties made to the purchase of the land situate at j street, suburb c in 2017, (i) whether or not various assets are held for the husband beneficially, (j) whether the wife is successful in her application for addbacks, (k) whether the husband owes $120,000 in loans for the purchase of the suburb f property, (l) the weight to be given to the parties’ respective contributions, and (m) the relevant s75(2) factors.   the financial contributions the parties made to the purchase of the land situate at j street, suburb c in 2017, (i) whether or not various assets are held for the husband beneficially, (j) whether the wife is successful in her application for addbacks, (k) whether the husband owes $120,000 in loans for the purchase of the suburb f property, (l) the weight to be given to the parties’ respective contributions, and (m) the relevant s75(2) factors.   whether or not various assets are held for the husband beneficially, (j) whether the wife is successful in her application for addbacks, (k) whether the husband owes $120,000 in loans for the purchase of the suburb f property, (l) the weight to be given to the parties’ respective contributions, and (m) the relevant s75(2) factors.   whether the wife is successful in her application for addbacks, (k) whether the husband owes $120,000 in loans for the purchase of the suburb f property, (l) the weight to be given to the parties’ respective contributions, and (m) the relevant s75(2) factors.   whether the husband owes $120,000 in loans for the purchase of the suburb f property, (l) the weight to be given to the parties’ respective contributions, and (m) the relevant s75(2) factors.   the weight to be given to the parties’ respective contributions, and (m) the relevant s75(2) factors.   the relevant s75(2) factors.
the length of the relationship
family violence
contributions
purchases and sales of properties at suburb c
contributions to a child from a previous relationship
assets in dispute
property in country p
motor vehicle 3
motor vehicle 4
motor vehicle 5
motor vehicle 6
suburb f property
the parties’ existing legal and equitable interests
proceeds of sale of the b street property
motor vehicle 7
motor vehicle 2 and motor vehicle 1
superannuation
the husband’s credibility and non-disclosure
section 75(2) factors
conclusion
associate: dated: 28 march 2024
dated: 28 march 2024