last updated: 9 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
macombe & jagels [2021] fedcfamc2f 427
orders
the court orders that:  withdrawing funds from any bank account held by b pty ltd except to: (i) pay creditors, and to this effect all invoices and receipts of payments to creditors are to be provided to the wife within 7 days of payment, (ii) transfer the wife’s withdrawal benefit in b pty ltd superannuation fund, (as calculated by mr c of d pty ltd on the date the husband resigns the wife’s membership of b pty ltd superannuation fund), to the wife’s f super fundannuation account. (b) disposing of any real property held by b pty ltd superannuation fund without the written consent of the wife, and (c) admitting any additional member to the b pty ltd superannuation fund.   pay creditors, and to this effect all invoices and receipts of payments to creditors are to be provided to the wife within 7 days of payment, (ii) transfer the wife’s withdrawal benefit in b pty ltd superannuation fund, (as calculated by mr c of d pty ltd on the date the husband resigns the wife’s membership of b pty ltd superannuation fund), to the wife’s f super fundannuation account.  ) transfer the wife’s withdrawal benefit in b pty ltd superannuation fund, (as calculated by mr c of d pty ltd on the date the husband resigns the wife’s membership of b pty ltd superannuation fund), to the wife’s f super fundannuation account.   disposing of any real property held by b pty ltd superannuation fund without the written consent of the wife, and (c) admitting any additional member to the b pty ltd superannuation fund.   admitting any additional member to the b pty ltd superannuation fund.
notation
reasons for judgment
judge carty
introduction  the sum of $215,438.36 is rolled out of the b pty ltd fund into a fund nominated by her, (b) the husband remove the wife as a personal guarantor for mortgages secured over two real properties held by the b pty ltd fund, within 14 days, (c) the husband indemnify the wife in respect of the b pty ltd fund, (d) after the funds are released to the wife, and she is removed from the mortgages, then the wife and the husband do all things to aid in the removal of the wife from all association with the b pty ltd fund, and (e) the superannuation aspect of the financial settlement be considered full and final.   the husband remove the wife as a personal guarantor for mortgages secured over two real properties held by the b pty ltd fund, within 14 days, (c) the husband indemnify the wife in respect of the b pty ltd fund, (d) after the funds are released to the wife, and she is removed from the mortgages, then the wife and the husband do all things to aid in the removal of the wife from all association with the b pty ltd fund, and (e) the superannuation aspect of the financial settlement be considered full and final.   the husband indemnify the wife in respect of the b pty ltd fund, (d) after the funds are released to the wife, and she is removed from the mortgages, then the wife and the husband do all things to aid in the removal of the wife from all association with the b pty ltd fund, and (e) the superannuation aspect of the financial settlement be considered full and final.   after the funds are released to the wife, and she is removed from the mortgages, then the wife and the husband do all things to aid in the removal of the wife from all association with the b pty ltd fund, and (e) the superannuation aspect of the financial settlement be considered full and final.   the superannuation aspect of the financial settlement be considered full and final.
background  in contravention of s.17a of the superannuation industry (supervision) act 1993 (cth) (“sis act”) the wife is a member of the b pty ltd fund but she is not also a director of the corporate trustee, as required by the sis act, (b) the australian taxation office (“the ato”), by letter dated 28 june 2021, has notified the trustee for the b pty ltd fund that it must rectify reported contraventions of superannuation laws, and (c) the ato threatens compliance action if the trustee does not rectify all reported contraventions, or breaches the obligations of the trustee in the future.   the australian taxation office (“the ato”), by letter dated 28 june 2021, has notified the trustee for the b pty ltd fund that it must rectify reported contraventions of superannuation laws, and (c) the ato threatens compliance action if the trustee does not rectify all reported contraventions, or breaches the obligations of the trustee in the future.   the ato threatens compliance action if the trustee does not rectify all reported contraventions, or breaches the obligations of the trustee in the future.
legal principles
17a definition of self managed superannuation fund basic conditions--funds other than single member funds   subject to this section, a superannuation fund, other than a fund with only one member, is a self managed superannuation fund if and only if it satisfies the following conditions: it has no more than 6 members, if the trustees of the fund are individuals—each individual trustee of the fund is a member of the fund, if the trustee of the fund is a body corporate—each director of the body corporate is a member of the fund, each member of the fund: is a trustee of the fund, or if the trustee of the fund is a body corporate--is a director of the body corporate, no member of the fund is an employee of another member of the fund, unless the members concerned are relatives, no trustee of the fund receives any remuneration from the fund or from any person for any duties or services performed by the trustee in relation to the fund, if the trustee of the fund is a body corporate—no director of the body corporate receives any remuneration from the fund or from any person (including the body corporate) for any duties or services performed by the director in relation to the fund.
the evidence  outline of case document (interim hearing) filed 10 november 2021, (2) application in a case filed 23 september 2021, (3) his affidavit filed 1 november 2021, and (4) minute of order filed 10 november 2021 (exhibit ‘b’).   application in a case filed 23 september 2021, (3) his affidavit filed 1 november 2021, and (4) minute of order filed 10 november 2021 (exhibit ‘b’).   his affidavit filed 1 november 2021, and (4) minute of order filed 10 november 2021 (exhibit ‘b’).   minute of order filed 10 november 2021 (exhibit ‘b’).   response to application in a case filed 22 october 2021, and (2) her affidavit filed 22 october 2021.   her affidavit filed 22 october 2021.
consideration
“...each member of the fund: is a trustee of the fund, or if the trustee of the fund is a body corporate--is a director of the body corporate.”
“... on a simple reading appear to allow the trustee to remedy the breach without further correspondence with ... [the wife]... or having to obtain her consent. the co-operative approach for her to comply with the deed by resigning as a member and assisting with the rollover of her member account balance has not been successful to date.”   in july 2020 the wife sent a request to the b pty ltd fund accountants requesting the trustee to rollover her member account, and notifying that her nominated superannuation fund is f super fund. the wife did not provide the trustee with the necessary request and consent to complete the rollover, (b) in july 2020, the b pty ltd fund accountants informed the wife that in order to calculate the wife’s current member account balance in the b pty ltd fund, the accountants would need to prepare the financial statements for the b pty ltd fund for the financial year ended 30 june 2020, (c) the wife accused the b pty ltd fund accountants of being in breach of the sis act, which accusation the accountants denied, and she threatened to use her email to them as “evidence to the australia tax office (ato)” (sic), (d) there is a high level of mistrust and anxiety on the part of the wife as to compliance with the sis act and regulations on the part of the husband and the fund accountants, and (e) there is currently a stalemate between the wife and the trustee of the b pty ltd fund in relation to the resignation of the wife’s membership in the fund.   in july 2020, the b pty ltd fund accountants informed the wife that in order to calculate the wife’s current member account balance in the b pty ltd fund, the accountants would need to prepare the financial statements for the b pty ltd fund for the financial year ended 30 june 2020, (c) the wife accused the b pty ltd fund accountants of being in breach of the sis act, which accusation the accountants denied, and she threatened to use her email to them as “evidence to the australia tax office (ato)” (sic), (d) there is a high level of mistrust and anxiety on the part of the wife as to compliance with the sis act and regulations on the part of the husband and the fund accountants, and (e) there is currently a stalemate between the wife and the trustee of the b pty ltd fund in relation to the resignation of the wife’s membership in the fund.   the wife accused the b pty ltd fund accountants of being in breach of the sis act, which accusation the accountants denied, and she threatened to use her email to them as “evidence to the australia tax office (ato)” (sic), (d) there is a high level of mistrust and anxiety on the part of the wife as to compliance with the sis act and regulations on the part of the husband and the fund accountants, and (e) there is currently a stalemate between the wife and the trustee of the b pty ltd fund in relation to the resignation of the wife’s membership in the fund.   there is a high level of mistrust and anxiety on the part of the wife as to compliance with the sis act and regulations on the part of the husband and the fund accountants, and (e) there is currently a stalemate between the wife and the trustee of the b pty ltd fund in relation to the resignation of the wife’s membership in the fund.   there is currently a stalemate between the wife and the trustee of the b pty ltd fund in relation to the resignation of the wife’s membership in the fund.
conclusion
dated: 23 november 2021
[1] in the marriage of burridge a.b and burridge m.j [1980] famca 89; (1980) flc 90-902[2] strahan & strahan (interim property orders) [2009] famcafc 166; (2009) 42 famlr 203; 241 flr 1[3] annexure a to affidavit of husband[4] paragraph 17 of affidavit of husband[5] annexure “a” to affidavit of husband[6] annexure b to affidavit of husband[7] annexure e to affidavit of wife[8] annexure f and annexure g to affidavit of the wife[9] s.90xt(2)[10] federal circuit and family court of australia( family law) rules 2021 rule 6.01