last updated: 25 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
horne & innes (deceased) (no 3) [2024] fedcfamc2f 453
orders
the court declares that:
the court further orders that:
removal of caveat
registrar to sign.
referral.
costs applications.
reasons for judgment
judge willis am
as at 30/4/2019 [ms merritt] had no idea - that i had commenced proceedings in the fcc of australia, because under rule 6.17, i could hold off serving [ms innes] up to (1) year after filing and [ms merritt] did not have to be served, because at this stage, she was not part of my fcc application. therefore - because i exercised rule 6.17- no fcc documents were ever filed or served upon me, prior to [ms innes] passing, because [ms innes] was never served and never knew i had filed my application.
procedural matters.
request for default hearing
i am late filing my response. i emailed the court checking i was registered to receive my files. i logged in regularly and checked for my orders. they are still not visible on the portal. i was called by [ms k] [in mid] 2020 asking if i had filed my response. prior to that i had no knowledge of the order. it is not my intention to prolong this or not provide what is required.
service of documents
the trial adjournment request
i had intended to have a meeting with a principal lawyer that i've been using prior to me even filing on 30 april 2019 and that meeting did not go ahead. so i met with my principal lawyer and part of my legal team on 22 march 2023.
the previous two, that's not my signature. there's two different signatures. people collected the mail for me, and i was still out at [town l], so i never saw those documents. i didn't even know they were in my mail. i asked people to collect my mail. i was in no position to read the documents because i was seven hours away out at [town l] and [town m], so even though mr kehoe has identified two signatures prior to 25 january 2023, those signatures are not mine, and i had no idea that the mail was signed by two other people.
the statutory declarations
orders sought by the applicant
the application.   that [ms innes], while living, transfer a 50% ownership of the property at [b street, suburb c] queensland to the applicant, as joint owners, as discussed and agreed between the applicant and [ms innes]. (2) that the applicant make a will specifying that upon his death, ownership of the property at [suburb c] be left in equal shares to [ms q] and [mr h], as discussed and agreed between the applicant and respondent. (3) that all tools equipment building materials and general items remain in both the [ms q] containers at [suburb c] until an amicable decision is made between both parties regarding the future of their contents. (4) that [ms innes] leave to the applicant through her "final will and testament" cash from her (3) superannuation accounts, as discussed and agreed between the applicant and [ms innes].   that the applicant make a will specifying that upon his death, ownership of the property at [suburb c] be left in equal shares to [ms q] and [mr h], as discussed and agreed between the applicant and respondent. (3) that all tools equipment building materials and general items remain in both the [ms q] containers at [suburb c] until an amicable decision is made between both parties regarding the future of their contents. (4) that [ms innes] leave to the applicant through her "final will and testament" cash from her (3) superannuation accounts, as discussed and agreed between the applicant and [ms innes].   that all tools equipment building materials and general items remain in both the [ms q] containers at [suburb c] until an amicable decision is made between both parties regarding the future of their contents. (4) that [ms innes] leave to the applicant through her "final will and testament" cash from her (3) superannuation accounts, as discussed and agreed between the applicant and [ms innes].   that [ms innes] leave to the applicant through her "final will and testament" cash from her (3) superannuation accounts, as discussed and agreed between the applicant and [ms innes].
i would love the opportunity of someone to say, "well, listen, would it be feasible that [mr h]’s name become on title with [ms merritt]?" if that occurred, i would be as happy as anything, and all i would want is my personal items back. i am not here to benefit in any capacity to achieve or attain [ms innes]' house in any way. i'm not here to gain any money in any way from [ms innes]' estate. i would like just my contributions of money back one day if that's possible... and i would just like my personal items back. so i'm here to try and obtain or receive my personal items back and maybe some funds for the electrical in the house.
the second and third respondent.
the law.
it is true that s 79(8) provides for the creation of anew proprietary rights after a marriage has been terminated by death. however, those rights may be created only if proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them had been commenced whilst the marriage was subsisting and only if the proceedings are continued by or against the legal personal representative of the deceased spouse. (emphasis added)   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship was registered under a prescribed law of a state as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship was registered under a prescribed law of a state as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship was registered under a prescribed law of a state as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship was registered under a prescribed law of a state as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship was registered under a prescribed law of a state as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship was registered under a prescribed law of a state as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether the relationship was registered under a prescribed law of a state as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.
each element of a relationship draws its colour and its significance from the other elements, some of which may point in one direction and some in the other. what must be looked at is the composite picture. any attempt to isolate individual factors and to attribute to them relative degrees of materiality or importance involves a denial of common experience and will almost inevitably be productive of error. the endless scope for differences in human attitudes and activities means that there will be an almost infinite variety of combinations of circumstances which may fall for consideration. for any particular case, it will be a question of fact and degree, a jury question, whether a relationship between two unrelated persons of the opposite sex meets the statutory test.
approach to property division   determination of a just and equitable outcome of an application for property settlement begins with the identification of existing property interests (as determined by common law and equity), (2) the discretion conferred by the statute must be exercised in accordance with legal principles and must not proceed on an assumption that the parties’ interests in the property are or should be different from those determined by common law and equity, (3) a determination that a party has a right to a division of property fixed by reference only to the matters in s 79(4), and without separate consideration of s 79(2), would erroneously conflate what are distinct statutory requirements.   the discretion conferred by the statute must be exercised in accordance with legal principles and must not proceed on an assumption that the parties’ interests in the property are or should be different from those determined by common law and equity, (3) a determination that a party has a right to a division of property fixed by reference only to the matters in s 79(4), and without separate consideration of s 79(2), would erroneously conflate what are distinct statutory requirements.   a determination that a party has a right to a division of property fixed by reference only to the matters in s 79(4), and without separate consideration of s 79(2), would erroneously conflate what are distinct statutory requirements.
in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate, (a) in the case of proceedings in respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them – altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property.
was there a de facto relationship? – the factors under s 4aa(2).
duration of the relationship
nature and extent of their common residence.
whether a sexual relationship exists
the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them
the ownership, use and acquisition of their property
the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life
you might love me but i know nothing about you. i pay for everything. i buy you clothes. you have a roof over your head and food and drink. why wouldn’t you be happy?? your set for life but what sort of a life am i going to have?? i speak to nobody about how miserable i am... you know everything about me!!!! can you say the same????
whether the relationship was registered under a prescribed law of a state as a prescribed kind of relationship
the care and support of children
the reputation and public aspects of the relationship
evaluation of the factors
is it just and equitable to make an order?  the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last mentioned property, and,   to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last mentioned property, and,  ) otherwise in relation to any of that last mentioned property, and,
whether or not that last mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de-facto relationship or either of them, and   the contribution (other than financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on the behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship. (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last mentioned property, and, (ii) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent.   to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last mentioned property, and, (ii) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent.  ) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent.
conclusion – should there be an adjustment?
associate: dated: 12 april 2024
dated: 12 april 2024
[1] affidavit of ms merritt filed 16 march 2023, pg 5. [2] affidavit of mr horne filed 18 november 2020. [3] i have no satisfactory evidence of the origins, author or authenticity of this handwritten “offer”, which the applicant seemed to have walked away with. see also paragraph 38 of the affidavit of ms merritt filed 16 march 2023.[4] fourth amended initiating application filed 18 march 2021.[5] affidavit of ms merritt filed 16 march 2023, para 6.[6] see the interim published judgment. [7] transcript of proceedings (3 april 2023), p 7.[8] ibid.[9] ibid.[10] ibid, p 8.[11] transcript of proceedings (3 april 2023), p 7.[12] [2009] hca 27; 239 clr 175.[13] transcript of proceedings (3 april 2023) p 66.[14] ibid, p 84.[15] affidavit of ms merritt filed 29 july 2020, pg 45. [16] as set out in the interim judgment. [17] section 90sm being the de facto equivalent. [18] stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52.[19] affidavit of mr baxter filed 18 march 2021.[20] affidavit of mr baxter filed 18 march 2021. [21] affidavit of mr baxter filed 27 april 2021.[22] affidavit of ms merritt filed 29 july 2020, pg 4. [23] affidavit of ms merritt filed 4 august 2020, pg 56.[24] affidavit of ms merritt filed 29 july 2020.[25] affidavit of ms merritt filed 29 july 2020, pg 58. [26] affidavit of ms merritt filed 4 august 2020, pg 51. [27] transcript of proceedings, pg 54-55.[28] affidavit of mr horne filed 16 july 2019.[29] affidavit of ms merritt filed 4 august 2020, pg 54.[30]affidavit of mr horne filed on 2 november 2020.[31] affidavit of ms merritt filed 4 august 2020, pg 4. [32] affidavit of ms merritt filed 29 july 2020, pg 51.[33] affidavit of mr horne filed 16 july 2019.[34] affidavit of ms merritt filed 29 july 2020, pg 41.[35] affidavit of ms merritt filed 29 july 2020, pg 44.[36] affidavit of ms merritt filed 4 august 2020, pg 46. [37] affidavit of ms merritt filed 4 august 2020, pg 42.[38] affidavit of ms merritt filed 4 august 2020, p 55 annexing letters dated 17 june 2018 and 12 july 2018 by mr w, noting one complaint is from ms r and the other is addressed to a government body regarding a complaint.[39] affidavit of mr horne filed 18 november 2020, pg 35.