last updated: 3 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
farnell & farnell [2024] fedcfamc2f 222
orders
the court orders that:  in payment of $97,550.01 to the husband. (b) in payment of $198,530.91 to the wife. (c) that any remaining balance if any be paid as to 57.5% to the wife and 42.5% to the husband. (d) that from the wife’s share of monies she receives pursuant to order 1 (b) above she pay to the husband the amount of $1,200 in reimbursement for the payment of the wife’s share of mediation fees.   in payment of $198,530.91 to the wife. (c) that any remaining balance if any be paid as to 57.5% to the wife and 42.5% to the husband. (d) that from the wife’s share of monies she receives pursuant to order 1 (b) above she pay to the husband the amount of $1,200 in reimbursement for the payment of the wife’s share of mediation fees.   that any remaining balance if any be paid as to 57.5% to the wife and 42.5% to the husband. (d) that from the wife’s share of monies she receives pursuant to order 1 (b) above she pay to the husband the amount of $1,200 in reimbursement for the payment of the wife’s share of mediation fees.   that from the wife’s share of monies she receives pursuant to order 1 (b) above she pay to the husband the amount of $1,200 in reimbursement for the payment of the wife’s share of mediation fees.   complete all outstanding and up to date financials, audit the same, lodge the tax return/returns of the farnell family superannuation fund. (b) thereafter pay any tax liability for the said fund. (c) calculate of the parties’ entitlements/member balances within the said fund.   thereafter pay any tax liability for the said fund. (c) calculate of the parties’ entitlements/member balances within the said fund.   calculate of the parties’ entitlements/member balances within the said fund.   all cash at banks and monies invested in the husband’s sole name, (b) the company known as ‘c pty ltd’, (c) motor vehicle 1 in the husband’s possession, (d) all personal effects and household contents in the husband’s possession, and (e) any superannuation entitlements received by the husband and invested by or on his behalf.   the company known as ‘c pty ltd’, (c) motor vehicle 1 in the husband’s possession, (d) all personal effects and household contents in the husband’s possession, and (e) any superannuation entitlements received by the husband and invested by or on his behalf.   motor vehicle 1 in the husband’s possession, (d) all personal effects and household contents in the husband’s possession, and (e) any superannuation entitlements received by the husband and invested by or on his behalf.   all personal effects and household contents in the husband’s possession, and (e) any superannuation entitlements received by the husband and invested by or on his behalf.   any superannuation entitlements received by the husband and invested by or on his behalf.   all cash at banks and monies invested in the wife’s sole name, (b) motor vehicle 2 in the wife’s possession, (c) all personal effects and household contents in the wife’s possession, and (d) any superannuation entitlements received by the wife and invested by or on her behalf.   motor vehicle 2 in the wife’s possession, (c) all personal effects and household contents in the wife’s possession, and (d) any superannuation entitlements received by the wife and invested by or on her behalf.   all personal effects and household contents in the wife’s possession, and (d) any superannuation entitlements received by the wife and invested by or on her behalf.   any superannuation entitlements received by the wife and invested by or on her behalf.
reasons for judgment
judge myers:  that x (born in 2011, currently 12 years of age, hereafter “x”) live with the wife and spend time with the husband: (a) during the school term, five (5) nights a fortnight, (b) half the school holiday periods, (c) special days including dates during easter and father’s day.   during the school term, five (5) nights a fortnight, (b) half the school holiday periods, (c) special days including dates during easter and father’s day.   half the school holiday periods, (c) special days including dates during easter and father’s day.   special days including dates during easter and father’s day.   the court notes that cross-examination of the husband commenced on 3 august 2023, by mr seow, counsel for the wife. (2) the court orders that cross-examination of the husband be permitted to continue on 7 september 2023 by counsel other than mr seow.   the court orders that cross-examination of the husband be permitted to continue on 7 september 2023 by counsel other than mr seow.   the respondent wife be entitled to retain counsel of her choice for the purposes of the resumption of the final hearing. (2) counsel instructed by the respondent wife for the resumption of final hearing is not to ask the applicant husband questions that have previously been asked and answered during cross-examination. (3) the applicant husband’s costs of these proceedings be reserved for the final argument in respect of this application. (4) the respondent wife is directed to provide a copy of the transcript of the first day of the final hearing to the solicitor for the applicant husband, within two (2) days of today’s orders.   counsel instructed by the respondent wife for the resumption of final hearing is not to ask the applicant husband questions that have previously been asked and answered during cross-examination. (3) the applicant husband’s costs of these proceedings be reserved for the final argument in respect of this application. (4) the respondent wife is directed to provide a copy of the transcript of the first day of the final hearing to the solicitor for the applicant husband, within two (2) days of today’s orders.   the applicant husband’s costs of these proceedings be reserved for the final argument in respect of this application. (4) the respondent wife is directed to provide a copy of the transcript of the first day of the final hearing to the solicitor for the applicant husband, within two (2) days of today’s orders.   the respondent wife is directed to provide a copy of the transcript of the first day of the final hearing to the solicitor for the applicant husband, within two (2) days of today’s orders.
parties’ proposed orders
and that for the avoidance of doubt the wife receive such payment from the remaining proceeds of sale of [d street, suburb g], nsw ("the former matrimonial home"), which is presently held in trust by the husband’s solicitors, so as to give effect to this overall percentage adjustment. that pursuant to paragraph 90xt(4) of the family law act 1975, within 14 days, the parties in their capacity as trustees of the [farnell] super fund take all necessary steps and execute all necessary documents to: divide any funds held in the [farnell] super fund, 50% to the wife, and 50% to the husband, do all things necessary and sign all necessary documents to wind up and close the [farnell] super fund, that these orders have effect from the operative time and the operative time is 4 business days after the date of service of the sealed orders upon the trustee. that orders 2 and 3 bind the trustees of [farnell] super fund. that within 14 days, the parties do all such things and sign all necessary documents to equally divide and close any bank accounts held in joint names. that the husband thereafter be declared to be the sole legal and beneficial owner of his right, title and interest in and to: all cash at banks and monies invested in the husband’s sole name, the company known as ‘[c] pty ltd’, the [motor vehicle 1] in the husband’s possession, all personal effects in the husband’s possession, and any superannuation entitlements received by the husband and invested by or on his behalf. that the wife thereafter be declared to be the sole legal and beneficial owner of her right, title and interest in and to: all cash at banks and monies invested in the wife’s sole name, all personal effects in the wife’s possession, and any superannuation entitlements received by the wife and invested by or on her behalf. that unless otherwise provided for herein, each party shall forthwith be declared entitled to retain and shall relinquish in favour of the other party any claim to any right title or interest in all items of property presently in the possession or custody of the other party including but not limited to real property, monies held in any bank, building society or credit union, shares, superannuation or life entitlements, motor vehicles, chattels, furniture, furnishings and personal effects. that the husband and wife hereby declare that they are not aware of any liability to which either of them has either a joint or several liability with the other, including but without limiting the generality of the forgoing, any bank, credit or charge accounts, guarantees and any liability resulting from any of the parties previous business (if any) and any other dealings. that if it is subsequently found that any such liability as described in the above order exists, the party pursuant to whose own business or other dealings such liability arose shall indemnify the other against all claims, costs, demands, suits, actions and proceedings which may be made against all incurred by the other party in respect thereof. that the husband pay the wife's costs of and incidental to these proceedings.
background
evidence of an opinion is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact about the existence of which the opinion was expressed.
section 79 of the evidence act provides an exception that provides that:
if a person has specialised knowledge based on the person's training, study or experience, the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion of that person that is wholly or substantially based on that knowledge.
it is not disputed that neither the husband or the wife possess specialised knowledge based on the person's training, study, or experience such that they could give evidence as to values of real property or chattels.
property situated at [j street, suburb k]. the approximate value at the commencement of our relationship was $380,000. the property had a mortgage secured against it to the value of approximately $295,000. as such, i held approximately $85,000 in equity.
during the relationship the parties made liberal use of the funds received into the company through which the husband conducted his business. its account appears to have been treated essentially as the bank account for the family.
balance sheets
description
ownership
value
assets
1
sale proceeds from suburb g property in access law group trust account
joint
$296,080.92
2
motor vehicle 2
wife
$5,000e
3
motor vehicle 1
husband
$12,000e
4
household contents – including bbq, furniture and equipment
$7,500e
5
household contents – including equipment and furniture from former matrimonial home
6
nab account – ...07
$2,000e
7
nab account – ...37
$1,000e
8
h bank account
$161
9
c pty ltd – joint valuation completed in may 2021
$0
10
personal gear, equipment, tools
$3,000
assets subtotal
$334,241.92
liabilities
11
nab credit card (used for matrimonial expenses with a balance of $9,927.29 at separation)
$9,927.29
liabilities subtotal
superannuation
name of fund
type of interest
member
applicants value
12
162,757.45 (proceeds of sale)
self-managed
$162,452.45
13
super fund 1
accumulation
$8,425
14
super fund 2
$5,300
superannuation subtotal
$176,177.45
total (assets – liabilities)
$324,314.63
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation)
$500,492.08
financial resources
financial resources subtotal
nil
other
15
interim distribution of sale proceeds
$27,000
16
17
$150,000
18
other subtotal
$354,000
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation + financial resources + other)
$854,492.08
agreed/not agreed
agreed
household contents – including bbq, tools and furniture
household contents – including furniture and fridge from former matrimonial home
c pty ltd – joint valuation completed in mid-2021
personal gear, equipment, tools, furniture and equipment
addbacks
husband motor vehicle 1 disposed of
$7,000
not agreed
$341,241.92
$331,313.63
$507,491.08
19
20
motor vehicle 3
$23,100
21
sale price of motor vehicle 4
$45,000
22
new motor vehicle
unknown
23
laptops and printers
$2,000
24
motor vehicle 5
25
nab business account – ...56
$4,000
26
nab account number – ...73
27
$5,000
28
unpaid superannuation by employer
$24,934.00
$461,034.00
$968,526.63
the court is reminded that after two days of cross-examination of the husband, the wife abandoned the “add back argument”. notwithstanding this abandoned argument, well after the closing of evidence the wife now relies on a purported addback relating to the disposal of a motor vehicle. there was no cross examination and in fact there was a ruling on this point. the court should reject the argument.
mr fermanis: with respect, where does this take matters in circumstances where the wife is now abandoned the add back case. his honour: well, that’s okay. there’s no – that’s why i wanted an updated balance sheet. the add backs are abandoned, aren’t they? mr bennett: the add backs are abandoned. (transcript dated 21 september 2023, page 7, lines 11-19).
there is no error committed per se in adjusting the parties’ actual property interests by a calculation involving notionally adding back into the pool sums which have been dissipated by the parties. we reject any suggestion that the decision of bevan v bevan ... or, more particularly, the decision of the high court in stanford v stanford ... is authority for any necessary contrary solution. some statements made by the high court may lead to the conclusion that references to “notional property” as have been referred to in decisions of this court and at first instance may need to be reconsidered. the decisions referred to seek to remind the court that, however the exercise of discretion might seek to deal with property that is said to be the subject of “add‐ back”, proper consideration must be given to existing interests in property, and the question posed by s 79(2) as a separate inquiry from any adjustment to property interests by reference to s 79(4) if a consideration of s 79(2) reveals that it is just and equitable to alter existing interests in property.
the trial judge proceeded on the basis that he “suspect[ed] that the payment of legal fees can in an appropriate case fall into the category of circumstances where an add‐ back of the legal fees into the pool is justified”. his honour’s suspicion accords with well‐established authority (see for example nhc & rch at [55]). if there was any doubt that the position might have changed as a result of what was said in stanford v stanford or bevan & bevan ..., that doubt has been removed by what was said by this court in vass & vass.
whilst not seeking to place a fetter upon the exercise of discretion of a trial judge in individual cases, it seems to us that the concept of adding monies reasonably disposed of back into the pool ought to be the exception rather than the rule. the parties are entitled to reasonably conduct their affairs post separation in a manner that is consistent with properly getting on with their lives.  ]. in my view what occurred in this case, as i said during the course of argument was, in fact, a premature distribution of a proportion of the matrimonial assets. what the husband did was to distribute to himself an asset in which the wife had a legitimate interest. in such circumstances i consider that it would be unjust in the extreme to simply treat such conduct by the husband as a matter to which regard should be had under section 75(2). it seems to me that the husband has had the benefit of that money. had he retained, for example, the taxi licence instead of selling it, that would have been brought to account as an item of property which would have been dealt with in the same way as the remaining items of property in this case. accordingly, i am of the view that the correct way in which to deal with the husband's receipt of those monies is to bring them into the pool of assets on a notional basis and make a distribution accordingly.
there seems to be no appropriate basis for notionally adding back moneys that existed at separation but which have subsequently been spent on meeting reasonably incurred living expenses. neither the family law act nor the case law require that parties go into a state of suspended economic animation once their marriage breaks down pending the resolution of their financial arrangements. parties are entitled to continue to provide for their own support. whether any expenditure so incurred is reasonable or extravagant is a matter that can be determined by the trial judge.
4. that within seven (7) days from the settlement of the former matrimonial home, the parties authorise access law group (the conveyancers) to release the amount of $20,000 from the sale proceeds to each party by way of an interim property distribution.
1. from the funds held in the trust account of the wife’s legal representative, being the proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home, $7,000 is to be distributed to each party by way of interim property distribution.
1. within seven (7) days, the parties do all things necessary and sign all documents to cause the firm trading as access law group (the firm) to release funds held in their trust account by way of interim property distribution and within seven (7) days, the firm shall release those funds as follows: -
a. $150,000 to the wife’s solicitor clear lawyers on behalf of the wife, and b. $150,000 to the husband’s solicitors family focus legal on behalf of the husband.
3.6.2. the respondent has asserted certain values in items 20 to 28. the respondent has advanced no submissions as to why those items ought to be taken into consideration nor has she advanced any basis upon which the court can make findings with respect to those values.
c pty ltd  c pty ltd is a company that owns and operated a transport business that contracts to f company. (b) c pty ltd is owned by the husband. (c) c pty ltd was valued by a single expert. (d) the parties agree in their respective balance sheets that c pty ltd is worth nil. (e) there was no forensic accounting expert engaged jointly or by either party to provide evidence in the proceedings that examined the operation, books, records, record keeping, business expenses, profit and loss and generally the transactions conducted by c pty ltd.   c pty ltd is owned by the husband. (c) c pty ltd was valued by a single expert. (d) the parties agree in their respective balance sheets that c pty ltd is worth nil. (e) there was no forensic accounting expert engaged jointly or by either party to provide evidence in the proceedings that examined the operation, books, records, record keeping, business expenses, profit and loss and generally the transactions conducted by c pty ltd.   c pty ltd was valued by a single expert. (d) the parties agree in their respective balance sheets that c pty ltd is worth nil. (e) there was no forensic accounting expert engaged jointly or by either party to provide evidence in the proceedings that examined the operation, books, records, record keeping, business expenses, profit and loss and generally the transactions conducted by c pty ltd.   the parties agree in their respective balance sheets that c pty ltd is worth nil. (e) there was no forensic accounting expert engaged jointly or by either party to provide evidence in the proceedings that examined the operation, books, records, record keeping, business expenses, profit and loss and generally the transactions conducted by c pty ltd.   there was no forensic accounting expert engaged jointly or by either party to provide evidence in the proceedings that examined the operation, books, records, record keeping, business expenses, profit and loss and generally the transactions conducted by c pty ltd.
b. the husband retains company (defined below) being the economic engine of the parties, significant either as:
i. a financial resource, or ii. a factor towards of a significant earning disparity.
12. during the relationship the parties made liberal use of the funds received into the company through which the husband conducted his business. its account appears to have been treated essentially as the bank account for the family.   the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.
35. it will be recalled that s 79(2) provides that “[t]he court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order”. section 79(4) prescribes matters that must be taken into account in considering what order (if any) should be made under the section. the requirements of the two sub-sections are not to be conflated. in every case in which a property settlement order under s 79 is sought, it is necessary to satisfy the court that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.
42. in many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife. no less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. that is, any express or implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing arrangements of marital property interests were sufficient or appropriate during the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the ending of the marital relationship. and the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4).   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last - mentioned property, whether or not that last - mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last - mentioned property, whether or not that last - mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.
financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage:
contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage.
the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent.
effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage.
relevant section 75(2) factors
the age and state of health of each of the parties: s 75(2)(a)
the income, property, and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment: s 75(2)(b)
whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years: s 75(2)(c)
commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support, himself or herself, and a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain: s 75(2)(d)
the responsibilities of either party to support any other person: s 75(2)(e)
the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia, and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party: s 75(2)(f)
standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable: s 75(2)(g)
the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant: s 75(2)(ha)
the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration: s 75(2)(k)
the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent: s 75(2)(l)
if either party is cohabiting with another person – the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation: s 75(2)(m)
the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under s 79 in relation to the property of the parties, or vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viiiab in relation to a party to the marriage, or a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii): s 75(2)(n) and s 75(2)(naa)
any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provide, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage: s 75(2)(na) and s 79(4)(g)
any other matters: s 75(2)(o)
the terms of any binding financial agreement binding on the parties to the marriage and the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage: s 75(2)(p) and s 75(2)(q)
any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage. 79(4)(f)
any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage: s79(4)(g)
just and equitable
division of non-superannuation assets:
non-superannuation assets of the husband:   motor vehicle 1 $12,000 (2) interim distribution of sale proceeds $177,000 (3) household contents – including bbq, tools and equipment $7,500 (4) nab account – ...37 $1,000 (5) c pty ltd $0 (6) hobby gear, equipment, tools, equipment $3,000 (7) h bank account $161
total: $200,661 husband liabilities:
husband liabilities:   nab credit less: $9,927.29
net total: 190,733.71 non-superannuation assets of the wife:
non-superannuation assets of the wife:   motor vehicle 2 $5,000 (2) nab account – ...07 $2,000 (3) interim distribution of sale proceeds $177,000 (4) household contents $7,500
net total: $191,500
division of superannuation assets:
total: $176,177.45
total: $13,725
his honour: okay. tell me this: is it really equal? are the parties’ entitlements in the super fund really equal or we don’t know? what’s mr fermanis: i can’t tell your honour off the top of my head what the members’ balances for the fund his honour: yes, that’s what i will need to know. mr fermanis: yes. i can’t off his honour: because you’ve got a member balance, as it is sitting here, at fifty-fifty and possibly not, probably not. mr seow: well, i don’t know either and it seems unlikely. (transcript, 3 august 2023 page 23, line 1-14).
associate: dated: 2 may 2024
dated: 2 may 2024