last updated: 17 march 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
little & thornton (no 2) [2021] fedcfamc2f 434
orders
the court orders that:
1. pursuant to ss 202-203 of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 (cth), direct that the parties be allowed to appear and to make submissions before the court by video and audio link.
2. direct the parties be at liberty to provide a copy of this order and these reasons for judgment to a state court.
3. direct the parties be at liberty to provide a copy of this order and these reasons for judgment to the department of families, fairness and housing.
4. all previous parenting orders, applications and responses be discharged.
parental responsibility and live with arrangements
5. the applicant father have sole parental responsibility for the child, x born in 2019 (x or the child) and for decisions about major long-term issues including with respect to the child’s health, medical treatment, education and schooling, provided that when making any such decisions he must: a) follow the recommendations of x's appropriate treating doctor(s) or health care provider(s), and b) consult with the mother and also take her views and wishes into consideration.
a) follow the recommendations of x's appropriate treating doctor(s) or health care provider(s), and b) consult with the mother and also take her views and wishes into consideration.
6. x live with the father with effect from the making of this order.
7. pursuant to section 68p of the family law act 1975 (cth), the father’s parents, his partner, ms m, and any other members of the father’s immediate family be permitted to be present during x’s time with him.
8. declare that to the extent the parenting arrangements specified in this order are inconsistent with any existing intervention order, this order takes precedence over any such order and that intervention order shall, to that extent, be invalid.
changeover
9. for the purposes of this order, changeover shall occur as agreed between the parents in writing, and failing such written agreement, changeover shall occur: a) at suburb n mcdonalds, b) upon x commencing pre-school, on school days, at that pre-school centre, c) upon x commencing school, on school days, at that school.
a) at suburb n mcdonalds, b) upon x commencing pre-school, on school days, at that pre-school centre, c) upon x commencing school, on school days, at that school.
c) upon x commencing school, on school days, at that school.
spend time
10. x spend time with the mother as follows: a) with effect from 5:00pm on friday, 3 december 2021, from 5:00pm on that day until 5:00pm on sunday, 5 december 2021, b) at fortnightly intervals thereafter, from 5:00pm on friday until 5:00pm on sunday, c) as otherwise agreed between the parents in writing.
a) with effect from 5:00pm on friday, 3 december 2021, from 5:00pm on that day until 5:00pm on sunday, 5 december 2021, b) at fortnightly intervals thereafter, from 5:00pm on friday until 5:00pm on sunday, c) as otherwise agreed between the parents in writing.
c) as otherwise agreed between the parents in writing.
11. when x turns three (18 may 2022), she spend time with the mother as follows: a) with effect from 5:00pm on friday, 20 may 2022, from 5:00pm on that day until 8:00am on monday, 23 may 2022, b) at fortnightly intervals thereafter, from 5:00pm on friday until 8:00am on monday, c) as otherwise agreed between the parents in writing.
a) with effect from 5:00pm on friday, 20 may 2022, from 5:00pm on that day until 8:00am on monday, 23 may 2022, b) at fortnightly intervals thereafter, from 5:00pm on friday until 8:00am on monday, c) as otherwise agreed between the parents in writing.
12. from 2024, x spend time with the mother as follows: a) with effect from 5:00pm on friday, 24 may 2024, from 5:00pm on that day until 8:00am on tuesday, 28 may 2024, b) at fortnightly intervals thereafter, from 5:00pm on friday until 8:00am on tuesday, c) as otherwise agreed between the parents in writing.
a) with effect from 5:00pm on friday, 24 may 2024, from 5:00pm on that day until 8:00am on tuesday, 28 may 2024, b) at fortnightly intervals thereafter, from 5:00pm on friday until 8:00am on tuesday, c) as otherwise agreed between the parents in writing.
special days
13. x spend time with the parents on their birthdays as follows: a) on the father’s birthday, ms m’s birthday, o, p and q’s birthday, from 5:00pm the evening prior until 5:00pm on the day of the birthday, b) on the mother’s birthday, or the birthday of her new child, from 5:00pm the evening prior until 5:00pm on the day of the birthday.
a) on the father’s birthday, ms m’s birthday, o, p and q’s birthday, from 5:00pm the evening prior until 5:00pm on the day of the birthday, b) on the mother’s birthday, or the birthday of her new child, from 5:00pm the evening prior until 5:00pm on the day of the birthday.
14. x spend time with the parents on her birthday as follows: a) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, with: the father, from 5:00pm the evening prior until midday on the day of the birthday, the mother, from midday on the day of the birthday until midday the following day, b) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, with: the mother, from 5:00pm the evening prior until midday on the day of the birthday, and the father, from midday on the day of the birthday until midday the following day.
a) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, with: the father, from 5:00pm the evening prior until midday on the day of the birthday, the mother, from midday on the day of the birthday until midday the following day, b) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, with: the mother, from 5:00pm the evening prior until midday on the day of the birthday, and the father, from midday on the day of the birthday until midday the following day.
15. x spend time with the parents on christmas and boxing day as follows: a) in 2021, and each alternate year thereafter, with: the father from midday christmas eve until midday on christmas day, the mother from midday christmas day until midday on boxing day, b) in 2022, and each alternate year thereafter: the mother from midday christmas eve until midday christmas day, the father from midday christmas day until midday on boxing day.
a) in 2021, and each alternate year thereafter, with: the father from midday christmas eve until midday on christmas day, the mother from midday christmas day until midday on boxing day, b) in 2022, and each alternate year thereafter: the mother from midday christmas eve until midday christmas day, the father from midday christmas day until midday on boxing day.
16. x spend time with the parents on new year’s eve and new year’s day as follows: a) in 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, with: the mother from midday new year’s eve until midday new year’s day, the father from midday new year’s day until midday on 2 january, b) in 2023, and each alternate year thereafter, with: the father from midday new year’s eve until midday new year’s day, the mother from midday new year’s day until midday on 2 january,
a) in 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, with: the mother from midday new year’s eve until midday new year’s day, the father from midday new year’s day until midday on 2 january, b) in 2023, and each alternate year thereafter, with: the father from midday new year’s eve until midday new year’s day, the mother from midday new year’s day until midday on 2 january,
17. x spend time with the father from 5:00pm the evening prior until 5:00pm on father’s day and, to the extent necessary, other arrangements for spend time pursuant to this order are suspended where they are in conflict with this order.
18. x spend time with the mother from 5:00pm the evening prior until 5:00pm on mother’s day and, to the extent necessary, other arrangements for spend time pursuant to this order are suspended where they are in conflict with this order.
communications & non-denigration
19. the parents limit all communication between them in relation to x’s care, welfare and development, save for in the event of an emergency, to messages in the our family wizard application.
20. subject to paragraph 5 of this order, both parents be at liberty to communicate with any doctor, health care professional or childcare service that x attends and service of a sealed copy of this order shall act as an authority to do so.
21. both parents: a) keep the other advised at all times of their current residential address, email address and mobile telephone number, and notify the other in writing within 24 hours of any changes to any of these particulars, b) provide to the other, 30 days’ written notice of any proposed change to their residential address, c) immediately notify the other of any medical emergency, illness or injury requiring treatment or consultation with a medical practitioner or allied health professional suffered by x whilst she is in their care, d) keep the other informed in writing as to any medical professional or other qualified person that they propose to consult in relation to x, e) advise the other in writing of any appointment they make for x so that the other may attend if they wish, with notice to be provided within 24 hours of the appointment being made, and f) list the other as next of kin and provide their details to any medical practitioner.
a) keep the other advised at all times of their current residential address, email address and mobile telephone number, and notify the other in writing within 24 hours of any changes to any of these particulars, b) provide to the other, 30 days’ written notice of any proposed change to their residential address, c) immediately notify the other of any medical emergency, illness or injury requiring treatment or consultation with a medical practitioner or allied health professional suffered by x whilst she is in their care, d) keep the other informed in writing as to any medical professional or other qualified person that they propose to consult in relation to x, e) advise the other in writing of any appointment they make for x so that the other may attend if they wish, with notice to be provided within 24 hours of the appointment being made, and f) list the other as next of kin and provide their details to any medical practitioner.
22. both parents are restrained by injunction from: a) abusing, insulting, belittling or otherwise denigrating the other or members of the others’ family to, or in the presence of x, or allowing x to remain in the presence of any third party engaging in such behaviour, b) questioning x about the personal life of the other parent, c) discussing these proceedings and these orders with x, d) passing messages through x or involving x in any form of dispute between them, e) consuming illicit drugs or consuming alcohol beyond the drink-driving limit whilst x is in their care, f) inflicting any form of corporal punishment on x or allowing any third party to do so, and g) both parents shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person from doing any of the above in x’s presence or hearing.
a) abusing, insulting, belittling or otherwise denigrating the other or members of the others’ family to, or in the presence of x, or allowing x to remain in the presence of any third party engaging in such behaviour, b) questioning x about the personal life of the other parent, c) discussing these proceedings and these orders with x, d) passing messages through x or involving x in any form of dispute between them, e) consuming illicit drugs or consuming alcohol beyond the drink-driving limit whilst x is in their care, f) inflicting any form of corporal punishment on x or allowing any third party to do so, and g) both parents shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person from doing any of the above in x’s presence or hearing.
injunctions & ancillary orders
23. until 18 may 2031, the parents be restrained whether by themselves, their servants, or agents or howsoever otherwise from removing or attempting to remove or causing or permitting the taking or sending of x from the commonwealth of australia.
24. it is requested that the australian federal police give effect to paragraph 23 of this order by placing x’s name on the airport watchlist in force at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia and maintaining her name on the airport watch list until the later of a court order for its removal, 18 may 2031 or with the consent of the parents in accordance with paragraph 26 of this order.
25. the marshal and all officers of the australian federal police and of the police forces of the various states and territories are requested and hereby empowered to take all steps as may be necessary to give full effect to paragraph 23 of this order.
26. paragraphs 23-25 of this order shall not prohibit the taking or sending of x from the commonwealth of australia to a place outside of the commonwealth of australia where that is agreed to occur with the consent of the parents in writing and transmitted to the non-travelling parent provided such consent is first: a) authenticated in the manner prescribed by with regulation 13 of the family law regulations 1984 (cth), and b) supplied to the australian federal police not later than 28 days prior to any intended date of departure.
a) authenticated in the manner prescribed by with regulation 13 of the family law regulations 1984 (cth), and b) supplied to the australian federal police not later than 28 days prior to any intended date of departure.
27. unless otherwise agreed in writing, neither parent may travel with x to any country or territory that is not a signatory to the convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction signed at the hague on 25 october 1980.
28. each parent inform the other with no less than 60 days’ written notice if they intend to travel with x, unless they are travelling for an emergency (such as the serious illness or death of a relative).
29. each parent, when intending to travel interstate with x shall provide to the non-travelling parent, an itinerary containing the details of their proposed travel plans, with such itinerary to include at least: a) the destination(s), b) the arrival and departure dates and times, including flight numbers, if applicable, c) the address(es) of where x will be staying, and on what dates, and d) a contact telephone number for x.
a) the destination(s), b) the arrival and departure dates and times, including flight numbers, if applicable, c) the address(es) of where x will be staying, and on what dates, and d) a contact telephone number for x.
30. unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing, neither parent may travel with x for a period in excess of 3 weeks during a single trip.
31. if the travelling parent’s proposed travel plans with x interfere with the non-travelling parent’s time with her, the non-travelling parent is entitled to make-up time for all time that the child would otherwise have spent with that parent.
32. should any dispute arise in relation to any proposal or application: a) to suspend, discharge or vary any provision of this order, b) to travel whether intra-state, inter-state or internationally,
a) to suspend, discharge or vary any provision of this order, b) to travel whether intra-state, inter-state or internationally,
the parties be restrained whether by themselves, their servants, their agents or howsoever otherwise from making any application under the family law act 1975 (cth), the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 (cth) or otherwise until they have first participated in mediation to resolve any such dispute.
reasons for judgment
judge a kelly
introduction
1 these reasons for judgment explain my conclusions upon a further amended initiating application brought under the family law act 1975 (cth) (act) respecting the parties’ only child, x born in 2019 (x or the child).
2 much of the background and procedural history of this matter may be gleaned from little & thornton [2021] fcca 1946 where interim orders were made on 20 august 2021 providing for a resumption of the child’s spend time with her father and allowing progression of overnight time arrangements with x and the applicant father. as the respondent mother had opposed the father’s interim application for a change of residence on the substantive basis that an issue of this magnitude should not be determined other than at trial, i acceded to that submission, doing so after hearing evidence from a clinical psychologist, dr c who confirmed observations he made in the course of a consultation held on 20 may 2021 that the attachment between the respondent and child was disturbed and dysfunctional. such was the concern of dr c that he asked his colleague, dr h, to validate his observations.
3 in august 2021, interim orders were made that the child spend time with her father each sunday and overnight each tuesday and during the day each friday. contextually, for the reasons given in little & thornton [2021] fcca 1946, an order was made that in default of compliance with those interim spend time arrangements, either party would be at liberty to apply on short notice including for an interim application for a change of residence pending trial. the final hearing which had been listed in august 2021 was vacated and that hearing was relisted with priority in november 2021 so as to afford the parties yet a further opportunity to prepare.
4 in summary, i have concluded it is in the child’s best interests that she should live with her father and, in accordance with dr c recommendations, spend time with her mother. an application for orders that the child may relocate with her mother to queensland is refused. the parties have no realistic ability to share parental responsibility and in those circumstances i have also concluded the father should have sole parental responsibility, subject to a proviso as proposed by the father for him to consult with the mother before making decisions.
the parties’ proposals
5 by his further amended application filed on 11 october 2021, the father advanced a claim for sole parental responsibility for the child and that she should live with him and his partner. orders were sought pursuant to s 68p of the act to enable the applicant’s parents, his immediate family and partner to be present while the child was in his care. an array of ancillary parenting orders were also proposed.
6 by her further response filed in august 2020, the mother sought orders for sole parental responsibility. by her amended response filed on 23 august 2021, she proposed final parenting orders be made for equal shared parental responsibility, but permitting her to relocate the child’s residence to queensland with effect from 1 january 2021 (sic) and to live with her. in consequence of those proposed orders, the mother advanced certain spend time proposals.
7 by their outlines of case, each party reiterated the final parenting orders that they sought. at the end of closing submissions a further direction was made that the parties file a joint minute of proposed orders indicating where the parties were agreed and disagreed on all issues. when they did so, it was clear each party adhered to the relief they had claimed at trial.
background & procedural history
8 for ease of reference the procedural history as set out in little & thornton [2021] fcca 1946 at [6]- [33] has been replicated in these reasons for judgment as necessary. as the parties chose to identify features of their case when providing a chronology of events in their respective outlines of case, it is also as well to include each of those events if only for the purposes of drawing attention to the issues as articulated and considered by one or other of them to be of particular importance or relevance. for the avoidance of doubt, the inclusion of such events does not necessarily involve acceptance of the fact or event being alleged. of no lesser significance is the parties’ decision to have made the allegation in this parenting proceeding and in particular where the interim reasons drew attention to the parties’ obligation to approach the final hearing in a way that was very much focussed upon the interests of their child.
9 the parties are relatively young parents whose relationship was of brief duration before their unplanned pregnancy was discovered. after commencing their relationship in 2018 they never lived together but often spent most nights together. like many people in their mid-twenties, each of the parties lived with their respective parents. the parents’ families are not close.
10 after the father instituted the proceeding the parties reconciled briefly. each of them accepts their separation is now final. demonstrably, they cannot share parental responsibility.
11 the applicant father now aged 30 years, is in good health and works as a tradesman. he is self-employed and has two employees as assistants. he has re-partnered with ms m who is mother to three older children with another partner from whom she is now separated but who, commendably, enjoys good parenting relations with her ex-partner.
12 the respondent mother, now aged 27 years, is also in good health but has not re-partnered. the respondent has recently delivered another child but does not know the father’s identity.
13 it appears the mother’s parents immigrated to australia from the country j in the early 1990s, shortly before the birth of the mother who is the third of four siblings (each being brothers). the mother also has an extended family in the country j. upon the father’s evidence, the maternal parents return to the country j at reasonably frequent intervals and appear not to like living in australia where they do not have many friends. so too, the father deposes that the mother is not particularly close with many friends.
14 as observed in cross examination and closing address, the parties’ relationship was of such brevity that they were never truly afforded an opportunity to get to know one another. so too, neither party had much in the way of an opportunity to know the other’s family.
15 the parties agree that their relationship began in mid-march 2018. after a few months, the applicant, then aged about 26 years, travelled overseas on a holiday for two months, before returning to australia when the parties’ relationship resumed.
16 when the respondent discovered she was pregnant, this news was confronting to the applicant who deposed to being in a state of real confusion for some weeks. he raised with the respondent whether they wished to terminate the pregnancy. this was not something which the respondent wanted to occur. i accept the applicant’s evidence that when her views were made clear, he was supportive of her decision the parties should keep the child. by contrast, after the failure of the relationship, the mother’s communications with the father indicate her deep-seated resentment of his earlier suggestion that the pregnancy be terminated.
17 the respondent alleges that in february 2019 she observed the applicant to be visibly affected by cocaine and to having acted in an erratic and forceful manner. on her case, and at a time when she was some six months pregnant, the parties had non-consensual intercourse.
18 on the respondent’s case, the parties first separated in march 2019, some three months before the birth of the child. it is the applicant’s case that the parties first separated shortly after the child’s birth (doing so in early june 2019).
19 x, who was born in 2019, is now aged two years and six months. she is in relatively good health but has been the subject of constant attention as described below.
20 a picture emerged that the respondent was both inconsistent and assertive in the stance she adopted on issues such as whether the applicant would be permitted to even attend the birth of the child. by the father’s account, the parties were excited for the arrival of the child and he attended most medical and related appointments (save where work commitments intervened), including at the birth of the child after which the father stayed almost every night with the mother and child and assisted in the care of their infant.
21 the father gave an account of highly conflictual relations both with the mother and her family including allegations that: during the mother’s pregnancy both she and her parents threatened to take the child to the country j with the maternal grandmother stating that she could make both the mother and child “disappear”, the maternal father objecting to the father’s desire to be a part of the life of the child stating “you will get nothing”, the mother stating “if you ever do anything wrong, i’ll go to country j and you will never see me or the baby again”, and, on 5 june 2019, at a time when the father was cuddling the child and stated to her “we’ll have to visit your grandparents at your other home soon” (this provoking an unexpected, eruptive response in the mother who yelled and screamed stating “this is x’s only home”, resulting in the father leaving the maternal home so as to avoid further conflict).
22 on 19 june 2019, the father filed an initiating application seeking interim and final parenting orders including orders for an airport watch list order, equal shared parental responsibility, for the child to live with her mother and spend time and communicate with him on three days in each week together with ancillary orders pursuant to ss 11f and 62g of the act. an application for abridgment was refused by a registrar. the proceeding was commenced in the combined circumstances that the mother withheld the child from the father for a number of weeks and where the father was contacted on 18 june 2019 by police who advised him that an intervention order had been made against him ex parte.
23 on 2 august 2019, a certificate was issued pursuant to s 60i of the act.
24 on 7 august 2019, the mother filed a response indicating her agreement with the father’s proposal for equal shared parental responsibility (both on an interim and final basis) and for the child to spend time with her father three times per week but to do so at a child contact centre and on terms that “the mother be present for the duration of the time spent with x until such time as x no longer requires hourly and/or on demand breastfeeding.” one order sought by the mother was that each parent encourage x to have a meaningful and positive relationship with the other parent while in their respective care.
25 the proceeding was listed for mention on 14 august 2019 in another docket and on that date interim orders were made, by consent, for the child to spend time with her father for two hours, three days per week, and for the parties to undertake family counselling.
26 in september 2019, the parties reconciled and in november 2019 the proceeding was discontinued. shortly afterward, on 8 december 2019, an ivo was made final and operative for a period of 12 months. this order was made, by consent, without admissions.
27 by may 2020, the parties had separated on a final basis and on 9 june 2020 the mother made application to vary the ivo. a full ivo was made against the father on an ex parte basis.
28 parenting arrangements deteriorated such that the mother unilaterally withheld the child from spending time with her father which endured for a period of five months until october 2020.
29 on 8 july 2020, the father filed a further initiating application in which he refined the relief being sought both on an interim and final basis. on 10 august 2020, the mother filed a further response. while the father adhered to the stance he had adopted at the outset (of the parties having equal shared parental responsibility), the mother’s position changed, to an application for sole parental responsibility. in a similar vein, by the time of trial in november 2021, the father sought sole parental responsibility.
30 it is the respondent’s case that in mid-july 2020, the father committed a breach of the ivo as varied, on an ex parte basis, for which charges were laid by victoria police. upon the information provided by the mother to dr c on 15 february 2021, the breach of the ivo occurred in circumstances where, although contact was allowed through mediation, the father had contacted her by email which she promptly relied on as constituting a breach of the ivo.
31 in a further escalation of the matter, allegations of drug use were raised by the mother. in an effort to address the issue, to his credit, in september 2020 the father took the initiative of voluntarily undergoing hair follicle testing which produced a negative result. during the course of the proceeding mutual allegations of cocaine use were raised and, in turn, orders were made for mutual drug screening which, by august 2021, produced clear results for both parties.
32 by his outline of case filed for the purposes of the first directions hearing, the father addressed the mother’s claim for his time to be supervised, it was, he said, entirely unwarranted.
33 by her outline of case, at that time, the mother contended that there was “very limited scope for functional joint parental responsibility.” in addition the mother relied upon the child’s attachment to her as supporting a conclusion for the child to have primary residence with her. the mother also relied upon allegations respecting, it was said, the father’s erratic behaviour, history of drug use, family violence including such violence in the presence of the child, this being said to constitute exposure to psychological harm of a kind which justified the child only spending time on a supervised basis with her father. upon her case, it was also necessary for changeovers to occur without contact between the parties. those matters notwithstanding, the mother submitted her orders were necessary to ensure the parties’ child would have a meaningful, but safe, relationship with both parents.
34 on 19 october 2020, the proceeding was the subject of a first directions hearing and on that date it was set down for final hearing on 19 august 2021 with orders being made regulating the orderly preparation of the proceeding for trial including for the parties to undergo psychological assessment and for a family report by dr c.
35 further orders made on 19 october 2020 provided for the child to live with her mother and spend time with her father, twice per week, supervised, at a family contact service. while the proceeding was adjourned for a mention on 15 march 2021, in the interim, orders were made for the parties to attend upon dr c for the purposes of a child inclusive conference.
36 having regard to the matters raised by the parties’ initial affidavits, and including the notices of risk, it was necessary to proceed cautiously and incrementally including by making of orders for the child to initially spend time with her father on a supervised basis and, after an s 11f report was obtained from dr c in february 2021, a transition to unsupervised time. i note that dr c’s 11f report had also recommended the paternal grandparents should be able to spend time with the child. this did not occur until orders were made. the problematic nature of the absence of any such agreement arose from the fact that the respondent’s ivo against the paternal grandmother meant that she had to leave her home on occasions of the child’s spend time with her father. again, the ongoing failure to respond to requests may be noted.
37 dr c prepared two reports and gave evidence on 19 august and 9 november 2021. like mr b, i found dr c’s reports and evidence to be of considerable assistance. it is useful to locate the reports or events involving dr c within the overall narrative of other evidence and i have adopted that course. in summary, dr c: (1) furnished an s 11f report dated 19 february 2021 having conferred with the parties and their child a week earlier, (2) responded to requests initiated by the respondent’s lawyers on 11 may 2021, (3) consulted with the parties for a second time on 18 may 2021, (4) then initiated a joint conference with the parties’ lawyers that was held on 20 may 2021, (5) concluded that upon the available data he would prefer to furnish an oral report to the court in august 2021, (6) received further documents pursuant to the interim orders made in august 2021, (7) prepared a family report, (8) was provided with further documents before giving evidence, (9) gave evidence at trial, (10) assisting dhhs, and other child support agencies, having taken those initiatives upon forming the view the child’s attachment was dysfunctional and disturbing.
38 on 15 february 2021, the parties attended upon dr c for an s 11f conference. contextually, the recommendations made in this report included an increase in time with the father, for transition to unsupervised spend time and for the child to be able to spend time with her extended paternal family. the mother was vehemently opposed to those recommendations. she was also deeply challenged by dr c’s observations in may 2021, as validated by his colleague dr h, that the attachment between mother and child was disturbed.
39 on 9 march 2021, lawyers presently acting for the mother filed a notice of address for service.
40 upon the whole of the evidence, including by his trial affidavit, i am satisfied the applicant has taken steps to be actively protective and being involved in providing care for the child.
41 on 11 march 2021, the respondent’s lawyers wrote to dr c with respect to the opinion expressed in his s 11f report that it was important for the child to be spending longer times with the applicant in a less structured environment. his attention was drawn to certain suggested behaviours of the child and the father and the communication difficulties which inhered in the parties’ relations. the jointly appointed expert was asked whether it would not be preferable for the child to spend less time with the father but to do so more frequently. additionally, the addressee was asked to furnish reasons if he disagreed with this proposal.
42 on 15 march 2021, the parties’ consent order for supervised spend time was discharged and consent orders were made for the child to spend time three days each week and on other special occasions. the mother opposed the father’s application to commence unsupervised time with the child. ancillary parenting orders were made including for a family report to be prepared before 1 july 2021 and for psychological assessments by dr b to be supplied to dr c. orders were also made for each of the parties to undergo hair follicle testing.
43 despite those orders, on 11 may 2021, the mother suspended the child’s time with the father. this suspension occurred shortly prior to a proposed consultation with dr c.
44 in the period march – may 2021, the mother raised allegations in relation to the care of the child while she was with her father. and over this period, changeovers became increasingly difficult (and on the evidence, took up to 2 hours on one or more occasions with the child refusing to be released from her mother). by contrast, it was common ground there was no difficulty when returning the child at the end of time.
45 on friday, 14 may 2021, the respondent’s lawyers wrote, notifying the father of recent instructions to seek orders to relocate with the child from melbourne to queensland. the issue, which on the father’s case, had never been flagged at any earlier stage was grounded upon an assertion that “since our client engaged her initial legal representatives, she was of the mistaken understanding that she could not relocate interstate.” this advice was said to have been given to the father’s lawyers on the stated basis that it was intended to provide their letter to dr c on monday, 17 may 2021 and so, it was said, to afford the father an opportunity to respond before they did so. contextually, the parties were scheduled to consult with dr c on tuesday, 18 may 2021 for the purposes of a family report. the lateness of the respondent’s notice as to relocation was a complete shock to the applicant.
46 on 18 may 2021, the parties attended with their child upon dr c. for reasons that are described below, at his initiative, on 20 may 2021, dr c held a joint teleconference with the parties’ lawyers, doing so for the essential purpose of discussing his concern arising from observations he had made (and had asked his colleague, dr h to validate), in relation to a troubling and dysfunctional aspect of the child’s attachment to her mother. this concern was the catalyst for dr c’s reluctance to furnish a written report at that time for the august 2021 final hearing and his preference to give oral evidence at that hearing.
47 one matter raised by dr c was the desirability of the mother and child consulting a bonding and attachment specialist. while the mother immediately reported this recommendation to the maternal health service she did not obtain an appointment of this kind. while some difficulty of obtaining such appointments may be accepted, upon her evidence in cross examination it is clear the respondent had and has no intention of seeking assistance of this type. by the time of trial, it was the collective view of mr b and dr c that the respondent’s personality profile formed part of the explanation for her resistance to do so. relatedly, an available inference is that the respondent was also resistant (to a greater or lesser extent) to consulting with each of mr b and dr c. while the respondent eventually consulted mr b, following the observations made by dr c on 18 may 2021, she would adopt the twofold stance that she would not attend a further appointment scheduled by dr c and purportedly withheld her agreement for the consultation to proceed without her.
48 on 5 june 2021, the father was psychologically assessed by mr b.
49 on 10 june 2021, the lawyers representing the mother wrote to dr c as to whether it would be premature for the parties to attend upon him at that time and in circumstances where they had done so on 18 may 2021 and dr c had conducted a joint teleconference with the parties’ lawyers two days later. by email sent on that date, dr c conveyed his view that it was his preference to give oral evidence at the hearing listed for august 2021, but absent agreement between the parties he felt it may be appropriate to seek clarification from the court. as dr c would explain at the hearing in november 2021, he did not consider himself entitled to ignore orders which provided for the provision of a family report in a timely way.
50 on 21 june 2021, mr b wrote stating that there had been no contact from the mother for her psychological assessment and that this silence was to be seen in the context of her agreement (as at 3 june 2021) to attend such an assessment. regrettably, although the mother continued to depose to her willingness to attend on mr b, this had not yet occurred as at august 2021. the mother deposed to communications with mr b and appeared to suggest he has not had availability, or had cancelled particular appointments. following the interim hearing in august 2021, the mother attended upon mr b who produced a report.
51 dr c notified the parties’ lawyers of appointments to consult with them and the child for the purposes of the family report which had been ordered. the father gave an account of his attendance on dr c on tuesday, 22 june 2021 and that he did so in circumstances where on friday, 18 june 2021, the mother’s lawyers wrote advising dr c and the father’s lawyers that she would not attend upon dr c on the appointed date and, remarkably, “does not agree for it to proceed without her.” despite orders made in august 2021, including for the provision of all relevant documents (and the reasons for the interim decision) to be supplied to dr c and mr b, counsel for the mother relayed the apparent surprise of his client and instructors that dr c had proceeded to prepare a final report for the purposes of the final hearing listed for priority in november 2021 when she and the child had not attended upon him.
52 although the child’s time with her father had been suspended for the period 11 may – 17 july 2021, such time resumed on 18 july 2021.
53 by mid-july 2021, the parties flagged that logistical issues were being encountered which may render compliance with orders for trial preparation more difficult than had been anticipated. of greater concern, the applicant’s solicitor stated that for a significant period the father’s time with the child had been suspended and that the mother had introduced, without any notice, a suggestion of relocation being in issue. the parties approached chambers before the proposed final hearing in august 2021 and sought to vacate that hearing, the matter was listed for mention in order that the court could obtain a more detailed appreciation of the issues that were in dispute. despite the parties’ intimation that the matter could simply be “adjourned off” and re-fixed for another hearing, a direction was given requiring the parties to attend on 19 august 2021 to explain the lack of real progress.
54 on 5 august 2021, the father filed an amended initiating application seeking interim orders for a change of residence for the child so as to live with him and spend time with the mother. further, a series of ancillary orders were sought to facilitate that the mother attend for assessment by mr b and other matters including a report pursuant to s 69zw of the act. the application for interim relief for a change of residence arose from essentially four overlapping matters: ongoing lengthy suspensions of time which, on the father’s case, were wholly unjustified, ongoing failures by the mother that, on the father’s case, involved her unjustified non-compliance with court orders, including by not following recommendations of jointly appointed professionals, observations made both by dr c (and, again, on the father’s case, validated by his colleague, dr h), and, matters raised by the victorian child protection service which were also of a concerning nature.
55 both parties filed further affidavits for the august 2021 hearing. by his affidavit made on 5 august 2021, the father telegraphed that dr c had indicated a preference not to conclude his family report at that stage but instead to provide an oral report to the court and for the parties at the mention on 19 august 2021. dr c’s proposal was consistent with his initial retainer as a joint expert to conduct a child inclusive conference and provide a memorandum. mr lethlean of counsel for the applicant properly submitted that where a child inclusive conference has been held and a memorandum provided, the author of the report will commonly provide an oral report for the court’s assistance. the adoption of that course was opposed by dr ingleby. dr c’s reports in this matter have been of real and significant assistance.
56 on 19 august 2021, submissions were received from counsel as to the appropriate course to be adopted on that date in relation to the father’s interim application for a change of residence. with the assistance of counsel it was possible to identify a range of matters which collectively might promote the prospect that the real issues in dispute in the proceeding were identified and properly prepared for the purposes of the trial. as stated, the court was able to accommodate the child’s best interests by the orders made on 20 august 2021 including for the conduct of a final hearing at the earliest available date. although counsel were directed to formulate a joint minute and to provide it after the luncheon adjournment, regrettably, the direction became the vehicle for further disputation. moreover, the minute as drafted did not address a number of the issues that had been raised in the course of submissions.
57 dr c gave an oral report to the court and the parties upon outstanding issues as detailed above. submissions advanced on behalf of the mother identified any number of reasons why, it was said, the question of overnight time should be deferred until the final hearing.
58 it was common ground that the child had not spent nearly 200 hours of time with her father despite agreement for spend time being reached and recorded in earlier interim orders. surprisingly, the respondent was also initially resistant to accepting a need for make-up time. it appeared as though the respondent’s preference was simply to proceed without any account being taken for the child’s lost time pursuant to prior orders. i accepted dr ingleby’s submission it could not be said the mother was in breach of those orders (in circumstances where no finding has been made whether or not a reasonable excuse existed for suspending the child’s time with her father). in any event, it was hoped the impasse would be rectified by her agreement on 19 august 2021 to allow for an increase in time to make up for the time which had been lost. dr c’s evidence was that an extension of spend time on a particular day ‘by one hour’, was “clinically neither here nor there”. however, the extension of spend time was opposed on the basis of a statement by dr c in february 2021 that he generally supported an extension of time but felt the issue should be explored later in 2021, august 2021 was apparently not late enough, despite the extensive withholding that had occurred. patterns of resistance to the child spending time unsupervised with her father or time overnight and unilateral suspension of time had clearly emerged in the period february – august 2021.
59 of no lesser concern were allegations that changeover has become increasingly problematic. it was alleged the process was being dragged out by the mother and that this was occurring despite recommendations made by dr c in his february 2021 memorandum. without delaying unnecessarily on the issue and as observed in the course of submissions, the evidence showed the mother’s lawyers were engaged in ongoing communications with dr c seeking further recommendations including opinions as to “additional steps” and doing so undercover of a suggestion that this is necessary to assist the parties and the child at changeover so as “to assist her not to be distressed.” those matters were reiterated in the mother’s affidavit. as observed in the interim reasons of august 2021, without having conducted a granular examination of that issue, there seemed to be some basis for inferring that it was thought to be easier to abdicate parental responsibility by passing it over to independent experts and lawyers rather than recognising the need to deal with the matter between themselves as parents. standing back, the events occurring in the period march-june 2021 might also be seen as reflecting a design to secure a variation of the march 2021 orders for unsupervised time.
60 the spectre of increasingly problematic relations at a parental level was also apparent from the father’s evidence that changeover was now taking over 40 minutes to effect and that after the child had spent time with her father, text messages were being sent by the mother which, in seemingly and increasingly strident terms, suggest, subjectively, the mother considered the child was not excited to spend time with her father or happy to do so and that it was for the father “to address the elephant in the room. the emotional and physical state you return x to me.” the father exhibited the mother’s text messages reflecting her views on this issue.
61 by the time of the interim hearing in august 2021, it was beyond argument the mother regarded changeover as being extremely difficult and involving the child in experiencing “ongoing, palpable distress” such that the child clung to her and refused to go to the father. her evidence portrayed a situation in which “the father would forcibly grab x and leave the changeover location” with the child crying and screaming in his arms. it seems the mother perceived herself to be the subject of criticism by the father about her conduct at changeovers. the mother’s affidavit made on 17 august 2021 at [8], also described a series of behaviours in the child which she considered to evidence her regression in development.
62 the mother contended that the child returned to her home after having spent time with the father in an exhausted state. as observed, some insight to the problem and its nature may be gained from the mother’s evidence that “i have many photos and videos of x returning to my care completely limp and exhausted after spending time with the father.” that the mother perceived it to be necessary or appropriate to dedicate resources to taking and recording many photos and videos to document those matters is notable.
63 it is unnecessary to recount the ongoing difficulties which have occurred in securing the attendance of the parties with their child, including for urgent reportable consultations with dr c since may 2021. as observed in the course of the interim hearing in august 2021, accepting the proceeding is to be conducted in the manner authorised by div 12a of the act, it was a matter for the parties whether their evidence was in proper, sequential and cogent form.
64 during the interim hearing in august 2021, dr c gave evidence. dr c provided to the court, the parties and their legal representatives his opinion that what he had observed in the mother was what he considered to be a disturbed and dysfunctional attachment to the child of a kind which he had never seen over the course of his career. he recounted that the behaviours were of such a scale that prompted him to bring his colleague, dr h, into his rooms so as to validate and confirm his observations. as observed in the reasons following the interim hearing, objectively, it was instructive that an experienced practitioner formed a view of this kind such as to initiate dr c’s decision to request mr h to come into his rooms and, in effect, to “see for yourself” the immediate and profound change in the child during transition in the changeover from the mother to the father. dr c described the child as being fraught at the prospect of not being with her mother and “within less than 20 seconds” becoming settled and of a completely different child in the care of her father (that is, once the mother had been physically removed from the room). the starkness of these behaviours is evident.
65 dr c was clear that some of the most useful data that could be available to him in his evaluation of the parents, the child and their relations and his opinions upon the matter, was being able to observe a child and the interaction of that child with each of his or her parents. at the interim hearing, dr c was unqualified in his support for an immediate transition to some overnight time and regarded that this too would be valuable data, both for the purposes of completing his report and for the evidence which could be given at the forthcoming final hearing. in light of the orders made in august 2021 for a resumption of spend time, counsel for the mother sought to place particular weight in the ‘improved’ nature of the parenting arrangements from that time until the final hearing. as observed in the course of submissions, on one view the supposed improvement may have been attributed to the fact that an interim hearing was held which resulted in the court acceding to the mother’s submission that a change of residence should not be considered on an interim basis but that the proceeding should be set down for final hearing with priority in november 2021.
66 the matters addressed by dr c at the mention in august 2021 informed the interim orders made at that time as set out in the reasons for judgment. in consequence of orders made on 20 august 2021, the final hearing listed to commence on that date was vacated, the proceeding was relisted for hearing with priority on 8 november 2021 and the respondent directed to file an amended response identifying the precise final parenting orders being sought. the latter order was made in circumstances where the respondent had recently indicated her desire to apply for orders permitting her to relocate with the child from victoria to queensland.
67 as the respondent had not yet attended upon mr b for evaluation a direction was made that she do so as soon as was reasonably practicable. relatedly, orders were made that both mr b and dr c be provided as soon as was reasonably practicable with a copy of the order made on 20 august 2021, the interim reasons, the parties’ trial affidavits, outlines of case and joint minute of proposed orders together with copies of their respective reports with the proviso that “for the avoidance of doubt, the supply or non-supply of any such document should not fetter or impede mr b or dr c in the completion of their reports at such time as they may decide but is intended to facilitate their further consideration of the matter so as to assist them in providing more efficiently their evidence at the final hearing of the proceeding.” other procedural orders were made.
68 with effect from 3 october 2021, the parties ceased using professional services for the purposes of assisting in changeover and delivery of the child from the mother to the father.
69 ultimately, on 30 october 2021, the mother attended mr b for psychological evaluation.
70 on 4 november 2021, dr c released his family report.
71 notwithstanding the interim orders, somewhat surprisingly, counsel for the respondent mother expressed surprise that dr c had furnished his report in circumstances where the mother had not consulted upon him, either alone or with the child (but as her lawyer’s had advised she would not agree to his report being completed in her absence). contemporaneous documentary and the expert evidence would suggest the respondent was averse to consulting with dr c, particularly having regard to the contents of his first report, his observations in may 2021 and his bonding recommendation. yet the respondent’s outline of case appeared to attribute to the applicant responsibility for her failure to have made arrangements to consult with dr c.
72 to similar effect, the respondent criticised the applicant’s lawyers for failure to provide either dr c or mr b with the parties’ trial affidavits or material in a timely way. likewise, criticism was made of the applicant’s lawyers for the failure to supply dr c with a copy of mr b’s psychological assessment of the respondent. this issue was addressed at the commencement of the final hearing by a direction which required the material be supplied to those experts and to defer their conclave until the afternoon of the second day of the hearing. further criticism was then made in the respondent’s outline of case, seemingly upon the basis that although dr c had indicated in may 2021 his view that it would be premature to prepare a family report (and he would prefer to give oral evidence at the hearing in august 2021), the family consultant had nonetheless proceeded to furnish a final report. a difficulty in the criticism was that the court had accepted the respondent’s submission no final hearing should occur in august 2021 and instead listed the final hearing for priority in november 2021 – a course that was not opposed at any stage by either party.
73 insofar as the respondent submitted “the court cannot rely on dr c’s report”, the basis for this submission was never explained. it is rejected. the court is concerned with the child’s best interests as a paramount consideration and as informed by the principles in div 12a of pt vii of the act as to the manner in which it is authorised to conduct proceedings where parenting orders are sought. reliance was placed upon dr c’s earlier expressed view that it was premature to provide a family report. i have reflected upon that submission. as discussed during the hearing, in a real sense evidence in a parenting case is never ‘complete’. equally, it is settled that the opinion evidence of an expert does not assume determinative or dispositive status and comprises but a part of the totality of the evidence upon which a case is to be decided. parties are given opportunities to prepare and adduce evidence which it is for them to take.
74 an order was made that the mother and child attend upon any one of a number of nominated bonding experts as may be approved and recommended by dr c. this did not occur.
75 the material relied upon by the parties was set out in their respective outlines of case and was augmented by materials produced on subpoena and tended as a joint bundle. for the purposes of the final hearing the respondent mother issued subpoenas addressed to the victoria police, ms r (region bb health child & youth mental health service (cymhs)) and the proper officer of maternal and child health coordinator suburb s city council. each of those subpoenas was framed in terms seeking records relating to each of the father, mother and child. documents were produced in obedience to those subpoenas.
76 the final hearing was conducted over three days from 8-10 november 2021. in the course of closing addresses, the parties were agreed in filing a joint tender bundle, thereby reducing the total volume of documents to be examined for the purposes of this judgment.
77 before leaving the procedural history it is convenient to recognise the court received considerable benefit from the manner in which counsel conducted the case.
notices of risk
78 on 18 june 2019, the father filed a notice of risk stating, in effect, the child was not at risk save for the prospect of being removed from the commonwealth by the mother or her family.
79 by a further notice of risk filed on 8 july 2020, the father alleged the mother exposed the child to family violence, which allegations had been reported. the particulars to the father’s notice bear repeating for the intensity of the language which, he alleges, is being directed at him:
the father alleges that the mother has verbally abused him in front of the child, including but not limited to screaming at the father words to the effect “you wanted to murder x”, “you’re the worst person i have ever met” and “fuck you”. the mother has sent the father abusive text messages, including swearing and name-calling such as “cunt”, “chicken shit”, “deadbeat dad”, “fucking lieing piece of scum and “fuckn moron”.
the father alleges that the maternal grandfather (who lives with the mother and child) has made threats to harm the father, including but not limited to threats to “shoot” and “fight” the father.
the father alleges that the maternal uncle has sent abusive text messages to the father, including but not limited to words to the effect “you are a fucking pig if you want to keep the child you wanted aborted and dig the mother who loves you and saved x’s life” and “fuck you cunt” and “you are a superstar in your own lunchbox.
for the rest of the world, you are a broke addict that can’t get his shit together and lives with mummy and daddy” and “bogan wanker”
particulars relied upon by the father as constituting circumstances which posed a risk to the child were that the mother had undiagnosed and untreated mental health issues. otherwise, the father’s more recent notice made other allegations of risk.
80 by her initial notice of risk filed on 7 august 2019, the mother made allegations that the child had been, and was at risk of being, abused by the father, basing those matters upon allegations the father had committed family violence by threatening and acting aggressively toward the mother in the presence of the child. complaints were raised of the father having had sexual intercourse with the mother in february 2019 which had caused her pain and of having “frequently engaged in abuse of drugs and alcohol.”
81 by her further notice of risk filed on 10 august 2020, the mother reiterated these allegations. further allegations were made that the father had attempted to run over the mother in his vehicle and that his constant family violence had variously been reported to her maternal health nurse, mabels, victoria police and its socit unit since june 2019. allegations were made that the father had untreated mental health issues, abused alcohol and frequently used cocaine.
departmental reports
82 in light of the parties’ initial notices of risk, the department of health & human services (now department of families, fairness and housing) did not provide a response: act, s 67z. however, upon the parties filing further such notices, on 21 august 2020, the department filed a response advising that it would take no further action, concluding the issues raised, including the level of acrimony, were best resolved in this court. the parties’ respective allegations as to mental health issues and drug use could not be verified including allegations that the applicant father had “undiagnosed and untreated mental health issues and frequent substance misuse including alcohol and cocaine.”
83 having regard to other matters raised in the parties’ recent affidavits in august 2021 an order was made pursuant to s 69zw of the act for the department of families, fairness and housing to provide a detailed report as soon as was reasonably practicable.
84 on 27 august 2021, the department described in detail its protective involvement over four phases: 21-27 june 2019, 10-21 august 2020, 12 april-3 may 2021, and, 13 may 2021.
85 as to the first such phase of protective involvement, at this time it was stated “ms thornton has made unsubstantiated allegations of assault and abuse by mr little. it is believed ms thornton did this in an attempt to seek revenge against mr little.” it was further reported that the paternal grandparents had expressed concern that ms thornton is housebound, not opening windows and not leaving her room, and exhibited irrational and paranoid behaviours. in light of the current ivo which had full exclusionary conditions, the report was closed at intake.
86 concerning the intake in august 2020, allegations were made of family violence by the applicant toward the respondent, it being noted proceedings were now on foot in this court. upon investigation, neither parent had an identified criminal history. multiple unsubstantiated allegations had been made (however, with a current investigation by socit being on foot). again, the investigation was closed at intake.
87 as to the intake on 12 april 2021, a reporter had informed the department of the change in the child’s time with her father from supervised to unsupervised and it was “reported that x doesn’t want to go for contact with mr little and that she will scream and cry.” photos of alleged injuries were supplied to the department and further reports of the extent of the child’s adverse behaviours were detailed. a copy of dr c’s 11f report was obtained and the matter was discussed by the department with him, it being recorded that the child did not need contact to be supervised but the father acknowledged the present distress occurring at change over. on this occasion also, the case was closed at intake.
88 a report was made on 13 may 2021, informing the department of the child’s regression in speech, infant like breast feeding and clinging behaviours. upon investigation the department noted “ms thornton appeared to have a high level of anxiety around x having contact with mr little and that this needed to be explored further to assess if ms thornton’s anxiety is being projected onto x.” a reported gash to the child’s skin was also noted.
89 the department identified its communications with an enhanced maternal child health nurse, a facilitator at a support playgroup (who first observed marked regression when the child was aged 19 months), and a child & youth mental health service. it concluded “child protection assessed both mr little and ms thornton as responsible for harm for not protecting x from emotional or psychological harm.” it closed the matter on the basis relevant professionals were working with the family to provide support to address the child’s anxiety.
90 in conclusion, the department stated “parental acrimony and its demonstrated impact on x’s emotional and psychological well-being has been identified as a primary concern” adding “allegations related to x being subjected to physical abuse by mr little have not been verified.” it concluded, “in order to address their conflictual relationship and for access/contact between x and both parents to be facilitated in a way that is conducive to the well-being of x and promotes enhancement of her relationship with both parents.”
intervention orders
91 one aspect of the proceeding has been the issue and a series of applications for renewal of certain intervention orders. as stated, such ivos were first sought by the respondent against the applicant and then, one or other of the grandparents. later, the applicant requested the police to issue an ivo against the maternal grandfather. another aspect of the ivos was allegations made against the applicant of his drug and alcohol use.
92 upon her complaint, victoria police investigated an alleged sexual assault on the respondent.
93 i have considered the parties’ trial affidavits in relation to the various ivos and i regard this series of events as informing consideration of the child’s best interests in a number of ways.
94 in addition to the ivos which were issued, the respondent also relied upon an extract from a victoria police record that the respondent had attended a police station where she was arrested regarding the use of a telecommunication device to harass, it appears, the paternal grandmother. although it is less than clear, it also appears the maternal grandfather, who had been detained, was released and that when the applicant was updated on these developments he had been “upset due to thornton not being charged.”
95 having regard to the evidence now adduced at the final hearing i have reflected whether some of the interim orders made in relation to these issues have been applied for where the necessity for doing so was open to question.
96 in light of certain interim intervention orders that had been applied for by the respondent with respect to the paternal grandparents, an order was made pursuant to s 68p of the act permitting those grandparents to be present during the child’s spend time with her father.
leap records
97 from the materials relied upon by the parties produced on subpoena by victoria police (leap records), i note the following.
98 as agreed by the respondent mother in cross examination, on 10 may 1999, the maternal grandfather was charged with counts of recklessly causing injury and intentionally causing injury and unlawful assault which, she agreed, involved an offence committed by her father against the maternal grandmother (i.e. his wife). these charges arose from offences alleged to have been committed on 8 may 1999 during a domestic dispute between the maternal grandfather and grandmother involving the husband having punched the wife to the left eye causing laceration, swelling and bruising with the husband being arrested and bailed. a community-based order was made for a term of 12 months also conditioned upon completion of an anger management course. relatedly as concerns the maternal grandfather: (a) further counts laid on 11 february 2000 (of unlawful assault and assault by kicking) were struck out and withdrawn, (b) a further report was made arising from conduct alleged to have occurred on 23 march 2012 in which the maternal grandmother called 000 in consequence of an escalating dispute between the maternal grandfather and his son. no action was taken.  further counts laid on 11 february 2000 (of unlawful assault and assault by kicking) were struck out and withdrawn, (b) a further report was made arising from conduct alleged to have occurred on 23 march 2012 in which the maternal grandmother called 000 in consequence of an escalating dispute between the maternal grandfather and his son. no action was taken.
99 on 6 july 2020, the respondent made a complaint to police at suburb g alleging breaches of an interim ivo by the applicant said to have been committed on 1 july 2020 and constituted by his having transmitted emails to her which were noted to be long winded and mildly derogatory. the police record states the messages were not believed to constitute a breach of the ivo. this matter was taken up with the applicant father and he was recorded to have been very upset.
100 following a complaint made on 17 july 2020 of alleged contraventions of an interim ivo, a decision was approved to arrest and interview the applicant father to investigate the matter.
101 as at 8 june 2021, the applicant father had no prior convictions of any kind. on that date a charge of contravening an interim ivo was adjourned, without conviction for 12 months.
supervised contact
102 although it was not the subject of any submissions, i note that an affidavit made by ms l on 7 july 2021 exhibited the series of supervised contact visits undertaken at a family contact centre in the period 25 november 2020 to 11 march 2021.
103 nothing in those reports ground any reason to consider risk factors have arisen in relation to the father’s conduct or parenting capacity. observations include that from the outset the child demonstrated warm recognition and affection toward her father which was reciprocated.
104 without rehearsing all of the detail in these observational records, the father was invariably seen to interact both physically, verbally and emotionally with the child in a positive and appropriate manner and to assist the child in her interactions with others. moreover, the father was observed over several occasions to act protectively toward the safety of the child and to cater properly for her dress, nappy changes and feeding.
105 changeovers returning the child from father to mother were not attended by difficulty.
106 more problematic however, was a post contact addendum recording an entirely regrettable exchange between the contact supervisor and the maternal grandfather who asked her whether she “knew how bad the guy was?” upon being advised not to discuss the issues with her (but instead to raise them with the mother’s lawyers), was informed the mother had changed lawyers several times as they were not being treated properly because of their ‘origins’. undeterred, the maternal grandfather kept speaking to the supervisor and then followed her to her car. there, he was told not to say anything further. the supervisor then left. those matters were unchallenged and spoke loudly to the veracity of the matters addressed in the father’s more recent notice of risk as set out above. there is some evidence from the father of a history of deep antagonism being shown toward him by the maternal family including that the maternal grandfather had threatened to shoot him.
107 it may also be noted that in december 2020 (before the s 11f report), the mother communicated by email with the supervisor, proffering an explanation why the child would not be attending for supervised time, asking “what can be done to ensure the report will be accurate.”
108 on 18 january 2021, ms t, family contact service, filed an affidavit attaching an observational report produced on 17 january 2021 that documented x’s supervised time with the father on ten occasions from november 2020 to january 2021. the report described four occasions where the changeover of the child from mother to father took fifteen minutes or more and one occasion where changeover did not occur at all.
109 the observational report recorded similar encounters with father and child where, at times, after a delayed changeover (where the child was upset and clinging to the mother), the time with the child and her father soon became a warm and cheerful affair. the report detailed the father as being attentive to the child’s needs, such as bringing a variety of age-appropriate toys and books to play with and as being responsive to the child’s non-verbal cues.
mental health concerns
110 allegations were raised in relation to the mental health of each party.
111 although the applicant was persistently criticised during cross examination for having raised questions in relation to the respondent’s mental health, as observed by dr c in the s 11f report at [12] “she denied ever having been diagnosed with a mental illness, however throughout the conversation, acknowledged that she had struggled with her mood during her late teens, that she had been prescribed psychotropic medication (diazepam), and that she had accessed psychological treatment due to ‘ . . . having a bit of an eating disorder thing.’”
112 the applicant was taken to his notice of risk dated 18 june 2019 and from which he accepted he had disclaimed any allegation the child was at risk because of mental health, abuse of drugs and alcohol or serious parental incapacity of the respondent. contextually, the risk identified in that notice was grounded on an allegation the child may be removed from the commonwealth of australia “by the mother and/or the maternal family.” on the basis of the matters contained in the father’s initial affidavit, and the urgency with which the initiating application had been filed, i can at least understand the content of that notice. however, the applicant was not taken to his more recent notice of risk in which mental health was raised. relatedly, the mother’s first notice of risk eschewed concerns about mental health: see q.4. at this point, her concerns were focussed on family violence, alcohol and cocaine usage.
113 as occurs not uncommonly, the expression ‘borderline personality disorder’ was raised. such a condition, bears a clinical denotation indicating a severe mental disorder associated with extreme emotional, behavioural and interpersonal dysfunction. counsel for the respondent accurately put it that there was no diagnosis of a borderline personality disorder. but to have framed the issue in that narrow fashion did not exclude the matters raised above and more relevantly, an assessment of the parties’ natures as it may affect their parenting capacity.
114 a record produced by a maternal & child health centre dated 21 may 2021 provided a history given by the respondent to that centre that there was no history of mental illness. this report stands in contrast with the concession made by the respondent to dr c in february 2021.
115 these issues were addressed most effectively by mr b and dr c.
child inclusive conference – dr c
116 on 19 february 2021, dr c, who had been retained as a single expert furnished a memorandum following a child inclusive conference that was held on 15 february 2021 during which a clinical interview was conducted with each of the parents and observations were made of changeover with the child. the report identified the documents then provided to the expert.
117 in the course of recounting the background to the matter, dr c noted the parties’ differing accounts of the nature and quality of the relationship including allegations by the father that the mother was controlling and overbearing, forcing him to sever ties with his friends and family, while the mother contended the father to be prone to aggressive behaviours and included allegations of cocaine use in february 2019. allegations of sexual abuse as articulated by the mother were denied by the father who expressed shock and dismay at the allegation. further, the mother identified addictive tendencies in the father including of gambling and resulting in her being prevailed upon to lend him $6,000 for that purpose.
118 dr c noted mutual allegations of mental illness or instability by each of the parties.
119 dr c observed there to be no co-parenting relationship between the parties and considered there to be no suggestion the father had ever been aggressive or hostile toward the respondent mother during changeovers. he also observed that at this time it was the respondent who sought sole parental responsibility with the applicant seeking equal shared responsibility.
120 at the time of preparing his child inclusive conference memorandum, dr c identified three areas of immediate concern in terms of risk which may warrant consideration by the court being whether: (1) the mother behaved in an erratic, unstable and controlling manner, (2) the father had been verbally and/or physically abusive and physically aggressive toward the mother in the presence of the child (including the allegation that the father had attempted to run her over with a car), (3) the father had sexually assaulted the mother.
121 i have considered the data obtained by dr c upon interviewing each of the parties including the father’s emphatic denial of the allegations raised against him and the evidence he proffered of contemporaneous documentary exchanges in which the mother demonstrated affection toward the father immediately after the very time she claimed to have been sexually assaulted.
122 in terms of the mother’s erratic nature, the father recounted her difficulty with interpersonal relationships including at school and at work and identified that the mother had earlier obtained an ivo against a fellow student (and also against his mother). dr c recorded the father’s account that while the child’s time with him was progressing well, he acknowledged there had been some instances in which the child had struggled to separate from her mother and that the process of separation had become complicated, including with instances where the mother would “immediately breastfeed the child after a visit seemingly to exaggerate the reunification process for the child.”
123 from the father’s perspective, in february 2021 he wanted a good relationship with his daughter and for the following “i just want all of the lies to stop. i want ms thornton to be able to work with me, but to be honest, it’s got to the point where i don’t think she can.”
124 at interview, the mother impressed dr c as being nervous. she acknowledged a complete absence of communication between the parties. she expressed a distrust of the father and asserted his tendency to lie and to place the blame at her feet for anything that went wrong. when the allegation of sexual assault was raised by the mother, her affectionate text message of the following day was put to her for comment. her response seemed not to deal with the question being posed in that she replied “at the time, i wasn’t aware of what it was.”
125 dr c also noted another instance in which, while the mother had asserted the father being aggressive and threatening to take the child, “when pressed, conceded that she had actually snatched mr little’s phone as he was recording her mother, and it was actually mr little attempting to retrieve the handset from her.”
126 whilst allowing for the importance of the child developing a relationship with her father, at the time of interview the mother’s stance was that the amount of time being spent “it’s enough.”
127 insofar as the mother’s mental state was addressed it appears she acknowledged having struggled with her mood during her teen years and having used psychotropic medication that the mother said she had been prescribed after “having a bit of an eating disorder thing.”
128 dr c observed the child to be weary and reserved, often gravitating toward the mother and of refusing to separate from, and clinging to, her, and to be crying. attempts to separate the child from the mother were largely unsuccessful: [13].
129 dr c distilled the issues before the court and described the situation between the parents as having become entirely dysfunctional and as involving a substantial financial, emotional and social cost to each of them in which trust and goodwill had broken down entirely. communication in any meaningful way was non-existent and predicted to be irrecoverable. dr c found it difficult to envisage a scenario in which these parties could ever co-parent in a functional manner or discuss arrangements for their daughter in a collaborative way. he made a number of recommendations to assist them with useful strategies.
130 dr c emphasised (by the use of bold type), that he had not formed a clinical impression the child was at an unacceptable physical risk in the care of her father or that supervision was warranted. the mother’s allegations of aggressive behaviour impressed him as being cursory, disjointed and internally inconsistent. he accepted there may have been heated exchanges between the parties and observed, aptly, that this was entirely unsurprising in the dual context of a deteriorating romantic relationship and the stress, for new parents, of parenthood (potentially coupled with other, unhelpful, involvement by the parties’ respective families).
131 dr c concluded that as concerned the parties’ interaction, save for basic communication, it should be minimised and for changeover to occur by an indirect means either by a paid child contact service or an agreed third person. emphasis was placed upon the need to minimise distress to the child including by the mother lingering less (not longer), in the process and of avoiding counter-productive conduct upon reunification as by immediate breastfeeding. other solutions were proffered. dr c considered each parent should complete a mental health assessment before the family report was finalised.
132 dr c considered that in absolute terms he believed it important for the child to be spending longer periods with her father and for her to do so in a less structured environment including by being able to see her paternal grandparents and extended family. recommendations to this were made including for an increase in time toward the end of 2021.
health care and child & youth mental health service records
133 a large bundle of records was also produced on subpoena from a health care centre and which i have examined. while the parties highlighted particular entries which i have reflected upon, i do not consider it necessary or appropriate to provide a complete description of every entry in this body of material which span the period 20 may 2019 – 15 october 2021. the respondent was assisted by this health service over the period may 2019 – october 2021.
134 in addition, a large volume of documents was also produced by a child & youth mental health service (cymhs) from whom the respondent had also sought assistance over the same period.
135 my attention was drawn to particular records of matters addressed by the respondent with those services and the assistance which she had obtained from each of them. it is instructive to merge the matters revealed by these documents in chronological order. in doing so, i am conscious the records made by those respective services largely reflect information that had been supplied to them by the respondent (although in some circumstances the applicant was also consulted). it is also of assistance to locate dr c’s involvement in these unrelated events.
136 the first maternal health record of an attendance appears on 30 may 2019 when the respondent provided a history including the circumstances of the parties’ new relationship. the respondent reported the applicant, “her boyfriend comes to visit and is enjoying his baby girl”.
137 on 6-7 june 2019, the respondent made a disclosure to the maternal health service of family violence involving the applicant and his mother turning up unannounced at the maternal family home resulting in a call to police and an appointment to apply for an ivo.
138 neither party placed reliance upon any entries from the documents of the maternal health service in the period 20 june 2019 – 19 may 2021.
139 dr c’s 11f report issued on 19 february 2021 has been noted above. it will be recalled that by early march 2021 the respondent had retained the lawyers now acting in the proceeding.
more recent events – ‘gash’ incident
140 as became clear upon consideration of all of the evidence, the respondent was insistent that the transition from the child spending supervised to unsupervised time with her father should not occur and she was opposed to the making of such orders in march 2021.
141 by letter dated 1 may 2021 the respondent’s lawyers wrote to dr c seeking his advice whether the orders for unsupervised spend time were appropriate or should be varied. on 5 may 2021, dr c referred those lawyers to the recommendations in his s 11f report of february 2021 concluding that “until those options have been exhausted, dr c would not make any immediate variations to the orders.”
142 by the applicant’s account, matters continued to worsen at changeovers in early may 2021 and noted contemporaneous text messages including: “x is not excited to see you”, “you can’t blame your daughter for not wanting to leave with you”, “i find it very concerning that she isn’t happy to see you and doesn’t run to her daddy with a big smile on her face”, “mr little it is time to address the elephant in the room. the emotional and physical state you returned x to me”, and “i am scared of what state you return x to me next time you have her and i find it heartbreaking that no matter what happen (sic) to x whilst under your care you will predictably, deny, dismiss and lie about it.” by contrast, the applicant noted that when a changeover had occurred which did not involve the respondent (but one of her friends, ms y), it had taken less than five minutes and the child had quickly and easily settled into his care with the changeover being the smoothest that had occurred in some time. this led to attempts to adopt this means of effecting changeovers which the applicant described in positive terms and as leaving him in good spirits with a belief that a way forward had been found.
143 again, things deteriorated rapidly and soon required the assistance of dr c.
144 while the precise date and sequence of events is unclear, the respondent addressed an incident (which she identified as having occurred on 4 may 2021), where, after spending time with the applicant, the child was returned to her as follows “x sustained a large gash on her torso which left blood on her top. the father returned her to me wearing the bloodstained top and did not mention the gash. the wound had no dressing or antiseptic applied to it. she also returned with a severe mouth rash, a bruise on her back, and in an exhausted and limp manner.” the respondent exhibited photos of the child. i have examined those photos. if the respondent considered the injury to the child’s back to warrant the description of being a “large gash on her torso”, the respondent’s trial affidavit is somewhat notable for the lack of any account by the respondent as to the manner in which she dealt with the injury on that date. particularly is that so in the context where the trial affidavit otherwise provided accounts of the child being taken to hospital and treated by others for less immediately significant concerns.
145 instead, the respondent’s narrative moved from 4 may 2021 (being the date upon which the large gash was apparently first observed by the respondent), to 11 may 2021, on which date the respondent’s lawyers wrote to the applicant’s lawyers raising this and further concerns. this correspondence, which i infer was sent on instructions, recounts that the respondent first observed the gash and bruising “the following morning.” the fact of the injury formed the basis for criticising the applicant for a number of reasons: (1) not having mentioned the injury at the time of changeover, (2) not having cleaned the wound or dressed it with a protective covering. the letter proceeded to relate those failures to other issues involving the child having developed a chemical rash and a mouth rash. in sum, these allegations, together with accounts of the child being distressed at changeover and the manner in which (it was said) the applicant physically removed the child from the respondent at changeover, were relied upon to support an assertion that the father constituted an unacceptable risk of psychological harm such that the respondent would not facilitate changeover further in accordance with the orders. in conclusion, the respondent’s lawyers advised that it was appropriate for the parties to jointly engage dr c again for the purposes of immediate and urgent advice to ensure new strategies could be implemented to prevent or at least reduce the child’s distress. further, in all the circumstances of this case, it is not without some irony that the letter concluded:
we note that despite the previous order requiring a child inclusive family report to be prepared, there were no observations between x and your client due to x’s unwillingness to be with your client. this is clearly an issue that must be rectified in any further report prepared by dr c.
the suggestions in this letter that dr c had somehow failed to record observations of the interaction between the child and her father and that this was due to “due to x’s unwillingness to be with your client” was a reference to the consultation in february 2021.
146 the respondent deposed that by may 2021 she had made a decision to withhold the child until such time as considered advice was obtained “as to how to repair the relationship between her and the father. i agreed to supervised time at the play centre until such advice was obtained.” as may be observed, from the mother’s perspective, the problem which required repair was the relationship between the child and her father. independent expert opinion evidence would soon suggest the contrary was the case. the respondent does not accept this opinion.
147 by his trial affidavit the applicant denied the child had suffered any trauma in his care and stated that it was on 8 may 2021 he noticed a gash and some bruising on the child’s back which he had raised with the respondent later that day when returning the child to her. by his account, the mother denied any knowledge of the injuries but later accused him of being responsible (and of doing so by the letter dated 11 may 2021 from her lawyers).
148 it is also convenient to observe the parties’ essential lack of direct communication.
149 the applicant was subject to searching cross examination about the precise sequence of events and in particular whether it had been the applicant or respondent who had first raised the issue of the gash to the child’s back at changeover. it is clear the changeover concerned occurred later in the day when the child was returned to the mother. included in the court book was an electronic link to a recording said to be of the parties’ discussion at the subject changeover. counsel proposed the recording be played in open court. as the link was not functional, this was not possible. a request was made for the recording to be supplied on a thumb drive. when the drive was delivered, it emerged (and the applicant’s counsel confirmed by email that night) the respondent’s recording was of the morning, not afternoon, changeover. the following day, counsel for the applicant suggested the respondent’s audio recording of the afternoon changeover be played in open court. instead, a so-called ‘unofficial’ transcript of the recording was put to the applicant and from which he acknowledged the first person to have raised the gash had been the respondent. given the respondent’s focus on this incident, the report of it to external agencies and the cross-examination of the father, it is set out:
2:10 mother – hello x!
2:13 to 2:15 – indiscernible
2:18 – father – she had a sleep from about 1:00o’clock to about 2:30
2:21 – mother – hello baby
2:23 – father – bye bye
2:24 – mother – can i just ask you how she got that gash on her back?
2:25 – father – i was about to ask you the same thing. we looked at it this morning and went wheres that from? so i don’t know where it’s come from?
2:35 – mother – she didn’t have a fall or anything?
2:38 – nah well that’s the thing we looked at it today and went, that wasn’t there wednesday. so, dunno how it got there
2:45 mother – coz her top had blood on it
2:50 – father – i dunno, wouldn’t happen with me, we weren’t doing anything outrageous or anything
2:55 – mother – she wasn’t with anyone else?
2:57 – father – nah she was with me. i was gonna ask the same thing today, we look at it and went . . . . i would tell ya, i would write a message to you to going what happened, coz i wasn’t sure, if something like that does happen we need to be able to tell each other . . . it’s pretty decent
3:20 mother – it is pretty bad
i am prepared to infer the conversation was of about 70 seconds duration. i do not discern any direct allegation being made by the mother to the father that he had caused the child’s injury. the accusation, when it emerged for the first time, was contained in a letter dated 11 may 2021. however, it will be seen that the mother noted blood on the child’s clothing at the time of changeover. the unofficial transcript may be notable for the sequence of questions that were put by the mother to the father at changeover. for the avoidance of doubt, i am not prepared to draw any adverse inference arising from that consideration.
150 next, by her trial affidavit the respondent stated that in about mid may 2021 an enhanced maternal health nurse, ms u, had expressed concern about the child’s presentation “after spending time with her father and told me that she had reported the matter to child protection.” the respondent would rely upon the pending investigation by child protection as another basis for suspending the child’s time with her father. as would later appear, the twofold reasons warranting departmental investigation were the gash to the child’s skin and observations of markedly regressive behaviours by a professional play group supervisor.
151 by letter dated 13 may 2021, the applicant’s lawyers responded to the respondent’s letter dated 11 may 2021, disputing the respondent’s account of events and which i have considered. a detailed response was provided on the issue of the ‘gash’ to the skin, but i note it had taken until 11 may 2021 (being the day before the child’s next visit with her father), for the allegations to be raised concerning the gash injury and advice as to ongoing spend time.
152 after dealing with allegations of breach of orders for spend time (and alluding to the respondent’s failure to take up or implement recommendations made by dr c in february 2021 for a transition to unsupervised and overnight time), the letter also recorded alleged failures by the respondent or her lawyers to address: (1) directions for a co-operative approach to the preparation for a trial in august 2021, (2) failures to obtain a psychological evaluation of each party, (3) to no less than three letters in which the applicant’s lawyers sought a response to dr c’s recommendation that the child “should be seeing her paternal relatives as well.” i observe the recommendation made in february 2021 for the child to be able to spend time with the paternal family had not been addressed for some months.
153 the respondent’s lawyers also communicated with dr c and by letter dated 13 may 2021 expressed what were described as their client’s serious concerns in relation to the welfare and safety of the child and informed him their client had withheld the child on the basis of her view she was being “exposed to an unacceptable risk of psychological and potentially physical harm.” the correspondence noted the child’s apparent regression and palpable distress at changeover and restated the behaviours to which reference had been made in the letter sent on 1 may 2021. the respondent’s lawyers then contended that “the above issues are further compounded as a result of poor communication between the parties” before advising him their client had attended upon a maternal health nurse “who has also indicated to our client that she hold serious concerns in relation to x’s welfare if there is not a significant change in circumstances.” dr c’s urgent advice was sought.
dr c’s ongoing involvement
154 following the high level of activity in may 2021 as set out above, dr c became engaged in consultation or dialogue with each of child protection, cymhs, the maternal health service, the parties and their lawyers. i have set out an account of the observations made by dr c during the consultation held on 18 may 2021 including of the disturbed and dysfunctional nature of the attachment between the child and mother and the recommendation for them to consult a bonding/attachment specialist. a point emphasised by dr c was that the child’s transition from a state of distress in the care of the mother quickly settled once she was in the care of the father. dr c explanation of his clinical views are below.
155 the respondent gave an account of her consultation with dr c on 18 may 2021 and provided a narrative which, on one view suggested the child’s negative behaviours had only begun from march 2021 after orders were made for a transition to unsupervised time. by her account, while in dr c’s rooms the child held her leg tightly but began crying once she had been removed from the respondent’s leg. she deposed that the child did not walk to her father and that the respondent had had to peel herself away and wiggle herself from the room with the child all the while screaming and crying.
156 the applicant also gave his account of the events occurring upon consultation with dr c and provided his description of the difficulties experienced in effecting changeover between the respondent and child. after noting that dr c had called in his colleague dr h to observe the child’s behaviour with her mother, the applicant stated his account of the advice received from dr c and that “she is a completely different child with you.”
157 some account of the matters discussed by the parties’ lawyers during their joint consultation with dr c on 20 may 2021 were set out in the respondent’s trial affidavit and included: there was no co-parenting relationship – the parties were parenting in isolation, changeovers which were problematic, were exacerbated when they were prolonged, the respondent’s concerns about the child’s regression were genuine, the child was observed to interact well with her father at dr c’s rooms, the attachment between the child and respondent was disturbed, the respondent demonstrated an inability to soothe or settle the child,  in response to the question whether the respondent had been justified into spending time, dr c had replied, in effect, “it was a difficult issue as my concerns were genuine, but it was not a matter of simply ‘kicking the can down the road’”.
the applicant also provided his account of the observations and recommendations conveyed by dr c to the parties’ lawyers in the joint tele-conference held on 20 may 2021. no useful purpose is served by identifying the differences in the parties’ accounts.
158 of more relevance is that on the date dr c provided those recommendations to the parties’ lawyers, the applicant immediately contacted a professional supervision service that could facilitate professionally supervised changeovers and, that despite providing those details to the respondent, no reply was received. the applicant in the course of dialogue with a child protection worker also made attempts to lift the current suspension of the child’s time. by the applicant’s account, the child protection worker had formed the view the child was regressing and while concerns were held in relation to the respondent, no concerns were held regarding an immediate recommencement of time by the child with her father.
159 on 20 may 2021, the respondent contacted her maternal health service by text stating that dr c wanted her to attend “a bonding clinic because he believes i have an unhealthy bond with x.” after a detailed consultation with the mother the following day the service recorded the respondent reported the child “appeared to be slowly returning to her old self.”
160 a record produced by the maternal child health service dated 21 may 2021 provided a history that was given by the respondent to that centre including an assumption that it was the applicant’s lawyers who had arranged the referral to dr c and that the respondent had given an account of the parties’ conflictual relationship and the mothers referral for ivo assistance. the nurse’s record also recounted concerns arising from observations apparently made by a play group facilitator with respect to the child’s regressive behaviours.
161 from the records below, i am prepared to infer that dr c had conveyed to caseworkers at the maternal health service and cymhs, his observations made on 18 may 2021 and his opinion that the attachment between mother and child was disturbed and dysfunctional.
162 by contrast, on 21 may 2021, a child health nurse with the enhanced maternal health nurse, ms u, transmitted an email to ms r at cymhs, suburb v stating:
i also have no concerns in regard to the attachment between ms thornton and x.
also, there have been no concerns re attachment in maternal and child history over the last two years, and ms thornton attended all arranged visits with mch service. (emphasis added)
it seems implicit ms r had expressed to ms u her view she had no concerns in relation to the attachment between the respondent and child. ms u shared those views.
163 the views expressed by the nurse above, may be contrasted with those of dr c arising from his observations of the respondent and child on 18 may 2021 (and as i infer, as validated by his colleague, dr h, on that date), which served as the catalyst for dr c to initiate a joint conference held on 20 may 2021 with the parties’ lawyers. when it is recalled that dr c had engaged in consultation with these caseworkers, an available inference is that his observations of a disturbed and dysfunctional attachment had been raised with them and that those caseworkers disagreed with those observations.
164 if it were possible, matters only deteriorated further. on 3 june 2021 the respondent’s lawyers eventually replied, advising of their instructions that the respondent would continue to suspend time and would not permit the child to spend any time with the father other than on a supervised basis until child protection had completed an investigation. those lawyers further advised of their instructions opposing the child spending any time with the paternal grandmother and also conveyed the respondent’s opposition to the family report proceeding. by this stage, the respondent had unilaterally withheld the child for an extended period.
165 on 11 june 2021, a child protection worker spoke with the respondent stating she had been told that the child’s time with the applicant should not be suspended on account of the child protection investigation, a statement that was later confirmed by child protection in writing. although the respondent addressed particular issues contained in the applicant’s trial affidavit, no opportunity was taken to address, qualify or contradict this evidence.
166 on 16 june 2021, a cymhs clinical assessment was made recording a medium risk arising from the likelihood the respondent was suffering “ptsd from her experiences with father.” further, it was noted the father was “seeking unsupervised access to the child via a forensic psychologist” and that “ms thornton has breached orders for father to have unsupervised access after concerns about the state x was returning to her in. marked regression in x’s development and increased distress in the time that x started to have access with her father. child protection case is open.” i infer the reference to a forensic psychologist was a reference to either dr c or mr b. the clinician does not seem to have been informed that both practitioners were joint expert appointments made by the parties.
167 the reference to child protection arose, not from the observation of a gash to the child back, but from observations of regressive behaviour when the child was in a supervised play group. child protection contacted dr c. i note when he was contacted by child protection, he referred the enquiry to this court for the purposes of obtaining a copy of his s 11f report.
168 even when, on 16 june 2021, the respondent’s lawyers were advised by child protection of the conclusion of the investigation and that no protective actions were to be taken, new conditions were stated by the respondent’s lawyers as limiting the manner in which spend time would resume. the issue continued to drag until time was resumed on 18 july 2021.
169 by letter dated 18 june 2021, the respondent’s lawyers wrote to dr c stating that their client “will not be attending the appointment on 22 june 2021 and does not agree for it to proceed without her.” while the respondent did not agree to do so, the applicant attended the appointment on his own, and at the time of completing his trial affidavit on 11 october 2021, he believed dr c had received no further communication from the respondent.
170 a record produced by the maternal & child health dated 30 june 2021 recounts the outcome of a zoom case meeting attended by a child protection caseworker, ms w, a clinician and senior mental health social worker with cymhs, ms r, and the family report writer and forensic psychologist, dr c. from this record, the caseworkers expressed concerns with respect to the child’s developmental delay and regression after access visits with the father and further stated “both practitioners express concerns for x and agreement that x’s regression obvious and cause contested by parents.” at this meeting, dr c told the attendees he would complete his assessment for the pending court hearing. it was also noted the respondent continued to withhold the child and that while he would complete his report, dr c was concerned both that the respondent was breaching access visits and concerned by the applicant’s behaviours. i note two other matters:
child caseworker stated that mr little has denied causing injury to x highlighted by [mother] re photos post x’s return to her from access with mr little.
cymhs will continue to support and assess [mother] re attachment and therapeutic intervention commenced.
i infer the respondent had supplied photos of the child to the caseworker.
171 separately, a progress note from the file of cymhs dated june 30, 2021 recorded in brief format the identity of the persons who had attended this meeting, their stated roles and that:
outcome was that cp will be closing as case is with the family court.
cp recommended that both parents have access to the child.
dr c felt that the aetiology of x’s regression was unclear and he did not witness distress from the child in his observation. he felt that both parents did not facilitate transition well and were somewhat “under resourced” in their parenting.
plan: cymhs to continue with treatment re parents child attachment and anxiety in both parent and child . . .
from this record it is apparent that the attachment and anxiety in both the mother and child had been well recognised, as had her regression. what was not entirely clear was the aetiology for that regression. the progress note concluded that weekly sessions were to be set up and that the father was offered a role in the child’s mental health treatment.
172 on 14 july 2021, ms r, recorded an entry following a discussion with the father who was grateful to have been contacted and had many questions: “he said that he had not seen x for two months and he was upset about it and also very worried about her.” ms r recorded his awareness of the respondent’s pregnancy, his concerns about her mental health and whether it was affecting her “he said that ms thornton doesn’t take things on board and that she and her family are not nice and are not social. . . . he is wanting a change in residency. he offered to be involved in treatment and assessment.” after discussing the clinical plan which included feedback at fortnightly intervals, as to how the child was going and an assessment after the outcome of court proceedings as to “what is needed for x’s mental health. mr little is happy with this plan. mr little was appreciative of how x is going.”
173 a cymhs clinical review (arising from contact with a general practitioner who had referred on 30 july 2021), signed by ms r addressed the following:
formulation: x is a 2 year old girl that was referred by ms u emchn after concerns were raised by supported playgroup facilitator noticed a marked regression in her development and becoming withdrawn and anxious about being separated from her mother. her mother, ms thornton also reported regression in her mood, play, speech and when interacting with family. she returned to breastfeeding frequently and co-sleeping with her mum and to waking often during the night. she reported that x appears sad and easily frightened. ms thornton presents with hyper vigilance, poor eye contact, and is scared of other people.
x’s father was perpetrated family violence to her mother while she was in utero and as an infant. this has impacted on ms thornton’s mental health and her confidence in parenting. mr little did not want the pregnancy to continue and when ms thornton refused a termination said that ms thornton was now owned by him. mr little now wants custody of x.
x’s decline in her mental health and regression coincided with her father having all day unsupervised access granted in march. her mother reported x returning with a bruise and an unexplained gash on her back. also with rashes, dirty clothes and increased crying. ms thornton stopped the access breaching family court orders. this access has resumed.
it is likely that the trauma ending side he has affected ms thornton’s parenting, the attachment relationship and the impact of family violence has effected both parent and child. the recent changes in access also seemed to coincide with x’s deterioration in mood and development.
ms thornton is a motivated parent who has support from her extended family. she is proactive in seeking support for x and is clearly a devoted and protective parent. x and ms thornton have engaged well and there has been a marked improvement in x’s mood and regression.
diagnosis:
rationale for ongoing treatment within cymhs for further 91 days: psychiatry consult, then review
recommendations: return to supported playgroup, dyad sessions, paediatric review in november
174 on 2 august 2021, ms r recorded an entry following a session held on 29 july 2021 at which observations were made of a play session with the child and mother. the clinician observed the child to play more confidently and to be less clingy including a capacity to play imaginatively but also noted a lack of eye contact and being unable to respond to her name as though “like her ears stop working.” . . . “more words today.” a doctor had apparently expressed concerns about asd and wanted to see the child again in november. the clinician seems to have explained to the respondent that poor eye contact and some rigidity may indicate features of asd but did not do so clearly. the clinician determined to leave this diagnosis to the medical practitioner and to “focus on building parent child relationship and reduction of anxiety. and also “to contact father to feedback impressions.” no hearing test is considered.
175 a record produced by the maternal & child health centre dated 3 august 2021 records that since the nurse had last spoken with the mother “things have taken a turn for the worst.” the respondent provided the nurse a detailed history of various complaints and behaviours observed with the child which was said to start before and continue following her time spent with the father. according to the record, the respondent’s lawyer had affirmed his support for the decision to withhold the child. the respondent asked the nurse to “come see x, write the letter advising what you think is best for x in regards to her time spent with mr little” and concluded “x was doing well while no contact was occurring. and as soon as they start, she is coming back destroyed.” from a record dated 10 august 2021, it appears the respondent continued to be engaged with cymhs and that the clinician, ms r, would provide “a letter of support in regard to maternal and child interaction.” she did so.
176 on 9 august 2021, ms r recorded an entry following a session held on 5 august 2021 with the father in which she reported: “he said that court is coming up in two weeks and he will be asking for changes in residency. he said that ms thornton was not fit to have x with her full-time. i reported to him that in the last few weeks i have seen good progress in x’s gaining confidence. less anxiety when attending the clinic. i am still not sure about her lack of eye contact or limited words and encouraged him to help her with this.”
177 by letter dated 16 august 2021, the respondent’s lawyers wrote to ms r at cymhs informing her of the hearing listed for 19 august 2021 and requesting information in relation to the child, her bond with the respondent together with the respondent’s mental health, parental capacity and any recommendations including any welfare concerns.
178 on 18 august 2021, ms r recorded an entry following a session held on 13 august 2021 with the father in which she reported that the child was animated, happy, confident and appeared relaxed, affectionate and familiar with her father who, it was considered, “tried hard to show he was a good dad. he talked about been frustrated that both families can’t get along and that he had a gap of not seeing x. i asked if he felt he needed parenting support and he said that he felt well supported by his partner and family.” later it was recorded that “i informed mr little i was concerned about her limited speech and poor eye contact and not hearing often so that she can’t be moved to another activity. i had no concerns during the session for x with mr little.”
179 on 25 august 2021, ms r recorded an entry following a session held on 18 august 2021 with the mother in which she reported upon the interim orders for the child to have overnight stays starting immediately. ms r, reported her observations upon meeting with the child including her initial happiness but that “x then started rubbing her face and began crying then looking very angry and started hitting me. she then became highly distressed and cuddling into her mum who tried to soothe her. again she started to hit me and then hit her mum. we ended the session . . .” the author made no record whether the child’s behaviours on that date were considered to reflect a disturbed or dysfunctional attachment with the mother.
180 by letter dated 18 august 2021, ms r responded to the request for a report made on 16 august 2021 advising the child had been referred by ms u, the enhanced maternal child health nurse who worked at the local council. she stated the child was observed to have become withdrawn at playgroup and that the mother reported regression “in her little daily living activities, severe separation anxiety, and deterioration in mood and enjoyment of previously enjoyed activities in early 2021.” after describing that the child had been engaged for a mental health assessment and treatment, ms r stated “x was diagnosed with separation anxiety. we were concerned with her level of anxiety seen in the clinic and home environment and with the re-emergence of breastfeeding, poor sleep and toileting difficulties.” ms r described the treatment plan and recommendations and that the respondent had been committed in attending eight sessions and further, “in the last four weeks i have observed good progress in the reduction of x’s anxious behaviours in the clinic as well as ms thornton’s anxiety about access arrangements. ms thornton has also reported a reduction in x’s anxiety at home and an improvement in daily living activities. i have observed that ms thornton is an attuned, proactive and loving parent and she is well supported by her family.” finally as to the applicant, ms r stated in conclusion “mr little was also committed to attending the clinic and was seen with x on 13th of august 2021. he was informed of the treatment plans and recommendations by phone before the session.” it is not known whether ms r’s letter dated 18 august 2021 had been written before or after the session that she held with the respondent and child on that date (as described above).
181 further, and notwithstanding the data recorded by her earlier, including the contents of her letter dated 18 august 2021 and her record made on 25 august 2021 above, on 12 october 2021, ms r made an entry that the service had not seen anything of concern in relation to parenting (except when ms thornton was stressed) and that this impacted on her parenting ability. after noting the applicant had asked whether a report had been produced, the progress note reads “cm felt that mr little wanted information that could be used in the next hearing that would provide information that suggests ms thornton’s parenting is not good enough. . . . final court hearing in 4 weeks.” equally, the record omits any reference to dr c’ observation that the attachment between the child and the respondent was considered to be disturbed and dysfunctional. nor was there reference to the child’s diagnosis of apparent separation anxiety. given the earlier involvement of these persons from may 2021 with dr c, this is notable.
182 on 15 october 2021, when the respondent attended with her newborn child at the maternal & child health centre, there was brief discussion respecting the “history and current situation with daughter, x’s father” and the support being provided by her parents.
183 my consideration of the matters above was undertaken in the context that neither party called either ms u or ms r to give evidence and each of them was explicitly content for the court to examine the subpoenaed records upon which each of them placed reliance.
parties’ evidence
184 although a number of affidavits were filed, only the applicant, respondent, mr b and dr c were called to give evidence and be cross-examined. this occurred in circumstances where the parties (quite appropriately), were content to rely upon the testimonial or other evidence as contained in other affidavits which i have also considered.
185 by way of overview, the parties provided an account of their relations which sometimes differed drastically. i have reflected upon the parties’ evidence on the manner of their presentation when giving viva voce evidence, particularly, where applicable, insofar as it stood in marked contrast to contemporaneous documentary communications. i was fortified in the views i formed of the father and mother, both from my own observations and the opinion evidence of the experts, mr b and dr c.
186 those experts were somewhat critical of the father, and i agree in their observation that each of the parties had contributed to the highly conflictual relationship they now share. i also agree the father was not slow to be critical of the mother where occasion arose. however, for my part i considered the father endeavoured to give his evidence in a candid and forthright manner, including that he was quite prepared to make admissions against interest as matters were put to him in cross examination. contrastingly, although the mother’s evidence bore a narrative which reflected many principles found in or underlying part vii of the act, for the most part i found her viva voce evidence to be quite unconvincing. as submitted in closing address, while the respondent presented with an agreeable demeanour in her affidavit and when giving evidence, there was an objective disconnection between her avowed desire to facilitate or support a meaningful relationship between father and child and her resistant behaviours.
187 likewise, the experts, who were not challenged as to their expertise, gave their evidence in an independent manner as i would have expected.
188 the following findings are based upon an analysis of the parties’ affidavits, viva voce and documentary evidence and the inferences which i consider are properly made. the matters set out below include both matters that were common ground, including from their outlines, and my findings of fact upon particular issues. matters addressed above in my summary of the background and history are incorporated in my findings.
189 where the parties had agreed upon a fact or circumstance in their affidavits or case outlines, i have taken account of that matter. where issues of dispute arose, i have addressed them separately. in deciding disputed issues of fact, i have applied the civil standard of proof to the resolution of that issue: evidence act 1995 (cth), s 140. the more serious the allegation, the more necessary it was that i took into account the gravity of the allegation in deciding whether it was made out: cf evidence act, sub-s 140(2), johnson v page [2007] famca 1235, (2007) flc 93-344, [72], briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336. where the evidence did not permit the court to make an affirmative finding either way on a particular issue, it is not bound to do so, and may find that the party which bears an evidentiary onus of proof has failed to discharge it: kuglioski v metrobus [2004] hca 34, (2004) 220 clr 363, [60]. given the parties’ tendency to debate the minutiae of their history, and having regard to their definition of the issues in dispute, in many cases it has not been necessary to decide, as a matter of probability, which of the parties’ allegations or counter-allegations are to be preferred. the court may well accept some parts of a witness’s evidence and reject other parts of it: jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78, (2019) flc 93-898, 78, [110] and cases cited. the court, in reaching a decision, is not required to refer to every piece of evidence or submission presented during a trial: bell & nahos [2016] famcafc 244. i have applied these principles in making findings upon the evidence adduced at trial.
190 the parties commenced a relationship in march 2018, did not live together but instead, often spent nights together sleeping in the homes of their respective parents.
191 in mid-2018, the father travelled overseas for a brief period. the parties’ relationship resumed in july-august 2018 and in the latter they discovered the respondent was pregnant.
192 from the mother’s perspective, the parties argued in march 2019 as a consequence of which she considered the relationship to have ended. the respondent recounted that the applicant used alcohol and cocaine and had a predilection for gambling (with the use of her money). it seems from the applicant’s perspective, the respondent was more concerned with objecting to the applicant spending nights out with his mates than with his use of alcohol and drugs. examples of text messages relating to these issues were exhibited by the respondent. those texts indicate the parties were in dispute about the frequency with which the applicant used cocaine which he described as using “once in a blue moon”. in addition, the respondent was critical of the applicant for drinking and gambling (the latter habit he said he enjoyed). the respondent, who had been essentially non-responsive to the applicant’s allegations that she too used cocaine acknowledged in her trial affidavit that she had done so but only on two occasions (and then only upon yielding to pressure from the applicant to do so).
193 despite this, the relationship continued in some form or other until early june 2019 when, on the father’s case, the parties separated. he contended the parties were reconciled between september 2019 and may 2020 but separated on a final basis in may 2020.
pregnancy
194 after returning from his trip, the parties’ relationship continued and the respondent discovered she was pregnant in about 2018. the pregnancy was unplanned and unexpected and occurred in circumstances where the parties’ relationship was already strained. on the father’s case the parties were financially insecure, still lived separately but the respondent had expressed an expectation, in effect, that it was for the man to go out and earn the money.
195 the applicant, who was in a state of shock about the pregnancy, raised the topic of an abortion with the respondent. text messages addressing this topic were also exhibited. during these exchanges the respondent acknowledged that she understood the discovery of their pregnancy was a huge shock and a huge life changing decision. the applicant seemed to express the view that it should be a 50/50 decision and resented that “i get no say.” the applicant also stated that he was feeling sick to his stomach and that it was all too much at the moment. he also stated “the truth is i’ll be there to support if it happens” and that “but only just found out and it’s driving me insane.” the parties agreed they wanted to find out the sex of their child. the applicant was challenged on evidence that during this period the respondent had been sending him upwards of 50 text messages a day. when a call for those messages was made, the applicant’s response was that he could not locate them, however, some support for his evidence was provided by exhibits -1 and -2 to the respondent’s trial affidavit.
196 although it is less than clear, the ambit of the text messages on this topic spanned the period 9-17 september 2018. the applicant’s evidence was, and i accept, that after recovering from his initial shock, he was fully supportive of the respondent’s desire to deliver the child. there was dispute whether the applicant had transmitted one of the text messages being relied upon.
197 evidence was also given in relation to the parties’ conflict upon whether the applicant would be permitted to be present at the child’s birth. text messages set out in the respondent’s affidavit spoke plainly of the applicant’s resentment at being excluded from the birth. another dispute concerned the child’s surname, whether it would be hyphenated and the order in which the surname of the mother and father might be used. the applicant’s evidence was that the respondent’s position on issues of this kind changed on an almost daily basis. the respondent contended the applicant’s mother became involved in disputes over the child’s name. by her trial affidavit, the respondent described the applicant’s mother as the ‘matriarch’ of her family. in turn, the applicant took umbrage at this description and in a reply affidavit stated that the description of his mother as the family matriarch was absurd.
unwanted sexual intercourse
198 the applicant confronted allegations that in february 2019 and again in january 2020 he had engaged in sexual intercourse with the respondent, doing so without her consent.
199 a medical certificate dated 17 february 2019, stated the respondent had attended with vulvular swelling for which no bleeding was observed and she was recorded to have a regular pulse of 70 bpm and blood pressure of 118/78. a certificate for one day off work was issued.
200 the applicant denied these allegations and in the course of an s 11f conference with dr c in february 2021 addressed the allegations directly. although the issue was not explored at all in the course of the parties’ evidence during the final hearing, as dr c observed, on at least one of these occasions on the day immediately after the alleged incident the respondent had transmitted a text message to the applicant in wholly affectionate terms. when this was put to her by dr c, her reply seemed to be almost non-responsive.
201 as noted, the respondent reported one or other of these complaints to the victoria police sexual offences and child abuse investigations team who duly investigated the matter. following the investigation, the applicant was told the matter would not be pursued due to a lack of evidence. ongoing difficulties with parenting arrangements ensued.
early parenting difficulties
202 following the birth of the child, disputes then arose in relation to spend time arrangements including whether the paternal grandparents could see their granddaughter. from the respondent’s perspective, the paternal grandparents preferred that the new parents would visit with their child to their home (where the parties had been accustomed to sleep on occasion) while she preferred that the paternal grandparents should visit her at the maternal grandparent’s home. somewhat incongruously, the respondent deposed “my family and i have not had a civil relationship with the father’s parents whatsoever, notwithstanding our attempts to have one.” quite why, in those circumstances, the respondent perceived the paternal grandparents would wish to visit at the home of the maternal grandparents was not explored.
203 from late may until early june 2019, the parties’ relations deteriorated. during this period, the respondent perceived the applicant had threatened her. in the result, she said that on 5 june 2019 she attended a police station and applied for an ivo. by this account, the applicant engaged in argumentative and disruptive behaviours toward her and the maternal grandmother (and which included one or both of the parties using their mobile phones for the purposes of filming the event and the respondent locking herself in a room).
204 the applicant provided a detailed response to the respondent’s account of this incident that i have considered. the respondent alleged that during this period the applicant described her to her mother as being “mentally ill”. the applicant denied ever having used that terminology but stated it appeared to him the respondent was struggling following the child’s birth. by his account, the applicant had attempted and offered to give the respondent a reprieve, including by taking the child to his parents’ home for an hour or so. the applicant deposed to a conversation with the maternal grandmother in which he suggested the respondent needed help but that the response he received from the grandmother was simply, “nothing is wrong.” he emphatically denied becoming aggressive or agitated during these exchanges and from his presentation in court i accept that by nature he is averse to confrontation. mr b made similar observations in relation to the father’s overall presentation and nature.
205 the respondent also related another incident on 5 june 2019 when, as she alleged, the paternal grandmother attended, uninvited, at the maternal grandmother’s home and told the grandmother that the respondent was “mentally ill and needed help” and was “not fit to be a mother”. to the extent it may be of any limited use, in a reply affidavit the applicant stated he had put these allegations to his mother and that she denied them.
206 on about 6 june 2019, the respondent met with her maternal nurse as a consequence of which she contacted a community legal centre, mabel’s, where she was advised to apply for an ivo.
207 the respondent also recounted incidents on 10 june 2019 involving the applicant sending a text message to her informing her he was coming to her house and that when he did so (some two hours later), she would not answer the door to him and that he left before police arrived.
208 as noted, an ivo was granted on 18 june 2019 on an ex parte basis. i observe, notwithstanding the events set out above, the applicant was the only person against whom the ivo was made.
209 within weeks of the delivery of the child and a day after the issue of an ivo, on 19 june 2019, the applicant commenced this proceeding. interim orders were made on 14 august 2019. shortly afterwards, the parties attended a psychologist in suburb g, they reconciled and resumed their sexual relationship. the proceeding was discontinued on 12 november 2019.
210 on the father’s case, between september 2019 and may 2020, he visited the respondent and child at the home of the maternal grandparents on an almost daily basis. by christmas 2019, he was spending numerous nights per week at the respondent’s home.
211 during this period, when he was not at work, the applicant shared parenting responsibilities with the respondent including by feeding, changing, bathing and attending to the child, particularly on the nights that he slept over. he recounted his enjoyment of reading to and playing with his daughter. he also recounted the activities the parties undertook as a family including by going out for brunch, away for weekends, visiting the zoo, hot springs and parks.
212 from the respondent’s perspective, by march 2020, she had no interest in any relationship with the applicant or seeking to reconcile with him. the applicant deposed that the parties’ relationship continued to experience difficulties and that the respondent refused to allow him to take the child to visit his family or friends, including by reason that “ms thornton’s relationship with my family was also an ongoing source of tension.”
spend time & changeover issues
213 the child’s spend time arrangements with her father have been constantly interrupted or unilaterally suspended by the respondent.
214 as concerned supervised spend time, the respondent described in adverse terms the manner of the behaviours of the paternal grandmother on these occasions and of the distress which the child experienced at these times. she also recounted an occasion on which the applicant brought to a supervised spend time session some “7 adults who passed x from person-to-person. x returned to my care that day unsettled, screaming and unable to fall asleep for hours on end. i took x to hospital that night and a paediatrician said she was overstimulated and potentially frightened from the event.”
215 the respondent’s trial affidavit set out in detail her account of conflictual dealings with the paternal grandmother. she relied upon an incident on 15 december 2019 where, as she stated, the child was returned to her after spending time at the father’s home. the respondent described the child as falling asleep, being limp and then that neither she nor her mother could detect the child to be breathing with the result that they dialled 000. she stated “the ambulance arrived and took x to suburb s hospital where the doctor diagnosed her as being overstimulated and this was her reaction. i tried to raise this with the father who denied anything wrong and told me words to the effect of ‘nan knows best.’” by his reply affidavit, the applicant observed he had been told nothing of the event for some weeks afterwards. the applicant stated that upon asking for an explanation why he had not been told earlier, the respondent had replied she was embarrassed, paramedics said the child was simply overtired.
x’s first birthday –2020
216 the parties’ relationship effectively ended on this date. the applicant exhibited a card written, i infer, by his mother and addressed to her granddaughter expressing the grandparent’s support, love and affection for her and gifts for the applicant to take to her. to this the respondent replied by text messages sent to the applicant and his mother and father respectively which i have read. in short, the respondent replied that she had thrown the toys in the bin (which she said, in cross examination she had not in fact done), and, with implicit reference to the child, said that ‘people’ didn’t need love from people who have strings attached and conditions.
217 having regard to the statement in this card that the grandparents would be ‘there for the child’, “no matter what happened” i infer the respondent took umbrage at this.
218 in the course of his viva voce evidence, the applicant said that as he was concerned it was then clear there was no possibility of a relationship between the respondent and himself.
text communications
219 the mother’s trial affidavit was replete with text messages and other accounts which appeared to illustrate the difficulties in communications between the paternal grandmother and herself. at all events, by 30 january 2020, the paternal grandmother sent a text message (addressed to both the respondent and her mother) advising they had no desire to receive any further contact from the respondent or her family, apparently on account of “all your ongoing contact with us has been nasty, bullying and harassing.” again, the applicant gave an account of a visit by the maternal grandparents to the home of his parents including that his parents had been told “pay us $100,000 to buy ms thornton a house or we’ll make her disappear.”
220 i record these events, not for the purpose of making any findings as to the truth of what was being said by one or other of the parties or grandparents but merely to illustrate the nature of the overall relations between these persons, or one or more of them. it is clear the respondent has been markedly reluctant to allow the child to spend time with her father or his extended family and has been abusive toward them both at changeovers and at other times. various texts resulted in the respondent alleging the applicant had breached the terms of an operative ivo. other evidence suggests the applicant was advised by police to act protectively.
221 while the applicant has given some account of attempts to patch up relations between the respondent and his mother it is unnecessary to investigate the issue in any detail. while the respondent was critical of a supposed failure to call the paternal grandmother to answer the matters raised against her, the applicant’s case was conducted on the basis that there was clear conflict between the parties’ families, including the paternal grandmother. since the difficulty in these extended relations was essentially common ground, in my view the issue was not joined but rather accepted at least in general terms. i decline to draw any adverse inference as to this.
222 the respondent’s abusive text messages are set out in the applicant’s trial affidavit at [24]-[25] it does nothing to edify this decision to set out the many abusive text messages transmitted by the respondent to the applicant after the parties’ separation. suffice to say, they are appalling.
223 the respondent readily admitted to sending each of those texts. in other text messages addressed in the applicant’s trial affidavit at [57] and with copies exhibited, a series of communications from the respondent projected and repeated her view that the child, wanted nothing to do with her father and that the problem (“the elephant in the room”) was the applicant and that it was he who needed to confront this problem for himself.
224 by the father’s trial affidavit he also recounted other text messages received from the respondent’s brother and father. the tenor of those messages was equally unrestrained and violent in their abuse. as set out in the reasons for the interim orders made in august 2021, the applicant also alleges the respondent mother stated after the parties’ separation that she could make the respondent and child disappear and that the applicant had no rights.
225 the respondent sought to address these communiqués with a simple expression of regret and appeared almost to wave them aside. the manner in which she did so was quite unconvincing.
226 the respondent’s abusive text messages as set out in the applicant’s trial affidavit at [24]-[25] were presented for consideration by the experts during their conclave. dr c considered that the respondent’s decision to send text messages of this kind fitted entirely into the category of labile behaviours (p 34). by contrast, mr b stated his view that “it’s extraordinarily poor behaviour. i disagree, as you know, with dr c. i don’t think it comes from any personality flaw. i think it comes from very poor choices about how to proceed in a difficult situation.” (p.34). understood in the context of other evidence given by mr b during the conclave, it is clear that a deep personality flaw was not a prerequisite to bad behaviour (p.14). mr b’s evidence above is also to be understood in the broader context that he was quite clear the respondent did not suffer a borderline personality disorder.
227 viewed more broadly, i am in little doubt that the applicant was generally not at all welcome in the home of the maternal grandparents.
228 the tenor of these messages is of relevance to the considerations posed by s 60cc.
passport
229 the respondent alluded to her country j heritage and fluency in that language stating that it was her desire for the child one day to travel to country j where relatives of her family still reside. at present the child does not have an australian passport.
230 the respondent stated that she asked the applicant in may 2020 to sign a passport application and that the parties argued on many occasions as he refused her repeated request to do so.
231 the respondent alleged that on one occasion the applicant said “i will not sign the passport as i need it as collateral over you”. in a reply affidavit, the applicant denied having ever made any kind of statement to that effect and referred to his account of events as provided in his trial affidavit. by that affidavit, the applicant deposed that shortly after the parties’ final separation, in may 2020 the respondent had continuously requested that he sign a passport application for the child and that she did so “despite the covid-19 virus having just reached australian shores and our international borders being closed.” the applicant deposed that when he declined her request (which provided his reasoning), the respondent replied in terms variously referring to him as a psychopath, a control freak and a dictator. responding to a message in which the respondent asserted the child had a right (either to travel or a passport) concluding “and that’s it”, the applicant replied in mollifying terms “okay and we can look into it when international travel opens backup. haven’t said yes or no to anything.” and shortly afterward, he added, “focus on our co-parenting first i think that’s what we need to work out first. come on ms thornton let’s just get along it shouldn’t be that hard.” later communiqués from the respondent upon this issue included “blah blah blah broken record”, “you have to cut your umbilical cord and grow up. you’re almost 30” and “full rights to see her family in country j.” putting aside any question of ‘rights’ or whether it was realistic to travel internationally at that time, the reference to the applicant’s umbilical cord was unambiguous.
232 the tenor of the respondent’s messaging to the applicant was utterly regrettable. of immediate significance is that the torrent of abusive communications was essentially one-sided and cannot be cast aside as some sort of “one-off” incident which would not be repeated. the respondent has engaged her lawyers for almost all recent communications on parenting issues.
spend time and communications post may 2020
233 each of the parties gave their account of the ongoing difficulties with spend time and change over after the child’s first birthday. the nature of the difficulties are explored by dr c.
234 by the respondent’s trial affidavit, a series of incidents were described which invariably involved the child becoming distressed and refusing to let go of her mother. she also described the condition of the child at the end of spend time as frequently being “exhausted with a blank look with her eyes glazed over. she also wanted to be breastfed and cuddled into me before falling asleep quickly.” the respondent’s trial affidavit was replete with such descriptions of the child upon her return after spend time with her father.
235 the respondent’s trial affidavit recounted ongoing difficulties in 2021 in relation to spend time and changeover and the condition of the child after such spend time including the suspension of spend time and the communications between the respondent’s lawyers and dr c. the extent of difficulties encountered in relation to the practical operation of changeover, spend time and communications is also confirmed by the extent of communications passing (not between the parties), between the parties’ lawyers.
236 upon the evidence, i am satisfied the respondent either personally and/or by her lawyers have not infrequently been non-responsive to requests from the applicant and/or his lawyers in relation to parenting arrangements including spend time, changeover and supervision. i accept like allegations are made against the applicant but am less persuaded of their veracity.
237 the applicant’s trial affidavit recounted in some detail how difficult arrangements for changeover had become, visits were cut short by 15-45 minutes on numerous occasions and in circumstances where the respondent, in effect, refused to hand the child over to a supervisor or to place her in a pram. further, insofar as the evidence raised dispute whether the applicant had forcibly removed the child at changeover, i was quite unpersuaded by such suggestions.
238 there was some evidence the parties had explored a series of alternative methods for effecting changeovers so as to ameliorate the risk of the child becoming upset at these events. for example, on 2 and again on 4 april 2021, the parties exchanged emails suggesting a different method for changeover which would, in effect, involve the parties swapping over at a time when the child was distracted with her activities at a playground. another method was for the parties to engage the assistance of a person with whom the child was familiar in place of the respondent being present at such events.
239 despite recommendations to do so, the respondent has not as yet been able to make arrangements to obtain an assessment of the bond between the child and herself and her trial affidavit explained the steps that had been taken without success to obtain an appointment. while dr c allowed for the difficulties in securing such appointments, as exposed in the course of the experts’ conclave, the more fundamental concern is that the respondent is and will most likely remain opposed to such assistance (on the subjective view it is just not needed).
240 her trial affidavit also described the nature of her attachment to the child, the activities in which they participate and the types of venues which they visited (when out of lockdown). other activities described included the child’s communications with her great grandparents by facetime calls to country j and that she is learning to speak this language as a result. also described was the child’s participation with the respondent in playgroup and with her neighbours and others.
241 i accept upon the evidence there is no difficulty with changeover when the child is returned.
242 some evidence was adduced to suggest that parenting arrangements had improved somewhat since interim orders were made in august 2021.
243 by the applicant’s account, despite the significant length of time which had passed between the child and her father last seeing one another, spend time went very well and the child transitioned well into his care and did so within a very short space of time.
244 the father also gave other evidence respecting new and troubling behaviours in the child at this time which he considered to be entirely out of character. more precisely, the child was reported to be making statements which were critical of the father as a bad man.
245 the applicant also described in essentially positive terms the nature of the time being spent with the child, including overnight time and the ease with which changeovers were occurring. he also described conversations with the professional supervisor who had been assisting with changeovers. in short, while the supervisor and the applicant considered that an end to supervision at changeover was appropriate it was agreed the issue must be raised with the respondent. perhaps unsurprisingly, the supervisor was told by the respondent “there was ‘no way’ she would agree to it, particularly when she had a baby on the way.” in the event, the respondent’s lawyers proposed an end to supervised changeovers shortly afterward.
relocation
246 the respondent’s trial affidavit described the closeness of her relationship and reliance upon her parents including that, following the delivery of her newest child, she was unable to work or support herself financially. she described the support that they provide her.
247 the respondent’s trial affidavit also described in general terms various discussions said to have been held with the maternal grandparents and also the applicant from perhaps 2018-2019 when the possibility of her parents purchasing a property in southern queensland was, she said, to have been discussed. at all events, the evidence indicates no property has been purchased.
248 by the applicant’s account, the first suggestion of any relocation proposal by the respondent was that contained in the letter from her lawyers dated 14 may 2021. i accept the applicant’s denial that he and the respondent had earlier discussed any such relocation proposal.
249 insofar as the respondent had attributed to her earlier lawyers a mistaken belief that she could not relocate (and so explaining why no such relief had been sought earlier), the applicant observed that the respondent’s previous lawyers had represented her for at least 18 months and, critically, at times overlapping the period in which, it was said, such relocation had been discussed by, amongst others, the respondent, her parents and, on her case, the applicant also. again, the applicant pointed to the issue of a suggested relocation as only emerging for the first time after steps had been implemented to restore time with the child and her father and to do so on an unsupervised basis which, on the evidence was progressing most positively. as to this, i note after the s 11f report was issued, by early march 2021 the respondent had consulted the lawyers who now represent her. there is no suggestion relocation was ever raised by those lawyers from march 2021 until 14 may 2021. when it was so raised this occurred in the context that, as was said, the respondent’s lawyers wished to afford the applicant an opportunity to consider the issue as they intended to raise it with dr c on 17 may 2021. while the issue was not explored in detail, there was at least room for a suggestion of recent invention.
250 for reasons explained by the applicant, he is opposed to such relocation.
251 relatedly, the applicant explained the circumstances of himself, his partner and her children and the commitment he maintained to the welfare of the child and that he did so in the face of unrelenting opposition and hostility from the respondent. he deposed to a belief that there was no basis for concluding there would be any meaningful change in the respondent’s behaviours.
252 upon the whole of the evidence there is no substantive basis supporting a conclusion the parties or either of them have the financial capacity (whether personally or via family resources), to allow for the child to travel and spend time with her father at the intervals now being suggested by the respondent’s outline of case. nor does the evidence indicate any real likelihood of the child retaining the benefit of a meaningful relationship with her father if this occurred.
other affidavits
ms m’s affidavit
253 ms m, current partner of the applicant father, deposed to her support for parenting orders as sought by the applicant. ms m described her present circumstances. she is the mother of three school-aged children and she shares equal care with her ex-partner. she deposed the applicant is involved in her children’s lives, shares a warm and familiar bond with them, and acts as a parental figure.
254 ms m deposed that there is “a strong and loving relationship” between the applicant father and x. ms m stated that her children, the applicant father, x, and herself “frequently spend time together as a family”.
255 ms m deposed that the applicant and herself had been searching for potential new accommodation of four or five bedroom homes and, in general terms, that there would be a bedroom for x.
ms y
256 in her affidavit, sworn on 19 october 2021, ms y, a friend of the respondent, deposed of observations made at changeovers between the applicant, respondent and child on 21 march 2021 and 9 may 2021 at f play centre.
257 by her affidavit, ms y deposed of the parties’ interactions with each other and attempts to engage x when she was in a heightened state. during changeovers, ms y characterised the applicant as being agitated and unco-operative with the respondent. further, she described the child as being reluctant to spend time with the father.
ms z’s affidavit
258 x’s maternal grandmother, ms z, made an affidavit on 19 october 2021.
259 the maternal grandmother described events from when she first met the applicant in april 2019, events occurring after the child’s birth, events surrounding the intervention order made against the applicant, the maternal grandmother’s involvement in the mother and x’s life, and her intentions of moving interstate.
260 she provided a narrative which described the applicant’s aggressive displays towards the respondent and alleged he sought to take x away from the mother. the grandmother deposed to the breakdown in the parties’ relationship including of allegations made by both the paternal grandmother and applicant concerning the respondent’s mental health.
261 the grandmother deposed that her family was deeply involved in x’s life. she provided examples indicative of her bond with the child, being the family’s country j culture, playtime spent, education, and, care for the child’s health and well-being. by contrast, the picture she provided of the applicant was of a boyfriend who spent little time during the day with her daughter and in the evening “would arrive late and leave early.” she also described his habit of playing cricket every saturday and golf every sunday.
262 in a similar vein, the deponent gave accounts of her dealings with the paternal grandmother. while the witness spoke of her country j heritage and of having migrated to australia in 1990, she also set out verbatim the content of a text message she had sent in december 2019 to the paternal grandmother which, apart from confirming the strained relationship between those parties was as notable for the clarity of expression and length (2½ pages) in which the author rehearsed the narrative as she saw it.
263 the maternal grandmother’s affidavit corroborated the awkwardness of relations between the respective grandmothers and of her observations of the child returning after spend time with her father as being tired, upset, distressed, exhausted and unhappy. the deponent also gave accounts of events leading to ivo applications which she identified as having occurred on four june 5 june, 14 august and 30 december 2019 and also on 29 january 2020.
264 the witness recounted a somewhat ambulatory interest in moving to queensland and exhibited two letters from an estate agent, each addressed “to whom it may concern” but which spoke in vague terms of a suitable property, other than as observing “i would take it as a great personal and professional achievement if i am able to sell the home to mr aa and ms z.”
mr b, clinical psychologist
265 mr b, a clinical psychologist with specialist experience, provided a psychological evaluation and report upon each party, doing so pursuant to orders made on 15 march 2021 and 20 august 2021 respectively. mr b also gave evidence on 9 november 2021. his expertise was not in issue and he gave evidence in a dispassionate, objective and forthright manner. i found his evidence to be of particular assistance.
psychological assessment of father
266 mr b identified the documents that he had considered in the communications which he had held including his consultation with the father on 5 june 2021. mr b’s report, relevantly identified the personality assessment inventory (pai) analysis, considered background facts and materials, discussed his forensic and clinical interview and provided his conclusions and recommendations. pai analysis measures personality, psychopathology, and the manifestation of clinical syndromes. pai analysis provides a psychological assessment that is based upon a self-administered test against an objective inventory. dr c endorsed the utility of pai and recognised it was based upon a self-assessment.
267 by way of overview, mr b concluded the father did not suffer from any major mental illness or personality disorder but was experiencing significant stress as a result of the present litigation and matters being raised in it (which the father considered he was managing reasonably well but may be supported by professional assistance to build strategies to cope).
268 mr b considered the father had completed the pai analysis in a manner which contra-indicated carelessness, reading difficulties, confusion, exaggeration, malingering or defensiveness. having identified and reflected upon a tendency in the father to portray himself as being relatively free of common shortcomings, mr b did not think the data collated from the pai analysis under-represented the extent or degree of any significant findings on account of the father’s tendency to avoid negative or unpleasant aspects of self. no evidence was found to suggest the father was motivated to portray himself in a more negative or pathological light than was warranted by the clinical picture which emerged.
269 mr b found no marked elevations as might indicate the presence of a clinical psychopathology but allowed that the father’s self-description might suggest a readiness to feelings of being treated inequitably or the subject of concerted efforts by others to undermine his interests. in addition, the report recognised the father as a person experiencing moderate degrees of stress, distress and anxiety including as arising from the death of a close friend and the current pressures the parenting proceedings were having upon him.
270 mr b excluded other significant psychological or emotional factors as having an impact upon the father and excluded current problems with alcohol or drug abuse or dependence. in the view expressed by mr b, the father was considered to be generally stable and positive in his self-evaluation and reported the father was normally a confident and optimistic person who approached his life with a clear sense of purpose and distinct convictions. mr b regarded those characteristics as being valuable for resilience and adaptiveness.
271 mr b considered the father as having a strong need for acceptance which likely dominated his interactions with others including by attempting to avoid conflict, rendering him vulnerable to being taken advantage of and exploited. a favourable prognosis was given.
272 issues of suicidal ideation or self-harm were excluded and as concerned anger management, the father described himself as being unassertive and as having difficulty in standing up for himself even when assertiveness was warranted.
273 as to background facts and materials, i have examined the matters considered by mr b.
274 upon his forensic and clinical assessment, mr b examined a range of issues which included that: the father impressed as an honest informant who had good levels of personal insight even when discussing issues that were contentious or difficult for him, the father demonstrated focus and good concentration. he accepted as generally accurate the pai profile generated from the answers he had given including upon more difficult subjects, the father revealed no significant mental health or personality problems, the father had good relationships with his parents (who were still alive) and siblings despite the stress of the present proceedings, the father had enjoyed a happy and loving childhood, a similarly good and happy adolescence maintaining friendships with many schoolmates, after completing year 12, the father obtained his apprenticeship “as a tradesman. . . i’m still a tradesman and i enjoy my work a lot.”
275 the father described his relationships and excluded any major physical health problems or having experienced any significant mental health problems or historical exposure to abuse.
276 the father candidly confronted issues in the allegations of alcohol and drug abuse which were examined by mr b and to which the father readily acknowledged having a few tinnies on friday or saturday nights (“10 would be a lot . . . a special occasion . . .”), and that he would last have been drunk perhaps three months ago. as to cocaine use, mr b stated “he seemed quite frank and open about his using cocaine recreationally in the past . . . she knows i only used it recreationally . . . she used it occasionally too . . . it really is in the past . . . i haven’t been near it for years.” mr b noted the father had no criminal convictions.
277 as concerned parenting, mr b recorded the father had adopted or modelled his role toward the child as being similar to that taken by his parents “fun and stern when i need to be . . . i want kids to have plenty of chance[s] to enjoy themselves and to learn . . . but i know how to set limits too.” mr b considered the father had good insight in relation to the detrimental impact which parental conflict would have upon the child.
psychological assessment of mother
278 on the eve of the final hearing, on 30 october 2021, the mother attended upon mr b.
279 mr b conducted an assessment of the respondent mother on 30 october 2021 which involved a clinical history interview and discussion of her personality, using the self-administered pai assessment.
280 mr b discussed the respondent mother’s pai assessment score, finding the respondent expressed high levels of defensiveness, hypervigilance and reluctance to admit faults or common failings “to which most individuals will admit”. to add, mr b reported the respondent’s penchant to minimise any negative repercussions brought about by her actions.
281 mr b made an assessment of the mother’s clinical profile stating “there are no indications of significant mental health or personality disorders”. while the mother’s self-report did not describe any negative symptoms, her score reflected a slightly elevated scale of paranoia, specifically feelings of hypervigilance and persecution. those results were supported by her self-described wariness and sensitivity to interpersonal relationships. mr b remarked that people would view the mother as being “tough-minded, sceptical, and sometimes even hostile”. he described the mother’s view of herself as being undermined or treated inequitably.
282 mr b reported the mother’s score relative to her interpersonal and social environment. he found, as a result of the mother’s need to keep a harmonious environment, she would tend to avoid interpersonal confrontation or conflict and controversy. mr b also found the respondent displayed elevated signs of ‘treatment rejection’ suggesting she was satisfied with herself and, relevantly, that she saw no need for treatment or changes in her behaviours.
283 in conclusion, mr b reiterated the respondent did not have any major mental illness or personality disorder but exhibited “signs of a moderate to high level of defensiveness in present circumstances that she will need to manage to make mediation of or negotiation about parenting and other issues productive.”
family report – 28 october 2021
284 dr c identified the materials and resources to which he had access for preparing his report including: his child inclusive memorandum, dated 18 february 2021, consultations with the parties (and observations of each party with the child) on 18 may 2021, teleconference with legal representatives of each party on 20 may 2021 and 6 june 2021, legal correspondence received in the proceedings, conservations with child protective services, the reasons for judgment given on 20 august 2021 and certain court documents, orders, applications and affidavits made by the parties and interested actors.
285 dr c provided only a brief background in light of his earlier s 11f report and summarised the opinions expressed at that time. he detailed the making of interim orders in march 2021 and the difficulties with spend time which had occurred thereafter. dr c noted certain matters of which he had been appraised when consulting with the applicant in june 2021 and of the stance being taken by the respondent via her solicitors’ communications and the litany of concerns including: her suggestion the applicant was critical, overbearing and aggressive, her view the child was fundamentally unable to cope with spending time with her father, her lawyers were deployed to communicate the issues and concerns which she held, the many and various regressive behaviours exhibited by the child after spending time with her father.
286 after summarising the parties’ competing proposals and addressing their respective, more recent, notices of risk, dr c expressed six areas of concern: the final living arrangement of x, the parties’ co-parenting relationship and capacity to collaborate in relation to their child, the relationship between x and each parent, risks arising from allegations of family violence in presence of the child, concerns of the applicant father in respect to respondent mother’s allegations of family violence, mental health, failure to support relationship between child and paternal side of the family, and, co-dependence with child.
287 dr c set out the data he had obtained from a further interview with the father and observed nothing anomalous about his mental state but recognised his frustration at the child’s time with him being unilaterally withheld where, as he saw it, he had done everything the court requested of him (psychological assessment, clear drug screens, sourcing a supervisor for changeover). the clinical psychologist discussed with the father his concerns about the child’s regression and the absence of any improvement in the parties’ relations with the constancy of allegations and ivos making any reasonable discourse all but impossible. despite this, the applicant related his attempts to be as friendly with the respondent as was possible at changeovers.
288 as the mother and child had not participated in a further consultation, no further data was available from those sources, however, dr c recalled that at the time of the child inclusive conference in february 2021, the respondent presented as being intent on finding fault with the applicant, rather than looking for solutions that would best serve the parties’ child.
289 absent more recent data, dr c concluded that from the interview conducted with the parents on 18 may 2021, he had observed a disturbed attachment between the child and her mother exhibited by x refusing to leave her mother’s lap, appearing unsettled, distressed and uneasy and as wrapping her arms around her mother in a distressed state even before the father was in the vicinity. “upon mr little entering the observation room, x had to be pried from the mother and placed on the floor, resulting in the child becoming more overtly distressed. ms thornton left the room, with her father (sic) rapidly scooping up the child and attempting to comfort and distract her.” remarkably, “[w]ithin approximately 10 seconds, x was calm, her presentation changed entirely, she became instantly confident, curious, exploring items around the room. her vocalisations increased. she was amenable to being approached by other people. she impressed is happy, contented and comfortable. for his part, mr little was entirely supportive and appropriate for his daughter.”
290 providing an evaluation upon identified concerns, dr c presented 11 recommendations. in doing so, he accepted the report had been limited by the mother and child’s non-attendance.
291 in respect to co-parenting, the doctor found that the relationship between the parties was obviously dysfunctional and observed that “there is no realistic way that the parties will ever functionally co-parent their daughter. the damage that has been caused to this point is simply too significant” with no realistic hope of improvement. dr c considered parallel parenting might be possible but concluded that this type of parenting arrangement was best instituted in children at around 11 or 12 years of age. he considered that the court should make a determination where, in light of the child living exclusively with one parent, one parent should have “singular authority for major decisions” in respect to x’s livelihood and care.
292 in his evaluation of the parent-child relationship, dr c considered the stark contrast in x’s behaviour with each parent. as echoed in his observations made on 18 may 2021, the doctor noted the child had been at ease with the applicant father whom he assessed to be a loving and invested parent. dr c considered the situation respecting the mother and child’s relationship to be significantly different (notwithstanding that the respondent had been the person with whom the child was most well acquainted) and as being “a cause for alarm”. clinically, while the child had sought comfort and a sense of security from her mother, dr c observed the respondent to be unable to soothe or placate her. he described the attachment as disturbed and having a confused dimension stating “it is not normal for children to completely refuse to be separated from a parent’s physical proximity. it is atypical for children to wholly refuse to explore and play in a safe (albeit novel) environment. it is not normal for children to resist warm, nurturing overtures from a seemingly familiar care figure.”
293 as concerned socialisation, dr c noted that until recently and for much of her life the child had spent time almost exclusively with the mother or maternal grandmother, did not attend childcare, had been largely limited in involvement with people outside the maternal family, continued to co-sleep with her mother and breastfed beyond what was biologically required. he concluded “ms thornton has invoked all manner of excuses to prevent x from spending time with her father. she has suspended the child’s time with mr little on several occasions. she has refused to allow x to spend time with the paternal grandparents.” upon those bases and the child’s presentation, dr c concluded the court should be “concerned about an increasingly unhealthy relationship between x and her mother.”
294 in relation to issues of risk, dr c noted the parties’ allegations were disputed but that the “only allegation that can be confirmed is that mr little did attempt to contact ms thornton in an effort to try and improve the co-parenting situation, which ultimately placed him in breach of the intervention order.” he was somewhat sceptical of the tenuous nature of some allegations and observed they did not always align with other known facts.
295 as concerned additional considerations, dr c considered in some detail the position of each of the applicant and respondent respectively at [37]-[38] of his family report and, while acknowledging the admissions made by the father, he did not identify any evidentiary basis for curtailing the child’s spend time with her father. when addressing in similar detail the position of the mother, the expert concluded “x is not thriving in the sole care of her mother, as has been observed by various independent third parties, such as child protective services.” in this context, i note during her cross examination, each of the substantive issues identified by dr c at [38] as adverse considerations relating to the respondent were put to, and rejected by, her without qualification. having recognised the need to test and consider the available evidence he stated, “at my most basic level, it is clear that ms thornton has not fostered circumstances in which it will be easy for x to spend significant and substantial time with her other parent, notably because the child has not been well socialised over the course of her life, and continues to spend the totality of the time exclusively in the care of her mother.” as was put to dr c in the course of the expert conclave, and accepted by him, more recently, the child’s activities have allowed her a greater degree of opportunities for socialisation.
296 dr c reported he was concerned about the mother’s behaviour. he observed in her an abject unwillingness to support x having a relationship with the father. what further concerned dr c was the mother’s penchant to blame the father for any ‘malady, or scrape, or fatigue, or behavioural issue’ of the child as a result of being ‘within the paternal environment’. the doctor was particularly alarmed by the mother’s inaccurate allegations of the father and her desire to “obscure, sabotage, and undermine” any proper relationship between father and child. he recorded that her motivations were not entirely clear and postulated, in light of her behaviour (and in the absence of a clinical psychological report), a possible underlying personality disturbance in the mother. again, given the lateness of the appointment ultimately made by the respondent with mr b, the family report writer did not have his opinion at the time of completing that report, however, it was provided to him in advance of the expert conclave held on the second day of hearing.
297 ultimately, dr c found x was “not thriving in the sole care of her mother, as has been observed by various independent third parties, such as child protective services.” for the sake of completeness, i repeat dr c concern at what he observed on 18 may 2021 in relation to the behaviours of the child with her mother was such as to prompt him to, in effect, enlist dr h to validate those observations. in short, the presentation of the child, who had been in a distressed state even before the father was in the vicinity, changed entirely within some 10 seconds once the mother was removed and in the care of her father became instantly confident and demonstrated positive behaviours as described above.
298 accepting he was unable to furnish a definitive opinion as an assessment was incomplete, dr c believed there was a sufficiently robust connection between the child/father to commence overnight stays and that the respondent mother demonstrated a complete incapacity to support the child having a relationship with both sides of her family stating:
indeed, although it would be a significantly disruptive step, there is at least some clinical argument that a change in residence would result in a more settled, well-adjusted and well socialised, and emotionally happier child. to reiterate, i do not believe that x is thriving in the care of her mother, and i am unconvinced that the aetiology of these problems lies solely with her visiting once or twice a week with her father.
. . . i would stress also the observation that once x actually completes the transition to her father, she presents as a totally different child – happy, socially interactive, curious and easy to engage.
dr c recommended that the child undertake a neuro-developmental assessment and repeated that the respondent and child jointly attend a bonding/attachment specialist.
299 when describing his ‘outcomes’, dr c distilled each of the matters described above.
experts conclave
300 having regard to the principles stated in div 12a of part vii of the act, a desire to provide a forum in which the experts might benefit from one another’s respective views and with an eye to considering the child’s interests having regard to the gravity of the matters in issue, the parties were requested to arrange that dr c and mr b give their evidence in a conclave which they did. the court was particularly assisted by the matters that they addressed and the manner in which each of them gave their evidence. before turning to those issues, i note an uncertainty whether the transcription service which made the recording, accurately transposed the identity of the parties’ respective counsel in all places. the experts addressed the following:
301 dr c accepted his family report was necessarily limited by the fact the respondent and child had not participated in a further consultation for the purposes of concluding that report. he also accepted, for those reasons, there had been no observation of the respondent or the child since may 2021. it was put to dr c that the respondent’s evidence at trial included that: (1) she had first realised and wanted the applicant to be involved with the child from the moment of pregnancy, (2) the father’s role in the life of a child was “to be as involved equally as the mother”, (3) the respondent had informed her health care nurse that in august 2021 the court had been dismissive of her concerns in relation to the child, (4) “her official position before the court then was for two hours supervised per saturday, and the court orders revealed – and ordered, sorry, overnight time.” dr c attention was drawn to his family report at [38] where he had stated “despite protesting for want of a more cohesive situation as support of x having a relationship with her father, all of her conduct indicates the opposite view.” dr c responded that in his field many people expressed a stated view that he or she was “supportive of the children having a relationship with the other side of the family, but we really need to drill into what their behaviours are, and to the point of my last involvement with ms thornton which, as everyone has noted, was in may of this year, at that point there was nothing about her behaviour to assuage my concern is that she wasn’t actually encouraging, supporting and facilitating this little girl’s time with dad, and at that point you need to also look, i think, that the reality that she was discouraging of x having a relationship with the entire paternal side of her family, and that there had been all sorts of allegations and claims and involvement of various professionals which is not the behaviour of someone who is wholly supportive of the child easily transitioning to the other side of her family” (p-10).
302 as to the proposal for assistance with bonding, dr c identified a tendency for persons to often gravitate towards professionals who expressed views that aligned with their own and in that respect did not consider the mother’s conduct to be entirely unsurprising, adding:
she has – when i have had involvement with ms thornton, she has fundamentally expressed for the ..... of me that the child is being deleteriously impacted by spending time with the dad, and she reports the child is being returned dishevelled and unkempt, with bumps and scratches and nappy rash, biting her lip, and all sorts of ..... which she attributes to her spending time with her father, and so it’s entirely unsurprising that she will seek input from professional people who express a view that’s similar to that and gravitate away from people who express a contrary view (p.11)
mr b generally assented in the view that people gravitated toward supportive experts and conversely, in the case of persons with resistant traits, would resist consulting with those whom they perceived would hold a view which may be inimical to their own.
303 as to whether it may be in the child’s interests for her to undergo neurological testing, dr c explained that he considered this to be a tricky issue as he could not pinpoint the reason for the child’s presentation in a context where previously “the child had presented in an extremely atypical way when observed with the mother, and then a very normal way with the father.” the anomalous presentation was identified as a reason why some neurological issue might underpin her presentation and dr c identified that this may be ruled out by testing (p.12).
304 as to the configuration for a variety of suggested shared care arrangements, dr c was wholly unsupportive of an equal time share arrangement doing so on the basis that:
that wouldn’t be a recommendation that i would make in this matter. my – i just struggle to envisage how it would be able to be implemented. i just don’t think that, given the disunity of these parents, given the age of the child, she is not a child who can communicate her own needs herself to any significant degree, i just don’t see how that would ever work. i think that the level of enmity and discourse – disunity between these parents are so significant that an equal-shared care arrangement is just not going to work. whether it’s split week, whether it’s each alternate day, the lack of continuity of care that would ensue for this little girl would be so substantive that it would be enormously destabilising. if the child was seven or eight, then there’s all of these difficulties between the parents, but the child is of an age where they can reasonably communicate their own needs (p.12). (emphasis added)
i pause to observe dr c left open the possibility of a change in spend time when the child attained the age of seven or eight years.
305 asked what structure he would recommend irrespective of whether the child resided with either parent, dr c replied that he considered the child to be in a robust relationship with her father that he would not be recommending anything more than a fortnightly structure of 12/2, extending over time to 8/4 so as to allow the opportunity for a meaningful relationship but did not see it was reasonably practicable to do more and observed “this child does not appear to be thriving at the moment and certainly something needs to change.” (p.13).
306 as to the mother’s personality, mr b clarified that personality assessment was concerned with a person’s characteristic patterns of behaviour, thinking and emotions and stated that, although it was to be expected (in a forensic/litigation context) that a party would, in effect, endeavour to ‘put their best foot forward’, he found the respondent to do more than that “even in a forensic situation, and so my hunch is that the defensiveness or hypervigilance that i discovered in the rest of the [pai] inventory is probably a lot more pronounced than it seems” (p.14). in his discussion of the respondent’s personality, mr b at pp.14-16: observed deep personality flaw was not required for a person to behave badly, noted the respondent’s exaggerated warmth in her self-report (on the positive side),  considered, on the negative side, that the respondent’s wariness would be foreseen “as putting up too much of a barrier too quickly”, (d) was unqualified in his view the respondent had a fairly strong sense there was nothing much wrong with her and for that reason was, and would be, resistant to treatment.
mr b reiterated his opinion the respondent did not have a borderline personality disorder but instead “she has a strong resistance for treatment because she doesn’t believe there’s anything that needs to be treated” (p 37). upon invitation, dr c had nothing to add (p.38).
307 as to the father’s personality, mr b was referred to his report in which he observed the father believed he was being treated inequitably and undermined (p.31). mr b rejected the suggestion this was used to support a hypothesis which related very directly to “his relationship with ms thornton as ending and their ongoing conflict.” (p.32). instead, mr b considered the combination of the stress being experienced by the applicant with the highly negative relationship in terms of very particular difficulties he was having and had experienced throughout the relationship with the respondent (p.32).
308 dr c was then asked to consider a progressive increase in spend time. dr c: (a) stated the respondent believed the applicant was inclined to aggressive and abusive behaviour with a propensity for sexual assault, addictions with gambling, alcohol and cocaine and a view that it was she who was unhinged, (b) posed the question whether it was likely, upon orders being made, the respondent would recalibrate her views and support the child having a relationship with her father, or whether there were “going to be consistent messages of restraint to this little girl from her mother, albeit unintentional, that eventually leads x to develop an adverse view of her father”, (c) answered those questions “i think that the risk that this child will one day reject one of her parents is significant”, (d) considered children picked up on “demeanour, tone, intonation, affects, and if this child is growing up against a backdrop of a mother that believes that she’s at risk with her other parent, almost certainly x will absorb some of that”, (e) considered that “the likelihood that this child will one day just exhibit these resistant refuse behaviours and entirely split off from one side i think is palpable at this stage” (f) accepted there were issues on both sides but that the father was “probably better placed to support this child to have a relationship with both sides of her parents”, (g) also observed that “the respondent mother has shown little realistic willingness to ensure that this girl grows up with a mum and a dad in a meaningful way”, (h) thought “the likelihood of a realistic improvement over a sustained period once the auspices of the court are removed is limited”, (i) in the context of relocation to queensland, was not surprised the respondent stated that maintenance of the child’s relationship with her father “will just be fine”, (j) reiterated that “unless there is some substantive change that happens at working on it, the court can make orders, but we will be back in 18 months’ time.” (pp.16-19).  stated the respondent believed the applicant was inclined to aggressive and abusive behaviour with a propensity for sexual assault, addictions with gambling, alcohol and cocaine and a view that it was she who was unhinged, (b) posed the question whether it was likely, upon orders being made, the respondent would recalibrate her views and support the child having a relationship with her father, or whether there were “going to be consistent messages of restraint to this little girl from her mother, albeit unintentional, that eventually leads x to develop an adverse view of her father”, (c) answered those questions “i think that the risk that this child will one day reject one of her parents is significant”, (d) considered children picked up on “demeanour, tone, intonation, affects, and if this child is growing up against a backdrop of a mother that believes that she’s at risk with her other parent, almost certainly x will absorb some of that”, (e) considered that “the likelihood that this child will one day just exhibit these resistant refuse behaviours and entirely split off from one side i think is palpable at this stage” (f) accepted there were issues on both sides but that the father was “probably better placed to support this child to have a relationship with both sides of her parents”, (g) also observed that “the respondent mother has shown little realistic willingness to ensure that this girl grows up with a mum and a dad in a meaningful way”, (h) thought “the likelihood of a realistic improvement over a sustained period once the auspices of the court are removed is limited”, (i) in the context of relocation to queensland, was not surprised the respondent stated that maintenance of the child’s relationship with her father “will just be fine”, (j) reiterated that “unless there is some substantive change that happens at working on it, the court can make orders, but we will be back in 18 months’ time.” (pp.16-19).
309 certain documents amongst those that were produced on subpoena by region bb health cymhs were put to dr c. he did not entirely accept statements attributed to him in those records, but stated the difficulty between the parents was a major contributing factor to why the child was not seeing the father. he willingly accepted that each of the parents were “under resourced.” later, dr c reiterated “as i’ve articulated several times, i think that these parents have developed entirely entrenched views that are now probably inflexible and unchanging, and what i do suspect is that mr little is probably better able to partial (sic) out his own misgivings towards respondent mother than is the case is reverse.” (p.25).
310 dr c also accepted the view which he expressed on 10 june 2021 that “a family report at this point is premature” firmly reflected his view at that time (p.27). dr c accepted his opinions were not definitive, including by reason that he had not seen the mother or the child since may 2021. despite being taken to letters sent by the respondent’s lawyers on 11 and 13 may 2021 and events occurring subsequently, dr c considered the parties were on notice of his intention to prepare a final report by reason that on 15 june 2021 correspondence had been sent by his office to the parties lawyers “which clearly states that consultations and appointments have been scheduled “the purposes of completing a family report” (pp.28-30). attempts to suggest it had been something of a surprise that dr c would not complete his family report were undermined in the combined circumstances that: an order for such a report had been made, a joint expert had been appointed, the respondent’s lawyers had objected in may 2021 to completion of the report, interim orders were made in august 2021 including for the provision of materials to the joint expert to enable the completion of reports, each party had been notified of the further appointments made by dr c. in my view it was not open to the respondent to block completion of the report by a unilateral decision that neither she nor the child would attend consult with and be observed by dr c. equally, dr c was clear in his view that orders were binding and if a change in the requirement for a family report before a trial was to be sought this was a matter to be raised with the court. no submission was made in august 2021 that the timetable for a family report should change and no suggestion was made that the priority final hearing in november 2021 should not occur.
311 when asked of the child’s primary attachment, dr c was clear that the use of such terminology was not overly helpful and instead spoke of the child’s relationship with the respondent in terms which had the appearance of primary care but that this arose for reasons of exposure in circumstances where the child’s time with the applicant had been suspended (pp.25-26). dr c accepted a change of residence would be a significant disruption.
312 insofar as attempts were made to suggest the absence of supervision at changeover represented a significant indication of progress, dr c did not agree in this suggestion. instead, he attributed the court’s involvement in august 2021 as being a more decisive factor (pp.30-31).
313 a sophisticated question put to mr b by counsel for the respondent was whether the particular combination of the parties’ personalities exponentially increased the risk of misunderstanding and conflict for them. to this mr b replied although he had not seen dr c report at the time he had consulted with the respondent, he had read it for the purposes of giving evidence. he stated “the toxicity of the inter-parental relationship that he described, especially in his first child-inclusive conference memorandum, didn’t surprise me at all because it was reflected in the suspiciousness and hypervigilance of both parties” (p.32).
314 dr c diverged slightly from the view expressed by mr b above. in particular, he considered that “there are features of ms thornton’s personality and functioning and interpersonal functioning that have contributed significantly to where things are at.” at the same time, dr c acknowledged mr b had administered a very well-regarded psychometric instrument but which was predicated upon the respondent having self-reported (p.32).
315 an attempt was made to demonstrate some aspect of the respondent’s behaviour in the period april-may 2021, and in particular that she was motivated to assist in changeovers. dr c returned to the clinical necessity of distinguishing between statements and conduct:
right. so in the month thereafter – as i said, in the month thereafter her behaviour says an entirely different thing to that sentiment. we’ve got to drill into what people’s conduct and behaviour, which is factual and typical and easily established. well, what people say is ..... people say things all the time and this – this parent has consistently said that she supports a relationship between this child and her other parent. where i guess what i’m imploring the court to do is look at what her behaviour says about her position on that question. and in the month after that email was sent, the child staying with her father was unilaterally suspended for a protracted period (p.36) (emphasis added)
316 further cross-examination of dr c ceased at that point.
applicable principles – parenting orders
317 by their outlines of case, opening and closing submissions, the parties presented for determination questions of parental responsibility, residence, spend time and relocation.
318 application is made for a variety of ‘parenting orders’: act, s 64b.
319 part vii of the act, which concerns the subject “children”, is arranged in 16 divisions comprising ss 60-70q. part vii has frequently been described as providing a legislative pathway which governs parenting decisions: see, e.g., goode & goode, [2006] famcafc 1346, (2006) 36 fam lr 422, [5]-[13], morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230, (2007) flc 93-343, [62]-[71]. the pathway includes: objects and principles underlying part vii: s 60b,  child’s best interests as the paramount consideration for a parenting order: s 60ca, how a court is to determine a child’s best interests: s 60cc, primary and additional considerations which are relevant: s 60cc, a presumption of shared parental responsibility: s 61da, assessment of equal or substantial and significant time: s 65daa, assessment of reasonable practicability: sub-s 65daa(5).
the statutory considerations which may be relevant to a particular case must be considered and applied as directed by the act: see, e.g., oswald & karrington (2016) flc 93-726, [47].
320 the objects of part vii are stated in sub-s 60b(1) of the act. they include to ensure that the best interests of children are met by protecting them from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence: act, para 60b(1)(b). the principles underlying those objects recognise certain, extensive, rights of children with respect to their parents: act, sub-s 60b(2). the rights of children as expressed in sub-s 60b(2) of the act remain subject to the exception “where it is or would be contrary to the child’s best interests”. in determining the best interests of a child, there are certain primary considerations which the court must take into account: sub-s 60cc(2) of the act. the court must consider: (a) the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parents, and (b) the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.  the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parents, and (b) the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.
see sub-ss 4(1) (abuse), 4ab(1) (family violence), 60b(1)(c), 60cc(1) (determining child’s best interests), 60cc(2) (primary considerations). additional considerations are prescribed by sub-s 60cc(3)(a)-(m) and include any other matter the court considers may be relevant.
321 in addition, amendments to the act effected by sub-s 60cc(2a) of the act now require that the court is to give greater weight to the need to protect children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected, or exposed, to abuse, neglect or family violence. thus, where the circumstances require, the need for protection from harm as prescribed by par 60cc(2)(b) of the act assumes prominence over the child enjoying a meaningful relationship with both parents as addressed in par 60cc(2)(a). this conclusion is reinforced by the exception provided for by sub-s 60b(2) of the act.
322 when deciding what parenting orders ought to be made in proceedings under pt vii of the act, the best interests of the children remain the paramount consideration: act, s 60ca. the principles s 60b(2), which express the rights of children in relation to their parents, may yield to the paramount consideration expressed in s 60ca of the act that in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order, a court must have regard to the best interests of the child.
consideration
323 the inherently discretionary nature of the power vested in the court in making parenting orders has been long recognised: see, e.g., gronow v gronow [1979] hca 63, (1979) 144 clr 513. while no decision upon the proper exercise of discretion can dictate the result of another parenting proceeding, the facts, circumstances and analysis in gronow remain instructive.
324 in that appeal, the high court set aside a decision of the full court which had reversed a decision at trial by evatt cj who, after a series of interim proceedings, had ordered the husband have custody of the child then aged two years with the wife to have reasonable access. certain factual aspects of gronow (some of which accord with the present case and others of which are distinguishable), included that the child was not unloved or neglected but was happy and well-adjusted and had two loving parents, each of whom was anxious to care for her and able to offer high standards of material comfort as well as a single parent might do. each parent was considered to be intelligent, of good character and devoid of disqualifying attributes. so too, the attributes of the maternal and paternal grandmothers were noted.
325 in his leading judgment, stephen j noted the parents’ separation denied her a life in a home where her parents could live amicably, together devoting themselves to her care, those difficulties and consequences could not be remedied by the court. his honour regarded the very fact that each parent had much to offer (and that there was very little to choose between them) as affording an environment in which reasonable minds might well differ as to what orders ought be made in a child’s best interests. stephen j underlined that the combined circumstances of a careful review of the facts and circumstances, coupled with the advantage possessed by a trial judge of gaining a first-hand impression of the parties’ personalities attracted significance in cases where the parties’ competing claims were evenly balanced: [1979] hca 63, (1979) 144 clr 513, 517-519, see also, murphy j at 532-533, and aickin j at 534-536.
326 as aickin j observed at 536 (mason and wilson jj agreeing at 526), evatt cj had considered that although the court could not be overly confident of the credibility of either party and where joint custody was not practicable, although the parents’ respective qualities were fairly evenly balanced, a factor that tipped the balance in favour of the father was the hostility which the mother felt toward him and which was displayed in the presence of the child stating “she felt that the wife would not be able to control that hostility or to conceal it from the child, or at least that she was unable to feel sure that she would do so . . . ”
327 insofar as reliance was placed upon a presumption of attaching weight to an additional consideration of ‘maternal preference’, all members of the court were united in the view that the child’s welfare remained the paramount consideration. stephen j observed, with respect, insightfully, that the addition of a maternal preference would serve to introduce a factor of imprecise weight which duplicated the facts and circumstances disclosed by the evidence in the particular case and only promoted the risk of an erroneous result: [1979] hca 63, (1979) 144 clr 513, 522. in short, the adoption of any such presumption would distract attention from focus upon the facts and circumstances of the case at hand. the other members of the court reasoned to similar effect: see mason and wilson jj at 526-527, murphy j at 530-531, aickin j at 540.  primary considerations: sub-s 60cc(2)
328 in many respects, as with an interim application, the final determination of an application for parenting orders is framed by the parties’ submissions and, more precisely, the particular considerations to which attention was (and was not), given, as the case requires. as gronow illustrates, the weight to be afforded to a particular factor is also informed by whether either party attached any or particular weight to a particular consideration at trial. irrespective of whether a particular consideration was the subject of submissions, i have considered each of them and accorded them the probative weight i consider appropriate to this case.
329 upon the principles considered above, the relative merits of the parties’ proposals should be evaluated upon considerations under s 60cc(2)-(3) of the act and in the context of ss 61da and 65daa of the act. i propose to adopt that course, and in the process of doing so, consider the issues as they were raised by the parties in terms of their competing submissions. benefit of meaningful relationships with both parents: sub-s 60cc(2)(a)
330 by way of overview, the child who is no longer an infant is still very young.
331 the legislature aspires to promote a meaningful relationship between children and parents, but accepts that it may not always be optimal: godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102, (2007) 208 flr 287, [36]. where it is determined that a meaningful relationship with both parents is in a child’s best interests, it is necessary to consider: (a) whether any such meaningful relationship is already established, and, (b) if it is, whether that existing relationship can be promoted or supported: heath v hemming (no 2) [2011] famca 749, [104].  is a meaningful relationship established?
332 the parties’ submissions did not address this issue directly but instead proceeded upon an unstated assumption that such a relationship was established. the evidence gives rise to serious concern as to the nature of the child’s relationship with her mother as identified by dr c and validated by his colleague dr h. i do not accept that an issue of such significance can be passed over lightly. in the overall assessment of the primary and additional considerations prescribed by s 60cc(2)-(3), the extent of this concern is of foundational significance and cannot be ignored. that said, it appears some effort has been taken since august 2021 to improve parenting arrangements and, it seems, this has been to the benefit of the child in the immediate short-term. i do not mean to conflate the issue of parenting arrangements with the importance of the child having a meaningful relationship with each of her parents, however, i regard the nature of the child’s relationship with her mother as providing important context to the evaluation of s 60cc considerations.
333 i recognise each party mouths an acknowledgment of the importance to the child of the benefit to her of having a meaningful relationship with each parent.
334 however, and to adopt the language of the respondent’s outline of case, the assertion that the child should have and maintain a meaningful relationship with each parent masks important features of the case including, as dr c noted, the objective reality of the stated assertion.
335 the father noted the mother’s behaviours following her pregnancy, at the time of the child’s delivery, during her infancy and (limited) childhood as undermining a conclusion that the mother actually supported the existence of a meaningful relationship of the child with her father. attention was also drawn to the mother’s failure to comply with a series of interim orders for the child to spend time with her father and the unilateral suspension of time amounting in all to some 200 days over the period 2019-2021. reliance was placed upon the observations of dr c in his family report that the mother appeared to have “invoked all manner of excuses to prevent x from spending time with her father.”
336 contrastingly the mother pointed to her communications as evidencing attempts to foster and encourage a relationship between the father and child and asserted that it was he who had continually attacked and denigrated the mother’s parental capacity and mental health (for which, it was submitted, there was no evidence of any mental health disorder).
337 in closing submissions counsel for the respondent placed reliance upon the report and evidence of mr b who excluded any finding of borderline personality disorder in the mother, an expression which he clearly considered to be overused and used inappropriately in such litigation. reliance was also placed upon the matters contained in the respondent’s recently filed amended response in which, it was said, detailed steps were provided to ensure that the child could maintain a meaningful relationship with her father upon her relocating to queensland with her mother. the efficacy of those ‘steps’ is to be gauged in light of the submission, quite properly made, that the relocation application was not the most refined of proposals that are seen in this court. further criticism was made of the father in this context for his having filed an amended application in which he had claimed sole parental responsibility. in my view, the fact of that decision falls for consideration in light of the history of the matter up to the august hearing and the panoply of troubled events which had impeded parenting arrangements. i found the mother’s assertions that the maintenance of a meaningful relationship between the child and her father would be ‘just fine’ to be quite unconvincing.  capacity to promote or support meaningful relationship
338 in promoting a meaningful relationship, the enquiry presented by par 60cc(2)(a) is inherently prospective. the court is required to evaluate the extent to which a meaningful or significant relationship with both parents is going to be of advantage to the children: g & c [2006] famca 994, [72], gorman & huffman [2016] famcafc 174, [76]. here, “meaningful” bears a qualitative and not strictly quantitative connotation. in mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520, [26], brown j stated that for the purposes of this provision, “a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child.”, see also warnett & amerson [2019] famca 499. it is because the enquiry is prospective that the court is necessarily required to examine historical facts and evaluate how they inform what will most likely occur in the future and what orders are proper to be made in a child’s best interests in all of those circumstances. and in doing so, the court is not required to uncritically accept the parties’ allegations when considering if a meaningful relationship may be promoted: keane & keane (2021) 62 fam lr 190, [69]. the object of ensuring that a child should have the benefit of both of his or her parents having a meaningful relationship in their life to the maximum extent is qualified by such involvement being consistent with the best interests of the child: masson v parsons [2019] hca 21, (2019) 266 clr 554, [8] (the court).
339 it was properly submitted for the respondent that the central risk of harm in this case was a risk that the child’s right to the benefit of a meaningful relationship with both of her parents. i accept that the child’s relationships with each of her parents are meaningful in the sense of it being important, significant and valuable to her and, subject to other relevant considerations, that it would be to the child’s benefit to maintain such meaningful relationships. at the same time, i considered there was real force both in the manner in which, and the proposition that, dr c identified the mother’s behaviours giving rise to a serious concern whether she had capacity to foster a meaningful relationship between the child and her father or would do so. i was fortified in that opinion evidence by the ferocity of the manner of the respondent’s text communications with the applicant (in contrast with his responses to them). in addition, i do not ignore the mother has deployed lawyers to engage in parenting issues in a significant way that stands in contrast to the lack of civil communications from her directly to the father. to the extent the mother submitted she was not implacably opposed to spend time, i may accept that this is so, however, a wider question is posed and i do consider she was deeply opposed to the child spending unsupervised or overnight time with her father, this is far from insignificant. it may also be accepted that the mother’s behaviours exhibit her inherent hypervigilance. however, the effect which this trait has had on parenting arrangements to date is clear. protection from risk of abuse, neglect or family violence: sub-s 60cc(2)(b)
340 in determining what is in a child’s best interests, the second of the primary considerations to which the court must have regard is the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. in applying those primary considerations, the court is obliged to give greater weight to the matters in par 60cc(2)(b) of the act: act, s 60cc(2a). on the question of risk, it is necessary for the court to give real and substantial consideration to the facts of a case, “and to decide whether or not, and why or why not, those facts could be said to raise an unacceptable risk of harm to the child”: n and s and the separate representative: [1995] famca 139, (1996) flc 92-655, 82,713-82,714. the principles stated in n and s are regarded as well settled: bant & clayton [2019] famcafc 198, [41], see also m & m (1988) 166 clr 69, 77.
341 i have re-examined the parties’ evidence and submissions as to this issue and the opinion evidence of dr c and mr b. neither parent poses an unacceptable risk to the child.
342 for the purposes of consideration of risk and related additional considerations, each of the parties’ advanced submissions directed to an evaluation of the risk posed by the other. while the father submitted he had been observed to be a loving and invested parent and considered by dr c to raise no concerns in relation to the child’s connection with him, it was somewhat instructive that the mother’s outline of case instead focussed on the risk that he may pose to the child without addressing in any detail the nature of her own relationship with the child.
343 i agree in the applicant’s submission that the child’s positive interactions with her father were also confirmed by the several observational reports provided by the family contact service. those reports existed only because of the mother’s allegations of the father’s conduct and her submissions that the child’s time with her father should not occur unless it was supervised.
344 attention was drawn to the evidence that the child had been observed to be anxious and un-settled in the mother’s care, including that she had been observed by dr c to have a disturbed and dysfunctional attachment, one that was not normal and that there was a confused dimension to the child’s relationship with her mother. attention was drawn to the observations in the s 69zw report (p.5) of other professionals who had worked with child and mother.
345 despite extensive external supports from an enhanced maternal nurse and cymhs, as recently as 25 august 2021, ms r recorded her entry of the session held on 18 august 2021. following her observations upon meeting with the child including her initial happiness, “x then started rubbing her face and began crying then looking very angry and started hitting me. she then became highly distressed and cuddling into her mum who tried to soothe her. again she started to hit me and then hit her mum. we ended the session . . .”
346 in support of the applicant’s submissions, attention was drawn to the mother’s behaviours over so many months where she had repeatedly and unilaterally withheld the child from spending time with her father and that she had done so despite the recommendations of dr c and orders that had been made. as was properly observed “what should have been a matter of common sense, even in the face of expert opinion, instead required adjudication by the court.”
347 reliance was also placed upon the recommendations of dr c who supported the child being able to spend time with the paternal grandmother and the mother’s resistance to this occurring. as dr c observed, the mother “has shown an abject unwillingness to support x having a relationship with the other side of her family.” this was not the subject of any serious or sustained challenge as indeed it could not have been in all the circumstances. upon the facts presented at the final hearing there is every reason to infer that if she remains in the care of the respondent, the child will not have the opportunity to enjoy the same quality of relationship with her paternal grandparents or extended paternal family. attention was drawn to the behaviours of the maternal grandfather who had harangued a professional supervisor in the manner described above. further, insofar as the idea of benefit from a meaningful relationship may be concerned, the respondent accepted her father’s conviction for serious domestic violence upon the maternal grandmother following her birth. while the issue of the benefit to a child of a relationship with a parents’ extended family may ordinarily be an issue of lesser significance than the benefit of the relationship with each parent, objectively, there are some facts in this case which would undermine the benefit to the child of a meaningful relationship with the maternal grandfather. by contrast, there is no evidence of a corresponding risk of harm in relation to the paternal grandparents’ or the father’s extended family.
348 insofar as it was said to be undisputed that the child was of country j heritage and immersed in the culture and language of that country, i was less than persuaded that a change of residence for the child “would further pose an unacceptable risk of psychological and emotional harm to the child” arising from the loss of such immersion. the issue did not receive particular attention in the course of the hearing or submissions but i do not ignore it.
349 the respondent placed particular reliance upon what were described as being both current and historical concerns about the applicant’s parental capacity and attitude toward the respondent. reliance was placed upon the maternal grandmother’s allegations of family violence characterised by denigration and yelling at the respondent in the presence of the child. while this witness was not required for cross examination, counsel accepted that apart from the parties and experts, other affidavits could be relied upon without the necessity of the witness being required for cross examination. this agreement was qualified by acceptance that the court would be free to evaluate the evidence for itself. while in no way suggesting that any adverse finding could or should be made against a witness who was not called, to say as much does not detract from the availability of an inference that a person standing in the relation of a parent to a child (here, the respondent) could ordinarily be expected to give evidence favourable to their child. in any event, the respondent’s reliance upon these generalised allegations of family violence stand in marked contrast to the more specific evidence adduced by the applicant of the mother’s capacity for unrestrained vitriol which she directed at the applicant on so many occasions. it is unnecessary to do more than refer to the evidence given during the conclave of the opinions held by the experts in relation to this conduct and its lack of restraint. i was wholly unpersuaded by the respondent’s expression of regret in relation to these frequent communications. from a forensic perspective it was entirely unsurprising that the respondent adopted the stance of expressing regret. the fact of the written communications put beyond argument that they had occurred and, perhaps as importantly, no attempt was made to contextualise these communications as having been the result of provocation from, or similar conduct by, the applicant. to the contrary, the content of these communications were simply undeniable. further, they spoke volumes.
350 an additional matter relied upon by the respondent was the recitation of observations said to evidence neglect of the child in the care of the applicant including observations of the child suffering a gash on her back which had been untreated, severe nappy rash, chemical burns, skin inflammation from exposure to grass, “and sores forming on her chin due to constant licking/aggravation.” given the seriousness of this allegation i have examined the available evidence. several features of the incident gave me cause to worry about the actual sequence of events, including precisely when the injury was sustained and first observed and by whom, how it was treated, including by each parent and medical practitioners, when it was reported, why an accusation was not raised with the father until 11 october 2021 and how it was then deployed as a reason, coupled with others (including an allegation the father had forcibly taken the child on one occasion of changeover), to assert the child was at an unacceptable risk of harm in the care of the father. the more i reflected upon the respondent’s case, the more persuaded i was by dr c’s opinion, in effect, that the respondent would seize upon any and every matter that might be relied upon as undermining the applicant’s capacity to parent.
351 that said, there is no question each of the parties bears a real measure of responsibility for the toxicity of their present relations and the impact which it has, and may continue to have, upon their child. the parties’ counsel readily accepted the collective opinions given during the experts’ conclave to this effect. to reflect upon this issue does call to attention the brevity of the parties’ early relations, the applicant’s overseas holiday, the short resumption of the parties’ relationship before discovery of the unplanned pregnancy and the litany of problems which ensued in the period leading up to, during and following the delivery of the child. i do not ignore and do attach some weight to the applicant’s failings in this regard. in addition, attention was properly drawn to the relative lack of resources available to the parties. relatedly, the lack of any real familiarity having developed between the parties’ parents and families is apparent.
352 for the applicant it was submitted that the greatest risk arising from the child remaining with the mother was the risk that she would not have the benefit of a meaningful relationship with her father or her paternal extended family. although the focus of s 60cc(2)(b) is largely directed to the need to protect a child from risks of harm of a qualitatively different kind, in my view it was not inappropriate to frame the applicant’s submissions in this way, particularly having regard to the fact that the submissions were also advanced to the purposes of other related additional considerations under par 60cc(3)(a)-(b).
353 dr c, whose expertise in parenting issues was properly accepted, expressed the opinion in a variety of ways that there was a significant and palpable risk the child would one day reject one of her parents, particularly if matters continued as they were and that something needed to change. this opinion based upon professional knowledge and experience was not challenged. it articulated a prognosis that the child faced a real risk that her rights, including to a meaningful relationship with her father would not exist by the time she was 10 years of age. to this, the respondent submitted that the court would be engaged impermissibly in speculation. the way in which the submission was framed draws attention to the nature of inquiry.
354 in malec v hutton (1990) 169 clr 638, the court recognised the distinction to be drawn when assessing the probability of historical events, and evaluating future events. deane, gaudron and mchugh jj stated, with reference to the settled approach taken at common law that “the future may be predicted and the hypothetical may be conjectured. but questions as to the future or hypothetical effect of physical injury or degeneration are not commonly susceptible to scientific demonstration or proof.” the plurality explained at 643 that where the law needed to take account of future or hypothetical events, it could only do so “in terms of the degree of probability of those events occurring.” brennan and dawson jj accepted at 639 that in relation to future possibilities, “the court must form an estimate of the likelihood that the possibility will occur” and is to be distinguished from events that “actually occurred in the past.”
355 the principles stated in malec v hutton, have been applied in this jurisdiction in the assessment of risk: see, for example, fitzwater & fitzwater [2019] famcafc 251, (2019) 60 fam lr 212, [73], [77], [133]-[142]. but as austin j explained at [134] (strickland and aldridge jj agreeing at [73]) they are to be applied in the distinct setting that a parenting proceeding is not an inter partes dispute, no party bears an onus of proof. instead, the court is required to evaluate what orders are proper to be made having regard to the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. parties are afforded an opportunity to adduce evidence relevant to that evaluation.
356 in my view, those principles are no less applicable to an evaluation of whether a child is likely to retain the benefit of a meaningful relationship with both of his or her parents including by reason of the capacity, or incapacity (as the case may be) of each of the parents to provide for the needs, including the emotional needs of the child. so too, those principles may be applied to inform the attitude of each parent to the child, and to their responsibilities of parenthood. in the present case the concepts arising for consideration under both par 60cc(2)(a)-(b) overlap.
357 in conducting an overall evaluation of the primary and additional considerations posed by s 60cc, the court is necessarily called upon to consider the parties’ capacity to foster the benefit of a meaningful relationship with a child and the likelihood of future harm to a child including psychological harm, of a requisite kind. while the parties’ submissions did not articulate the issue in precisely this way, in my view, and conformably with the principles in malec v hutton, the court is required to consider the probability identified by dr c that within a period of some years, the child’s relations with her father will likely not exist if matters continue as they are. viewed from another perspective, the primary consideration stated in par 60cc(2)(a) that the child should have the benefit of a meaningful relationship with both of her parents will likely have been destroyed. this is not a matter of speculation, particularly in the absence of any challenge to dr c’s opinion. further, as concerns historical events, the respondent’s behaviours have been examined above.
358 i do not accept the broad submission that if the child should live with her father she would be placed at an unacceptable risk of parental alienation. to the contrary, faced with consideration of the real risk posed to the child should she remain with the mother, the choice presented to the court is entirely regrettable but at the same time, unavoidable. again, to adapt stephen j’s reasoning in gronow, there are some consequences arising from the failure of the parties’ relationship which this court simply cannot solve or resolve. instead, what must be done upon an overall evaluation of all primary and additional prescribed considerations and any other matter which the court considers may be relevant, is to decide what parenting orders are ‘proper’ to be made treating this child’s best interests as the paramount consideration. additional considerations
359 the primary considerations in sub-s 60cc(2) are not determinative as to how a child’s best interests will be served. by sub-s 60cc(1) of the act, the court is required to consider each of the matters in both sub-ss 60cc(2) and (3). accordingly, those additional considerations must be addressed insofar as they are relevant. they must be considered with a view to the overarching imperative of securing an outcome that is most likely to promote the child’s best interests, and their relative importance will vary from case to case: mulvany & lane [2009] famcafc 76, (2009) flc 93-404, [76]-[77] (may and thackray jj).
views expressed by the child: sub-s 60cc(3)(a)
360 the views of the child, who is not yet three years of age, are not a relevant consideration.
361 while the child is too young for her views to be taken into account, equally, it is common ground that the child loves and is loved by each of her parents.
nature of relationships with the child: sub-s 60cc(3)(b)
362 for this issue, counsel for the applicant relied upon many of the submissions above.
363 on behalf of the respondent, submissions focused upon the extent to which the child was “immersed in daily life and activities with the mother.” it is undoubtedly the case that this has been the position for the first 2½ years of the child’s life, however, the reason why that process of immersion has occurred is explained in the evidence including that of the experts. the nature of the respondent’s relationship with the child is somewhat illuminated by her attitude as revealed by her outline of case. on the one hand, the respondent states that the “child allegedly responds well to the father’s care” and on the other, points to the child being returned “to the mother in a limp and exhausted manner, frequently distressed and numb.” support for those assertions was said to be evidenced by the many photographs and videos which the respondent elected to take and record through the course of the proceeding.
364 as noted, the child has a loving relationship with each of her parents. in my opinion, the child has an essentially positive and healthy relationship with her father. contrastingly, there is good reason to consider that the nature of the child relationship with the respondent is not entirely positive and has been significantly less than that for a somewhat extended period.
365 my views in relation to the child’s relationships are fortified by dr c’s evidence.
366 the question of a child’s relationships includes the nature of relationships with other persons and in particular, grandparents. again, the respondent emphasised the degree to which, it was said, the child had become immersed in the lives of her country j grandparents and culture and further, that she had developed a close and loving relationship with her half-sibling (who is not yet two months of age). the respondent’s outline also focused on the absence of evidence from the applicant’s extended family. there was a degree of asymmetry in this submission in the combined circumstances that: the child has been largely withheld from any contact with the extended paternal family until, in particular, interim orders were made in august 2021, the respondent purported to place conditions around contact between the child and paternal grandparents, and, the respondent obtained an ivo against the paternal grandmother.
367 otherwise, i note the evidence of the applicant’s new partner and the close and developing relationship which the child has enjoyed with her and her own children.
368 having reflected upon the nature of the child’s relationship with her parents and her prospects of ongoing relationships with the extended family of both of her parents, i regard those relationships as being potentially of ongoing value to the child, however, the available evidence respecting the maternal grandfather and at least one of the respondent’s brothers leaves room for concern whether there may be much potential benefit in those quarters. apart from the respondent’s ivo against the paternal grandmother, there is no corresponding evidence to undermine a conclusion the child would benefit from a relationship with the paternal family.
participation in decisions, spend time and communication: sub-s 60cc(3)(c)
369 although the respondent’s submissions were framed in terms by which she attributed to herself the discharge of responsibility for all major relevant long-term decisions affecting the child including her medical treatment, educational playgroups, language and culture and advice from health nurses and sleep school, at the same time the applicant was criticised for having taken a limited role in relation to these matters. as to spend time, it was suggested the applicant had adopted an attitude that the child’s time with him had to be convenient to him and to his parents. it was also said that the father had led no evidence of any attempts to spend additional time with the child beyond those stipulated by the orders. in my view, these submissions were somewhat remarkable and, in some respects, quite divorced from the evidence.
370 counsel’s submission, which resonated with me on the totality of the evidence, was that the applicant’s efforts and ability to participate in his daughter’s upbringing and making decisions in relation to it had been largely “stymied by the mother at every juncture.” attention was also drawn to dr c’s observation that “although [the father’s] parenting acumen is likely undeveloped to some extent, [this is] mainly because of lack of opportunity.” further attention was drawn to the manner in which the respondent had either failed to comply, or complied belatedly, with a range of interlocutory orders. support for the applicant’s submissions is found in the s 11f report at [3] where dr c noted “decisions regarding the day-to-day needs of the child are made exclusively by the respondent mother in the absence of any consultation or input by the applicant father.” it is also found in mr b’s evidence that the mother, by nature is resistant and for that reason, as i infer, unlikely to entertain the father’s views.
fulfilment of obligations to maintain the child: sub-s 60cc(3)(ca)
371 it was not in contest that the applicant had consistently paid child support.
372 the respondent’s outline reiterated her complaints respecting the applicant’s alleged failure to maintain the child as evidenced by: the physical injuries and trauma (gash, significant welts, sores, chemical rash and nappy rash) which, it was said, he had failed to treat, the child’s state upon return at changeover including, it was alleged, being limp, exhausted and distressed, all of which were said to disrupt the child’s routine and development.
373 i regarded the nature and content of these allegations as somewhat illuminating, particularly in the face of the uncontested evidence that the only problems at changeover occurred in one direction, that is, at the point where the child was to be delivered by the respondent to the applicant. it was clear no corresponding problems occurred when the applicant returned her. moreover, the extent of the ‘injuries’ of which the respondent complained appeared to me to be somewhat overstated and emphasised for the purpose advancing her claims in this proceeding including by her apparently taking and making so many photographs and videos.
likely effect of changes: sub-s 60cc(3)(d)
374 in contrast with many other additional considerations, emphasis was placed upon this issue both in cross examination and closing address.
375 dr c readily accepted, both in his report and in cross examination, that a change in residence would be a significantly disruptive step for the child. nonetheless he considered a clinical argument existed that a change in residence would result “in a more settled, well-adjusted, well-socialised and emotionally happier child.” this observation is to be viewed in the context of dr c’s other opinion evidence that: by may 2021, he had considered and validated his opinion that the attachment between the mother and child was disturbed and dysfunctional, it was not uncommon in the forensic environment for a person to aver a stated view, purportedly in favour of a supportive attitude toward the relationship between a child and the other parent, but that the necessary focus to be drilled into was what the parties’ actual behaviours indicated, in this case, despite protesting the desire for a more cohesive situation and being supportive of the child’s relationship with her father, her behaviours indicated the opposite view, as at may 2021 there was nothing in the respondent’s behaviours to assuage the concern that she was not actually encouraging, supporting or facilitating the child’s relationship with her father or her extended paternal family, by may 2021, the respondent had determined she would not (and the child would not) attend a further consultation with dr c at that time, the child was not thriving in the sole care of her mother, certainly something needed to change, there would be consistent messages of restraint from the respondent to the child, albeit unintentional, that would eventually lead to her developing an adverse view of her father, the risk that the child would one day reject one of her parents was significant and palpable, the respondent had shown little willingness to facilitate a meaningful relationship between the child and her father, while it should be accepted there were issues on both sides, the applicant was probably better placed to support the child to have a relationship with both of her parents and families. in my view, the cumulative weight of those observations cannot be ignored.
376 counsel for the applicant submitted the child would adapt quickly to being in the care of her father, particularly in circumstances where: she now (again) spends time overnight with him, the child was still quite young and so more easily adaptable to a new environment, the applicant and his new partner had made provision for the child to be integrated into a new family.
377 on behalf of the respondent it was submitted the mother was the primary carer of the child and that a change in residence would have a serious negative effect on her emotional, psychological and mental health and general well-being. assertions were made that the father’s conduct at changeover was the underlying cause of her exhibiting behaviours of parental alienation “given that the father would forcibly remove her whilst crying and in distress at changeover.” again, reliance was placed upon the child’s immersion in her country j culture and family. i do not accept the broad assertion that the father forcibly removed the child at changeovers and regard the respondent’s decision to persist with it as somewhat instructive.
378 i also found the evidence of dr c during the conclave as instructive including upon the use of the somewhat conclusory expression ‘primary attachment.’ dr c regarded the phrase as probably not overly helpful in this case and reminded the court, the parties and their lawyers, that in the course of giving his report during the august 2021 hearing:
i have made a comment previously to this court about some difficulties in the parent-child relationship as i have observed it, and i – as i noted when i was giving evidence previously, i was so concerned by what i saw that i proceeded to get my colleague, mr h, to come in and validate what i was seeing, so the issue of attachment is germane with this matter, and i probably was ..... the appearance of the primary carer but, of course, your honour, the submission of counsel that ms thornton is the person with whom this child is most familiar and accustomed is ..... for reasons of exposure ‑ ‑ ‑
379 dr c accepted a change of residence would be a significant disruption. he did not agree in the proposition that a change of residence would be enormously destabilising.
380 as raised in the course of closing submissions, the circumstance that the court is presented with an application for change of residence has an embedded disruptive quality. as i sought, and obtained, the assistance of counsel in relation to this issue, part of my concern was to recognise that approaching the question of change of residence from the perspective of disruption and its effect upon a child has a tendency to distract attention from the requirements of s 60cc in as much as the court is concerned to undertake an overall evaluation of all primary and additional considerations and any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks relevant.
381 as also raised in closing address, the text of par 60cc(1) and 60cc(3)(d) obliges the court in imperative terms to consider the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of her parents. in the first place, as counsel for the applicant observed with passing reference to cowling & cowling and the detailed guidelines that were progressively inserted into the act as now embodied in sub-div ba of div 1 in pt vii, the court is not entitled to adopt some sort of safe harbour mentality and simply dispense with the case by reference to the status quo. instead, as was robustly put, where a parenting application is brought forward by the parties for determination, “all bets are off” and the court is obliged to apply each of the considerations in s 60cc when deciding what particular parenting order should be made: see goode & goode [2006] famca 809, (2006) flc 93-285, [66]-[74]. in place of any so-called status quo, the court must regard the child’s best interests as the paramount consideration. secondly, consideration of the likely effect on the child of any separation from either parent is an inherently elastic one. as put to counsel, treating best interests as the paramount consideration informs the ambit of the consideration required of the likely effect upon the child and embraces each of the immediate, short, medium and long-term likely effects. the term effect should not be construed narrowly. thirdly, insofar as the shorthand expression status quo might be employed to pay due regard to the importance of providing continuity and stability in a child’s welfare, i regard it as a factor that should be weighed in the balance. but i do not regard the applicant as bearing a legal onus to demonstrate that a change in status quo will entail a positive advantage to the child.
382 while i accept a change of residence would no doubt effect a significant disruption in the immediate and perhaps short term, in my view weight must also be attached to the medium and long-term likely effects of any separation of the child from either of her parents. it is in this context that i drew the parties’ attention to dr c’s opinion evidence as set out above.
383 for each of the reasons above and without in any way detracting from the significant disruption which is, and is likely to be, an inherent feature of any order for change of residence, in my opinion, the text of par 60cc(3)(d), viewed in the context of the objects and principles underlying part vii and the act more generally, authorise and require the court to have regard to the likely immediate, short, medium and long term effect on a child of any separation from either of her parents. as reasoned by stephen j in gronow, the fact of the parties’ separation denies this child life in a home where her parents live amicably together and “whatever disability she will suffer in consequence are not now remediable by any court order.” instead, upon an evaluation of all considerations, the court must make an order that appears to it to be proper and as guided by this child’s best interests as the paramount consideration.
384 insofar as the respondent has recently delivered a new child, i do not consider that the effect upon x of a separation from her step-sibling is likely to be a significant issue. nor do i consider the likely effect of separation from the maternal grandparents would be such as to have a markedly deleterious effect upon her. more significant issues are at stake, namely, medium and long-term effect upon the child as opined by dr c.
practical difficulty & expense: sub-s 60cc(3)(e)
385 conformably with the requirements of s 65daa of the act in relation to a child spending equal time or substantial and significant time with both parents, the court is required to consider whether such a proposal is reasonably practicable. if it is not, the proposal is not open: cf mrr v gr (2010) 240 clr 461, [13], [19]. dr c was clear in his views as to this.
386 presently, the parties reside in premises which are a short distance from one another. while this would remain equally true irrespective of where the child was to reside, however, the respondent has introduced a relocation application to enable her to move with the child from victoria to queensland, a proposal which counsel properly conceded was not well developed.
387 the respondent, who is now mother to two young children, has worked in a retail setting and has expressed her desire to move from victoria to queensland with her own parents. the evidence indicates the respondent’s parents have not yet sold their home in victoria or purchased another in queensland. relatedly, i observe the maternal grandfather (and perhaps the grandmother) reside in country j for some months each year. there was force in the observation that the actual proposal being put forward in relation to relocation was somewhat underdone.
388 insofar as the respondent’s proposal had it that she would bear a significant part of the cost of the child travelling to and from queensland, i regarded the evidence as less than persuasive. while she has held employment as a part-time customer service officer, her case was predicated upon her overall dependence upon her parents (whose views are antithetical to the applicant).
389 counsel for the applicant pointed to the objective reality that relocation would place an immense toll on the child’s ability to maintain, regularly, a relationship with her father and that quite apart from the geographical, logistical and financial hurdles, the demonstrated attitude of the respondent in relation to facilitating the child’s spend time with her father undermined any confidence in the idea that the position would improve if the child was to relocate. by contrast, submissions on behalf of the respondent including that “the mother will fund the child’s airline travel costs from travelling to and from queensland to spend time with the father.” in my view, this submission was, at best, aspirational and unsupported by cogent evidence.
390 i conclude there would be real practical difficulty and the real likelihood of significant expense in the child spending time and communicating with the applicant if she was to relocate. i am also satisfied that such practical difficulties and expense would substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with her father on a regular basis.
parental capacity to provide: sub-s 60cc(3)(f)
391 sub-section 60cc(3)(f) of the act requires the court to consider the capacity of each of a child’s parents (and any other person) to provide for a child’s needs, including to provide for her or his emotional and intellectual needs. this consideration overlaps with par 60cc(2)(a).
392 having regard to the substantive relief sought by each party at this final hearing, i have paid particular regard to the evidence that was brought forward for consideration.
393 i have concluded the father has a demonstrated capacity to provide for these needs.
394 the independent expert evidence of dr c (which i accept was validated by his colleague dr h), is of some real significance in this case as informing the respondent’s capacity to provide for the child’s needs, including her emotional needs. such was my concern by the matters raised by dr c in the course of the august hearing that an order was made for a final hearing to be listed with priority. no opposition to the adoption of that course was stated.
395 i have no difficulty in accepting mr b’s opinion that the respondent does not have a borderline personality disorder. i was assisted by his evidence of the overuse of such expressions (including, as he stated, of the more recent tendency to raise issues of narcissism). however, i regarded this as distracting attention from the question posed by par 60cc(3)(f). the court must address the capacity of each parent (and others) to provide for a child’s needs, including those of an emotional and intellectual nature.
396 dr c’s opinion was that the respondent’s “care practices with this child would correlate with someone who is meeting their own emotional needs through the child” and that she “is clearly a woman who has had psychological challenges over the years, including with her mood, anxiety and potentially disordered eating.” in a similar vein, mr b noted “a slightly elevated paranoid scale [which] may reflect sources of psychological difficulty for [the respondent].” other observations by the parties’ joint experts included that the respondent: (a) had shown an abject unwillingness to support the child having a relationship with the other side of her family, (b) would continue to skewer, sabotage and undermine the child having a relationship with her father, (c) portrayed herself as being exceptionally free of common shortcomings to which most individuals would admit, (d) demonstrated a tendency to minimise any negative impact that her actions may have on other people, and also on herself, (e) showed signs of a moderate to high level of defensiveness in the present circumstances and that she will need to manage this personality trait.   had shown an abject unwillingness to support the child having a relationship with the other side of her family, (b) would continue to skewer, sabotage and undermine the child having a relationship with her father, (c) portrayed herself as being exceptionally free of common shortcomings to which most individuals would admit, (d) demonstrated a tendency to minimise any negative impact that her actions may have on other people, and also on herself, (e) showed signs of a moderate to high level of defensiveness in the present circumstances and that she will need to manage this personality trait.
each of those matters is illuminating in the present context. while it is perhaps easy to pass over evidence that some changeovers took between 15-45 minutes, or up to 2 hours and did not occur at all in some instances, it is useful to reflect upon the actual duration of such events.
397 in the course of the expert conclave, cogent evidence was adduced from each expert which drew attention to the respondent’s propensity to seek out professional assistance that would be corroborative of her own views and her aversion to consulting others whom she considered held views inimical to her interests. the experts drew attention to the degree to which the respondent had engaged with region bb health and others. by contrast, the respondent appears to have engaged with mr b only reluctantly and to have refused to do so with dr c.
398 insofar as submissions for the respondent relied upon the applicant’s supposed lack of demonstrated capacity to provide for the child’s needs, for the reasons above, i am satisfied those submissions were somewhat self-fulfilling and infected by circularity. in circumstances where, as was common ground, the child had been withheld for ~200 days over the past 18 months, objectively, the respondent’s conduct in doing so thereby denied the applicant a more fulsome opportunity to demonstrate such capacity. in saying as much i am not concerned either to criticise or characterise the respondent’s behaviours. rather, i am concerned to address each of the additional considerations, including those which are posed by par 60cc(3)(f).
399 while i am satisfied of the absence of factors which would contra-indicate a lack of capacity in the applicant to care for the needs of his daughter, i also observed him as a person who presented positively and as having a strong child focused attitude in this proceeding. for the reasons above, i am unable to make findings of either kind respecting the respondent but rather am confronted by contemporaneous objective evidence and expert evidence which supports an inference that the mother’s capacity to provide for the emotional needs of the child is open to scrutiny. i was not persuaded by her evidence that her attitude was truly child focused.
maturity, sex, lifestyle, background of child and parents: sub-s 60cc(3)(g)
400 these issues overlap with other issues that have been considered above.
401 although the respondent reiterated the importance of her country j heritage and immersion into it, nothing in the applicant’s proposal contains any suggestion or indication of any desire to deny this cultural origin. in the overall scheme of this proceeding, i do not consider this issue to be of particular significance. considerations of greater import need to be addressed.
indigenous considerations: sub-ss 60cc(3)(h), 60cc(6)
402 these matters are not relevant.
demonstrated attitude to and responsibilities for the child: sub-s 60cc(3)(i)
403 much of what has been discussed above, including the matters addressed by dr c and mr b is applicable to this consideration.
404 i incorporate my findings upon the evidence and additional considerations above on this issue.
405 insofar as the respondent submitted that the applicant’s attitude to the child and the risk his capabilities for parenthood were significantly lacking as illustrated by hostility toward the respondent and her family (with an inflexible attitude toward compromise or a relentless and persistent coercion of the respondent), the propositions were in my view quite overstated. upon the whole of the evidence, whatever shortcomings the applicant may have demonstrated, i am satisfied he has sought to exercise restraint and has done so, on some occasions, in the face of withering and unrestrained hostility from the respondent and/or her family.
406 to similar effect, while the respondent made submissions critical of the applicant for a failure to call the paternal grandparents, the difficulty in that supposed criticism is that it largely ignored the facts and circumstances of the case. while it is agreed the child has been withheld from the applicant for ~200 days in the past 18 months or thereabouts, the evidence also indicates a near blanket opposition to the child spending time with the extended paternal family including the paternal grandmother (with the insistent addition of further conditions to be placed by the respondent upon any such spend time).
407 as to the complaint of a failure to call the applicant’s mother, the court retains a discretion whether it would draw an adverse inference from a failure to call a particular witness in all the circumstances of a particular case and in this case i decline to do so.
family violence: sub-s 60cc(3)(j)
408 this topic has been addressed above. the sequence of events respecting ivos is not without some significance. nor is the nature of the alleged breaches for which the respondent engaged with victoria police, for example, in relation to an email communication over parenting.
409 contrary to the respondent’s submissions, the victoria police leap records deny a conclusion the applicant had any prior convictions until her complaint over the email.
410 as stated, i am satisfied neither party poses an unacceptable risk to the child.
matters relevant to existing family violence orders: sub-s 60cc(3)(k)
411 each of the parties raises allegations of family violence. i have addressed these matters above.
412 as the applicant submitted, presently, there are full extant exclusion ivos against: (a) the applicant, naming the respondent and child as protected persons – such an ivo has existed in some form since june 2019 and continues before a local court, (b) the applicant, naming the maternal grandmother as the protected person. as to this, a request for further and better particulars of the complaint has been ignored, (c) the paternal grandmother, naming the respondent and child as protected persons. again, a request for further and better particulars of the complaint has been ignored.  the applicant, naming the respondent and child as protected persons – such an ivo has existed in some form since june 2019 and continues before a local court, (b) the applicant, naming the maternal grandmother as the protected person. as to this, a request for further and better particulars of the complaint has been ignored, (c) the paternal grandmother, naming the respondent and child as protected persons. again, a request for further and better particulars of the complaint has been ignored.
413 while there was evidence of an attempt to secure an ivo against the maternal grandfather (a person who was given a bond for violence perpetrated upon his wife), police declined to act upon the applicant’s complaint, a matter about which he was deeply frustrated.
414 for her part, the respondent drew attention to her “evidence that the father has a history of cocaine use, erratic behaviour, sexual assault, family violence, and using the intervention order process to control and coerce her and, at the least, the maternal grandfather, matters which it was submitted should “be taken into account by the court when considering the attitude of the father and his family towards the mother and her family.” despite the observations made in the course of reasons for the interim orders made in august 2021 and the exhortation to reflect upon the real issues in dispute and to do so in a child focused way, it was not without at least some significance that the respondent framed her outline of case in this way. contextually, by that time her allegations of sexual assault had been addressed with her by dr c as long ago as february 2021 and her entirely inconsistent email communications drawn to her attention. so too, the allegations of cocaine use failed to address the reciprocal allegations raised against her by the applicant and ignored that each party had returned negative drug screens. insofar as allegations of the supposed misuse of ivos was concerned, i have reflected upon the evidence set out above. if there was any substance in the respondent’s complaint, it was at least open to reflect that she should be held to the same standard.
415 upon the totality of the evidence i am persuaded there is presently a potential for the ongoing use of ivos in this parenting dispute and in particular by the respondent against the applicant.
an order that would be least likely to result in the re-litigation: sub-s 60cc(3)(l)
416 the applicant submitted the final orders he sought – sole parental responsibility and change of residence for spend time with the respondent – were the least likely to lead to further disputes. conversely, the respondent contended the relocation order to queensland would do so.
417 for present purposes, enough has been said in relation to the proposal for relocation. however, upon the totality of the evidence i am satisfied orders least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child are orders of a kind for which the applicant contends. upon my overall evaluation of the facts and circumstances of this troubled case, i conclude there is at least a greater likelihood of the child enjoying an upbringing in a secure, stable and harmonious environment if she is to live with her father and spend time with her mother. this conclusion does not entail any finding that the child would be irreparably damaged if she was to remain with her mother. rather, it is to adopt a view upon an evaluation of the totality of the facts and circumstances of what orders are properly made in x’s best interests.
418 orders should be made which, as far as possible, will quell the need for further litigation.
419 a difficulty which exists in that regard is that the child is still very young, and in those circumstances, it is necessarily difficult to predict the manner in which the lives of the parties and the child will evolve. there are limits to which the court can reasonably be expected to go when making orders seeking to address future eventualities. equally, the making of final orders is directed to achieving that result. the parties’ willingness to litigate does not equate to an entitlement to do so. subject to the framing of appropriate orders, i refer to the matters identified by dr c who left open that matters could possibly be revisited in some years.
any other relevant factor: sub-s 60cc(3)(m)
420 standing back from the matter, i note that during the course of opening submissions the parties were afforded an opportunity to reflect upon the fact of their daughter’s young age. counsel readily accepting that in cases involving a young child, parents who were able to adopt a child focused attitude not infrequently couched parenting orders, by consent, in terms which carved out any potential future reliance upon the principles in rice & asplund. insofar as some other factor may be relevant to the consideration of what final parenting orders should be made, i do not ignore the child’s young age and the potential for some change in circumstances. those very considerations were also identified in gronow. equally, it was beyond question the present parenting dispute was one in which the only means of resolution was a court decision. parental responsibility: s 61da
421 division 2 of pt vii concerns the subject “parental responsibility” and comprises ss 61a-61f of the act. relevantly, parental responsibility in relation to a child means all of the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in relation to children: act, s 61b. absent a parenting order which is in operation, each of the parents of a child has parental responsibility for that child: act, s 61c(1). the position enacted by s 61c is displaced where parenting orders are made. but the position is not binary. a parenting order confers parental responsibility for a child on a person, only to the extent to which it confers on that person, duties, powers, responsibilities or authority in relation to that child: act, s 61d.
422 a presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is established by s 61da of the act, which may not apply in certain prescribed circumstances and which may be rebutted. section 61da relevantly provides:  when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. note: the presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that relates solely to the allocation of parental responsibility for a child as defined in section 61b. it does not provide for a presumption about the amount of time the child spends with each of the parents (this issue is dealt with in section 6.5daa). (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence. (3) . . . (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
the note to s 61da of the act above makes clear that the presumption that is created by the section is confined to parental responsibility and does not speak to the question about what amount of time a child should spend with either parent (or any other person).
423 where it applies, sub-s 65da(1) requires that the court’s discretion in making a parenting order is to be exercised upon a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for parents to have equal shared parenting responsibility: dundas & blake [2013] famcafc 133, [56]. this presumption does not apply where there are reasonable grounds for believing that a parent has engaged in abuse or family violence: act, sub-s 61da(2): mellick & mellick [2014] famcafc 236, [60], [65]. the presumption may be rebutted: act, sub-s 61da(3).
424 on the findings i have made, there are not reasonable grounds for believing that either parent has engaged in abuse or family violence. thus, the presumption applies unless it is rebutted. where it is sought to establish that the presumption is rebutted, this requires significant attention in the evidence: dundas & blake [2013] famcafc 133, [57]. i have endeavoured to examine the evidence in detail, particularly in light of the young age of the child. in the circumstances of this case, the parents have not, jointly, made important decisions respecting the child during, or after, the breakdown of their brief relationship. i am satisfied upon the totality of the evidence that it would not be in x’s’ best interests that her parents have equal parenting responsibility. dr c was clear on this issue. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is rebutted in this case.
425 for the avoidance of doubt, i do not regard any primary or additional consideration as being of dispositive significance in the determination of what orders are proper to be made in this case having regard to the child’s best interests as a paramount consideration. furthermore, as the authorities confirm, in its overall evaluation of all considerations, the court is not concerned to reflect upon the parties’ conduct with a view to rewarding one or punishing the other but instead “to ascertain from such conduct whether the welfare of the child will be better served in the custody of one or the other.” in the marriage of kress [1977] vicrp 37, (1976) 2 fam lr 11,330, see also barnett v barnett (1973) 2 nswlr 403. in this respect, i also accept that a propensity to make, and as importantly, persist in unfounded allegations may be relevant: in the marriage of smythe [1983] famca 27, (1983) 8 fam lr 1029. it was for considerations of this kind that the reasons for the interim orders given in august 2021 reminded the parties to adopt a child focused attitude toward the preparation of the final hearing for which the court had given orders for priority.
426 it is also of some importance to contextualise the reasons for the decision given in this final parenting proceeding by recalling that the rules of procedural fairness do not have an immutably fixed content. instead “what will be both sufficient and necessary to ensure a fair hearing in any given case will depend on, and vary with, the context in which a decision-maker acts”: sneddon v minister for justice for the commonwealth of australia [2014] fcafc 156, (2014) 315 alr 352, [177]. in this case, i have set out the history of the matter in some detail. part of the reason for doing so is to identify the opportunities which were afforded to the parties to be fully prepared for a final hearing in august 2021, a hearing which they wanted to vacate. despite that approach, the court of its own initiative called the matter on so as to gain a further insight into the lack of progress in readying the case for final hearing. as a consequence, the extent of the difficulties with parenting arrangements to august 2021 was exposed as set out in the interim reasons. furthermore, the respondent’s submission was accepted on the basis that any application for change of residence should await a final hearing – which hearing was given priority – with orders made to facilitate completion of reports by mr b and dr c. additionally, procedural orders were made to facilitate the conduct of an orderly final hearing.
427 against that background it was remarkable that the respondent conducted the final hearing, in part, on the basis that she had been surprised dr c had completed a family report. moreover, i attach some significance to the evidence given during the expert conclave that it was, in effect, entirely consistent with the respondent’s personality profile to seek out support for the view which she held and, by extension, to avoid consultation with those (i.e. dr c) whom she perceived as unlikely to be supportive of her entrenched views. i am satisfied the parties’ lawyers were notified of the further appointments made to enable the preparation of the family report and that while the father did attend, i infer that the mother chose not to do so. that this resulted in the production of a report which was necessarily qualified lies squarely at the feet of the respondent. relatedly, while the position in may 2021 was that a report was premature, the position had evolved, including by reason of the continuing difficulty in parenting arrangements which have been identified above. as at august 2021, the parties knew the matter had been listed with priority, as did dr c. the opinions expressed in his report of 28 october 2021 may have been further informed by the mother and child having attended for a further appointment but she did not do so. and as is so frequently observed, the opinion evidence of experts is but a part of the totality of the evidence in a case. it is not a trump card.
428 in february 2021, when dr c consulted each of the parties and observed the child for the first time, he recorded the complete breakdown of trust between the parties and when making his evaluation considered it evident that the situation between them had become dysfunctional. dr c recorded the substantial financial, emotional and social costs that each of them had incurred and that “trust and goodwill has broken down entirely. they do not communicate in any meaningful way. given what has unfolded over the last two years or so, i suspect the situation between them now is irrecoverable. it is difficult to envisage a scenario in which they will ever co-parent in a functional manner, or discuss arrangements for their daughter in a collaborative way.” the position has not changed in any substantive way. both before and since interim orders were made in august 2021, some efforts have been made to demonstrate and achieve more effective parenting arrangements. i prefer the view expressed by dr c that once this litigation has concluded, arrangements may well decline soon after.
429 neither party seriously suggested there was any realistic prospect of the position as described by dr c above as being restored or improved in the short, medium or long-term.
430 while a parenting order may deal with the allocation of parental responsibility for a child, such an order may allocate responsibility for making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child: act, s 64b(2)(c), 64b(3). the expression ‘major long-term issues’ as defined in s 4 of the act means issues about the care, welfare and development of the child of a long-term nature and includes (but is not limited to) issues of that nature about a child’s: education, religious and cultural upbringing, health, name, and changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.
431 having regard to the child’s young age, in my opinion it is appropriate to order that sole parental responsibility for major long-term issues be allocated to the applicant father but to provide (as he also submitted), a regime imposing an obligation to inform the respondent of the proposed issue and decision and to consider her views.
432 in my opinion it is appropriate and proper to make an order pursuant to ss 61d, 64b(2)(c) and 64b(3) so as to deal with the allocation of responsibility for making decisions about certain major long-term issues in relation to this child.  with whom the child should reside
433 the importance of considering whether to effect any change arises from the mandate to pay regard to x’s best interests as the paramount consideration when deciding what order is proper to be made. upon the whole of the evidence, i conclude it is proper and in x’s best interests that she live with her father. i do not consider that there is utility for the whole of the evidence to be rehearsed. i also consider the matters examined above sufficiently expose the facts and circumstances which i have regarded as having a bearing on each of the primary and additional considerations that inform an overall evaluation of what orders are proper.
434 in summary, however, i regard the father as having good insight in relation to the detrimental impact which parental conflict will have upon the child and of his overall aversion to conflict. the evidence persuades me, as it persuaded dr c, that the respondent is more likely to pursue a desire to obscure, sabotage and undermine any relationship between the child and her father. i am also persuaded she will continue to seek out the opinions of those whom she believes may be persuaded to support her views in relation to the underlying source of the child’s difficulties at any time including those of health and allied services, victoria police and the department. to this point, there is a deal of evidence the child has not been well socialised including because she has spent so significant an amount of her time exclusively with her mother or maternal grandmother. i accept there has been some change on this score.
435 relatedly, i accept the mother has demonstrated a near complete incapacity to support their child having a relationship with her father and extended paternal family. this conclusion is reinforced by the mother’s personality traits which include a strong resistance to adopt a course which is contrary to her own entrenched beliefs. as counsel for the applicant submitted, however noble and altruistic her statements may be, the mother cannot be relied upon to foster a meaningful relationship between the child and her father because she does not believe that is in the child’s best interests. mr lethlean put to the mother in cross examination and pressed in closing submissions that intention drives behaviour. applied to this case, there have been a cascading series of events over the course of this proceeding supporting a conclusion that she is utterly resistant to the child spending unsupervised or overnight time with her father.
436 upon the whole of the evidence i am not satisfied the mother can say one thing, yet be relied upon to do that thing versus doing another. in terms of making the predictive assessment of how the child’s best interests may be served in the future, i have taken into account the significant risk that if things remain as they are x will reject her father within a matter of years and that she will do so because she will be fed consistent messages, however unintentionally, by the mother which will lead her to develop an adverse view of her father. as dr c observed, x does not appear to be thriving at the moment and certainly something does need to change. in his opinion, the palpable likelihood that the mother will continue to impart to the child an adverse view of her father will eventually materialise in the child splitting away from her father.
437 accepting the applicant is not without flaws or responsibility, from his evidence and presentation i do consider he is probably far better placed to support x to have a relationship with both parents and their extended families. by contrast, i was persuaded by the opinion evidence that the mother’s personality and functioning and interpersonal functioning have contributed significantly to where things presently are at. viewed from slightly different perspectives, while i have concluded x should have the benefit of a meaningful relationship with each of her parents, i consider a more significant and valuable relationship will inhere if she no longer lives with her mother and, as importantly, if she now lives with her father where there is at least some prospect that the risk of the child splitting away from either parent may be minimised or avoided. allied to those considerations is that there seems good reason to conclude the child will have an opportunity to live in a more stable and settled environment than if she is to live in the care of her father. this in turn may promote the prospect that in a residence where there is an environment of stability and continuity this child will become “a more settled, well-adjusted, well-socialised and emotionally happier child.” as to this, i do not ignore the criticism of the apparent lack of detailed evidence disclosing the living arrangements of the father, his partner and family. the court is left to do the best it can with the available material and the inferences properly to be drawn from it. here, the impression to be drawn overall of the parties’ respective circumstances may be gleaned from the leap records, the ivos, the intense level of consultations with an enhanced maternal health care nurse, a clinician with child & youth mental health service, and the involvement by the department over the short history of this child’s life. contrastingly, there is a dearth of evidence suggestive of problems in the domestic arrangements of the applicant and his parents.
438 having regard to the evidence which i have examined and the matters addressed in relation to each of the primary and additional considerations, i conclude that the child should live with the applicant. questions then arise as to appropriate spend time arrangements. equal or substantial time: sub-ss 65daa(1)-(5)
439 section 65daa of the act is headed “court to consider child spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each parent in certain circumstances”.
440 it is only where the court determines that it is in a child’s best interests to spend equal time (or substantial and significant time) with each parent and that it is reasonably practicable to do so, that the court is authorised to consider making an order which provides for the child to spend equal (or substantial and significant time) time with each parent: mrr v gr (2010) 240 clr 461, [13]. in the present case, i have concluded that the parties should not have equal shared parental responsibility and in those circumstances the requirements of ss 65daa(1) and (2) are not engaged with the result that the court is not required to consider whether the child spending equal, or substantial, time with each of her parents would be in her best interests or is reasonably practicable or to make an order which provides for such spend time.
441 for a great many of the reasons which have been given above it is also not in x’s interests that she spend equal or substantial time with her mother. presently, the immediate concern is to readdress and repair the disturbed and dysfunctional attachment with the mother.
442 dr c was clear in his opinion that whichever way the court determined the child’s substantive place of residence, and notwithstanding the somewhat improved situation with the child and parenting arrangements he would not recommend anything significantly different from the non-residential parent spending more than two nights per fortnight building progressively to four days per fortnight, anything more than that was going to be difficult. in the view expressed by dr c, having regard to the child’s current disturbed presentation it was not reasonably practicable to contemplate a more expansive spend time arrangement.
443 nothing in the cross examination of the dr c’s altered my impression of this expert’s adherence to his opinion on this issue. given the particularly troubling nature of the issues presented, in my view it is proper to make orders which are informed by those opinions. by the time the parties had authored joint minute of proposed spend time arrangements, they had somewhat refined their proposals as to what types of arrangements they considered proper to be made. curiously, notwithstanding the evidence given by dr c, each of them seemed to have disregarded it inasmuch as he was opposed to fragmented spend time each fortnight.
444 there was merit in dr c’s opinion that spend time arrangements should be structured in a way that avoided the risk of constant disruption and promoted the prospect of providing stability to the child. upon those bases, the spend time arrangements should be structured to provide a single period of time each fortnight and to build, initially from two nights per fortnight and, when x is aged three (18 may 2022) increasing to three nights and in 2024, to four nights per fortnight. in some respects these arrangements are more liberal than those proposed by the applicant and to some extent mirror the proposal put by the respondent on the basis that the child would continue to live with her and spend time with her father.
445 as stated, these conclusions do not foreclose a possible alteration in spend time arrangements. whether that might occur would depend upon the facts and circumstances which then existed and application of the principles settled in rice & asplund: see also [304] above. although it is convenient to deal with the question of relocation separately below, for the avoidance of doubt i do not consider it is reasonably practicable for the child to relocate.  relocation
446 the power to make a parenting order pursuant to par 64b(2)(a) dealing with the person or persons with whom a child is to live embraces a power to facilitate relocation.
447 where relocation is in issue, the court is not concerned to restrain a parent from exercising their autonomous right to move to any locality. in a parenting context, absent exceptional circumstances, an adult has the right to live where they wish. the jurisdiction exercised under the act in making a parenting order concerns the making of orders that are ‘proper’ because they are in a child’s best interests. the court may impose a restraint against a party to prevent a child from being relocated where to do so would be contrary to his or her best interests.
448 in a & a (relocation approach)[2000] famca 751, , (2000) flc 93-035, [64], nicholson cj, ellis and coleman jj reviewed the authorities and considered the following principles to be established: in determining a parenting case that involves a proposal to relocate the residence of a child, the welfare or best interests of the child as the case may be . . . remains the paramount consideration but is not the sole consideration. in determining a case that involves a proposal to relocate the residence of a child, a court cannot require the applicant for the child’s relocation to demonstrate ‘compelling reasons’ for the relocation of a child’s residence ‘contrary to the proposition that the welfare of the child would be better promoted by’ maintenance of the existing circumstances.
449 the full court proceeded upon a detailed analysis of dicta in many authorities and commended the adoption of a three-staged approach that should be taken where relocation was in issue: [2000] famca 751, (2000) flc 93-035, [65]-[81]. it is important to recognise that a & a (relocation approach) was decided at a time before the act was the subject of extensive amendment, including by the provision of the legislative pathway that is now provided in part vii of the act.
450 in u & u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238, [80], gummow and callinan jj, while accepting that the court was required to give careful consideration to the arrangements proposed by the parties, questioned whether, in every case, the court was obliged, or would be able in every case to give discrete consideration to each of the three issues as articulated in a & a. gleeson cj, mchugh and hayne jj agreed in that judgment: [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238, [1], [34], [169]. although gaudron and kirby jj were in dissent, their honours’ respective reasons confirm that the court was unanimous in the need to give attention to the parties competing proposals: [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238, [37]-[38] (gaudron j), [136], [157]-[159] (kirby j). kirby j reiterated that while a child’s best interests were to be treated as paramount, they were not to be elevated to the status of the sole factor for consideration. his honour also acknowledged the hesitation that should be adopted by the court before refusing permission to relocate, stating at [158]:
the ‘hesitation’ mentioned in tyler does, however, evidence a greater attention to the realities of the position of the primary carer (overwhelmingly female). it allows a proper consideration of the factors affecting the carer's life, such as their freedom of movement, association, employment and personal relationships. these are to be weighed against any negative impacts of relocation, such as reduced contact. however, this last factor should not dictate the result, any more than should the carer's desire for relocation. (footnotes omitted)
451 in kb & tc [2005] famca 458, (2005) flc 93-224, bryant cj, may and boland jj discerned that the statements of gummow and callinan jj above had “ameliorated the somewhat rigid and or formulaic suggested approach” of a & a (relocation approach). the full court held at [72]:
in u & u the high court said that the proper approach to be adopted in a relocation case is a weighing of competing proposals, having regard to relevant s[60cc] factors, and consideration of other relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the parent who wishes to relocate, bearing in mind that ultimately the decision must be one which is in the best interests of the child.
452 following kb & tc, the act was substantially amended in 2006 by the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) act 2006 (cth), which commenced operation in 2006 and relevantly, by sch 1, inserted sub-div ba, best interests of the child, ss 60ca – 60dae to the act. those amendments established a new framework when parenting orders fall to be considered. following those amendments, relocation principles were reassessed.
453 in morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230, (2007) flc 93-343, boland j sitting as a single justice on appeal, considered relocation principles in light of those amendments to the act. his honour held at [72]-[80], that the statutory pathway contained in part vii was to be followed and required consideration of the competing proposals as against the criteria in s 60cc, informed by s 60b and, where equal shared parental responsibility was presumed or agreed, the evaluation of the matters required by s 60daa. boland j further held at [81] that:
. . . as a matter of practical utility, that structured exercise can be effectively carried out by examining the issues in dispute against the relevant s 60cc factors, and then applying those findings to a consideration of the criteria of s 65daa to craft appropriate orders.
454 in taylor & barker [2007] fam ca 1236, (2007) flc 93-345, [53], bryant cj and finn j agreed it was inappropriate to deal with the issue of relocation as an issue separately or distinctly from the consideration of the primary and additional considerations posed by s 60cc(2)-(3), stating:
we agree that when dealing with a case concerning the future living arrangements for a child, and involving a significant change in the geographical place where the child is to live, the preferred approach according to established principle has been not to deal with that change, or relocation, as a separate or discrete issue, but rather is just one of the proposals for the child’s future living arrangements, at least insofar as that approach is possible.
their honours cited both u & u and kb & tc as supporting that proposition and agreed it was entirely appropriate to consider the possibility of relocation under s 60cc(3)(m) as constituting “any other fact or circumstance that was relevant.” the plurality expressed difficulty in seeing in what other context within the applicable statutory framework relocation could be considered. their honours further held that a relocation proposal should also be evaluated, so far as possible, in the context of s 65daa: [2007] fam ca 1236, (2007) flc 93-345, [54]-[63].
455 in mrr & gr (2010) 240 clr 461, the court examined relocation principles and held that, in relation to orders for a child to spend either equal or substantial and significant time with each parent, preconditions to the exercise of power were that the court consider and make a finding whether the spending of such time was reasonably practicable. their honours further held at [15] that s 65daa(1) was “concerned with the reality of the situation of the parents and the child, not whether it is desirable that there be equal time spent by the child with each parent.” although their honours did not need to expressly address s 65daa(2) on this issue, parity of reasoning supports a conclusion that it too is concerned with the reality of a child spending substantial and significant time with each parent.
456 in moon & moon [2011] famcafc 116, [113], coleman j sitting as a single justice on an appeal, noted it had been suggested on a number of occasions (in light of the changes to pt vii and the high court’s judgment in mrr v gr), that reliance upon a & a (relocation approach) was “unhelpful and possibly erroneous”: citing hepburn & noble [2010] famcafc 111, (2010) flc 93-438, [100], mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, (2009) flc 93-405, and starr & duggan [2009] famcafc 115.
457 in tabac & kelmer [2016] fcca 1937, [112] citing morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230, paskansky & paskansky [1999] famca 1889, (1999) flc 92-878, kb & tc [2005] famca 458, (2005) flc 93-224, stewart j stated a number of propositions which accurately state the applicable principles: a) the best interests of the child remain the paramount, but are not the sole consideration, b) a parent who wishes to move to another locality does not need to demonstrate compelling reason to do so, c) instead, where relocation is under consideration it is necessary to weigh and balance the child’s best interests together with the right of the parent proposing to relocate to freedom of movement, d) such cases do not fall for analysis upon whether one parent should have residence of the child and, separately, whether relocation should be permitted, e) the proper approach in a relocation case entails the weighing of the parties’ competing proposals upon s 60cc considerations and any other relevant matter, including a party’s right to freedom of movement, f) ultimately, the decision turns on the best interests of the child.
a) the best interests of the child remain the paramount, but are not the sole consideration, b) a parent who wishes to move to another locality does not need to demonstrate compelling reason to do so, c) instead, where relocation is under consideration it is necessary to weigh and balance the child’s best interests together with the right of the parent proposing to relocate to freedom of movement, d) such cases do not fall for analysis upon whether one parent should have residence of the child and, separately, whether relocation should be permitted, e) the proper approach in a relocation case entails the weighing of the parties’ competing proposals upon s 60cc considerations and any other relevant matter, including a party’s right to freedom of movement, f) ultimately, the decision turns on the best interests of the child.
see also wilson & wilson [2019] fcca 2131, [83]-[86] (mcnab j).
458 where a proposal is made for the relocation of a child, it should be evaluated, so far as possible, in the context of s 65daa and to canvass the advantages and disadvantages of relocation: taylor & barker[2007] fam ca 1236, , (2007) flc 93-345, [54]-[63]. however, the formulaic approach that had hitherto been adopted is no longer appropriate: bonnor & loverdos [2021] famcafc 93, [61].
459 relocation is complex. despite the principles examined above, the parties’ submissions did not squarely seek to identify and address the relative merits and demerits of their respective proposals. counsel for the respondent quite properly conceded the relocation application was not the most well-developed application he had seen in this jurisdiction. i agree.
460 reduced to its essentials, the respondent, who has recently become mother to another infant, wishes to move to queensland on the stated basis that she is dependent upon her parents for support. in cross examination the respondent stated that if orders were made that the child should reside with her father, in that event she would elect to remain in victoria. presently, the evidence does not support a conclusion the maternal grandparents have any residence in queensland let alone an executed, but executory, contract to purchase land in that state.
461 there was really very little in the case to suggest the respondent’s autonomy was an issue. nor is there any suggestion the respondent has some other emotional or financial reason to move from victoria to queensland. i accept the applicant’s evidence the proposal to relocate, when first announced in may 2021, effectively came out of the blue and had not been raised before.
462 insofar as the respondent’s case for relocation included a submission that she would largely cover or make a substantial contribution of the costs of travel, the evidence does not support the acceptance of that submission or persuade me it is of any substance.
463 apart from the respondent’s stated desire to relocate, the court is entitled to, and does include in its evaluation of the application, the negative impacts which it would have including significantly reduced contact for the child with her father. since the decision must ultimately be one in which x’s best interests are the paramount but not sole consideration, upon all of the facts and circumstances of this case, in my view there would be overwhelming prejudice to the child if she was relocated to queensland by her mother.
464 in my opinion, the foregoing reasons provide a proportionate response to those submissions. the application for relocation is refused. relief
465 in the course of closing submissions, the parties were (again) requested to furnish a joint minute indicating where they were agreed and disagreed on the parenting orders being sought. by those minutes, the parties indicated their agreement on several issues.
466 the expression ‘parenting order’ has the meaning given by sub-s 64b(1) of the act which is cast in ambulatory terms and provides that a “parenting order” may deal with one or more of the following: (a) the persons with whom a child is to live, (b) the time a child is to spend with other persons, (c) the allocation of parental responsibility for a child, (d) the obligation of consultation in cases of shared parental responsibility, (e) the communication a child is to have with other persons, (f) maintenance, (g) steps to be taken before an application be made for variation of an order to take account of changing needs or circumstances of a child or the parties, (h) dispute resolution, and (i) any aspect of the care, welfare or development of the child or any aspect of parental responsibility.
467 section 65d of the act concerns the subject, “court’s power to making parenting orders.” by sub-s 65d(1), power is conferred on the court in proceedings for a “parenting order”, to make such parenting orders as it thinks “proper”. the discretion conferred on a court by s 65d of the act to make such parenting orders as it thinks proper is broad. in bondelmonte v bondelmonte [2017] hca 8, (2017) 259 clr 662, [32], the high court said of s 65d:
a parenting order made under s 65d involves the exercise of a judicial discretion because it is made by reference to a paramount consideration of a general kind, the best interests of the child, which involves an overall assessment of a number of other considerations, either statutorily prescribed or considered by the court to be relevant. the primary considerations in s 60cc(2) are matters to be borne in mind as consistent with the objects of pt vii. the additional considerations in s 60cc(3) require assessments of the matters there listed by reference to the circumstances of the case. they involve value judgments in respect of which there may be room for reasonable differences of opinion, as does the overall assessment of what is in the best interests of the child. (emphasis added)
these principles were recently applied in keane & keane (2021) 62 fam lr 190 at [54]-[64], see also blann & kenny [2021] famcafc 161.
468 gronow v gronow, which has been cited in many hundreds of cases, was one of the decisions cited in bondelmonte & bondelmonte as authority for the principles informing consideration of the discretionary power vested in the court by s 65d of the act to make such orders as it considers proper. the power created by s 65d of the act confers a largely unfettered discretion, albeit one that must be exercised judicially. the discretion must be exercised having regard to the objects and principles stated in s 60b of the act. those objects include: ensuring that the best interests of a child are met by ensuring she or he has the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the child’s best interests, protecting children from physical or psychological harm, ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential. principles underlying those objects (except where it would be contrary to a child’s best interests) include that: children have a right to know and be cared for by both of their parents, a right to spend time, and communicate, on a regular basis with both of their parents and other people significant to his or her care, welfare and development (such as grandparents).
469 in deciding what parenting orders are proper to be made in proceedings under part vii, the best interests of the child remain the paramount, but not sole, consideration: act, s 60ca, morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230, (2007) flc 93-343, [59], [73], [79]-[80], franklyn & franklyn [2019] famcafc 256, [28]. at the same time, neither party may arrogate to themselves any right to insist on what parenting arrangements ought to be made: cooke & morton [2018] famcafc 9, [39]. there, ryan, kent and cleary jj stated at [41] that “it is the child’s best interests that lie at the centre of parenting proceedings, rather than any assumed right, interest, entitlement or privilege of a parent/party to the proceedings.” the court is not obliged to accept either party’s proposal as to the orders which should be made: ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160, [95], [196], [218], [284], u & u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238, [1], [44], [80], [169]-[171].
470 these reasons for judgment explain why i have determined it is in x’s best interests that her father should have sole parental responsibility for major long-term issues and the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which this entails subject to the obligation that he should inform the respondent of proposed decisions and consider the views she may express. these reasons also explain why it is in the child’s best interests to live with her father and spend time with her mother overnight in an arrangement that is structured to increase incrementally, but will hopefully provide and promote a greater level of stability and continuity and a more settled and well-adjusted environment than has hitherto been obtained.
471 it is unnecessary to address in detail each of the orders as proposed by the parties including those upon which they were agreed. however, i have declined to make or modify some of the orders that are proposed and shall address those briefly. at the outset, i have made an order restraining the parties from applying to suspend, vary or discharge any order until after they have participated in mediation to attempt to resolve any dispute of that kind: act, s 64b(2)(g). in my view, an order of that kind does not trench beyond boundaries of the type identified in overlin & infeld (2021) 357 flr 391, [19], [21]-[22], [33]-[40]. the order is not limited by temporal restraints. it does not forbid any application being made and instead permits any application once mediation has been held. far from imposing an impermissible fetter upon the institution of an application, it operates conformably with ss 60i(1) and 64b(4a) of the act. nor is it conditioned upon either party having, for example, undertaken particular therapy. procedural fairness was afforded as to the making of such an order, the issue was raised during submissions. as noted in overlin, the principles in rice & asplund apply to any application to discharge, vary, suspend or revive a parenting order. proof of a material change in circumstances would ordinarily be required to do so. mediation would afford an environment in which the parties could demonstrate a material change and make a genuine effort to resolve the question whether it was in x’s best interests to make any new arrangements.
472 the parties’ proposals for changeover were somewhat surprisingly ill-considered and were framed in terms that provided for the changeover to occur at either a mcdonald’s or the child’s school. little if any thought had been given to the child’s present age.
473 proposals for communications have also caused me concern. in my view, it is presently in x’s best interests not to be communicating with the parent with whom she is not living. having reflected upon the substantive issues raised by dr c, i consider it will serve to promote stability in x’s life if she is left alone by the other parent. in due course it may be that matters settled somewhat and communication at other times will be possible. when, and if, the environment is such that other mid-week communication seems appropriate, the parties will be able to address that issue via their agreed parenting app or mediation.
474 i was satisfied that it was appropriate to make an airport watchlist order, however, the applicant sought that such an order remain operative until x was 18 years of age. i considered such a proposal excessively restrictive but have made ancillary orders that will oblige the parties to act in a more consultative manner before such travel may occur and will restrain either party from applying to this court in relation to the issue until they have first made proper attempts to resolve any issues in dispute, including, if necessary, by mediation.
475 i do not consider it is appropriate to make an order for the mother to take all steps and do all things so as to attend with the child upon a bonding and attachment specialist and follow all reasonable directions and advice from the appointed specialist. it will be for her to consider whether she wishes to do so including in the event she seeks any variation to these orders once the child has turned 7 or 8 years of age. aside from the issues raised in overlin, i am reluctant to force the mother to do something she may simply refuse to entertain.
conclusion
476 the facts and circumstances of this case are entirely regrettable. the proceeding has been given a priority hearing in those circumstances and final orders made which take account of the parties’ agreement on particular issues and their submissions and the whole of the evidence.
dated: 24 november 2021