last updated: 9 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
galvis & galvis (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 557
orders
pending further order the court orders that:
note: the form of the order is subject to the entry in the court’s records.
note: this copy of the court’s reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 10.14(b) federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13 federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).
part xivb of the family law act 1975 (cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify persons, associated persons, or witnesses involved in family law proceedings.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction and background
material relied upon  her application in a proceeding filed 31 october 2023, (b) her minute of orders sent to the court on 19 april 2024, (c) her affidavit filed 15 march 2024, and (d) her case outline filed 5 april 2024, in particular at paragraphs 4.1 to 4.31.   her minute of orders sent to the court on 19 april 2024, (c) her affidavit filed 15 march 2024, and (d) her case outline filed 5 april 2024, in particular at paragraphs 4.1 to 4.31.   her affidavit filed 15 march 2024, and (d) her case outline filed 5 april 2024, in particular at paragraphs 4.1 to 4.31.   her case outline filed 5 april 2024, in particular at paragraphs 4.1 to 4.31.   his response to an application in a proceeding filed 17 april 2024.
evidence
relevant legal principles
‑‑4.8 the purpose and operation of the principles in rice & asplund are well known. as was recently restated by bennett j in mahoney v dieter (no 3) [2022] fedcfamc1f 151 at [6]:
the rule in rice & asplund is aimed at preventing a party from re-litigating simply in the hope of obtaining a more favourable result from a re-exercise of a discretion. the purpose of it is to protect children [...] from the disruption and uncertainty of serial litigation. in cases subsequent to rice & asplund this court has confirmed that the rule operates to protect the child based on the best interests not being served by repeated applications to vary orders. this view that rice & asplund operates to protect the child from “the disruption and uncertainty” of repeated litigation has also been stated in freeman & freeman [1986] famca 23, where strauss j had additional mind to the effects on the parties themselves, the financial effects of re-litigation and the “proper and orderly administration of the law” in general: ... continuing and seemingly endless and inconclusive litigation is usually emotionally damaging to the litigants and will likely to affect the children adversely. it impairs the ability of the custodian [...] to deal with the present and plan the future of the family. it is financially burdensome. for these and like reasons the court may, in an appropriate case, scrutinise with some care an application such as the one in question here where a party applies for what is, in effect, the reversal of an order made a short time previously. the court may enquire what the facts and circumstances are before it embarks on what might be a lengthy and costly hearing. the welfare of the children is [...] the paramount consideration. but once the court, either after a full hearing or by a consent order, has settled the question of custody, it is usually in the best interests of the children that the order made by the court is treated as determining the dispute and be given the necessary support. stability in the lives of children and also in the lives of adults is an essential pre-requisite to their wellbeing. another important reason for approaching with some care an application to overturn such a recent order is that the proper and orderly administration of the law in the community of which these children are a part requires that orders made in this jurisdiction should not be overturned unless sufficiently weighty new facts and circumstances are shown to exist which throw sufficient doubts on the desirability of continuing the custodial arrangements brought about by the order. each case must depend on its own facts but, as a general proposition, it might be said that those new facts and changed circumstances should be such as to necessitate a fresh investigation to safeguard the best interests of the children.
... 4.10 furthermore, in barr v barr (no 3) [2023] fedcfamc1f at [26]-[28] (barr v barr), hartnett j recently affirmed the following:
[26] in walden & cooper [2020] famca 104 , austin j set out the current guiding legal principles, on which i proceed, as follows: the infinite vicissitudes of life mean no parenting order can ever be truly immutable, which reality is recognised in the act (s 65d(2)). however, it is well established that no parenting orders, intended to be final, will be revised unless an applicant seeking to vary the orders can demonstrate a material change of circumstance to warrant the revision ( rice & asplund (1979) flc 90–725 at 78,905 (“rice & asplund”), sps & pls (2008) flc 93–363 at [1] (“sps & pls”), marsden v winch (2009) 42 fam lr 1 at [48] (“ marsden v winch ”), langmeil & grange [2013] famcafc 31 at [43]–[48], poisat & poisat (2014) flc 93–597 (“poisat & poisat”)). the question of whether there has been a change in circumstances of sufficient magnitude to warrant revision of existing orders may be determined either by way of preliminary enquiry or comprehensive hearing (poisat & poisat at [39]–[41], marsden v winch at [46]–[47], miller & harrington (2008) flc 93–383 at [80]–[83] (“miller & harrington”)) but, at whichever stage the determination is made, the application of the rice & asplund guideline is merely a manifestation of the paramountcy principle (poisat & poisat at [18], [19], [40], [42], marsden v winch at [55], miller & harrington at [101]) and procedural fairness should always be observed ( marsden v winch at [56]). in order to determine the existence and materiality of the asserted change in circumstances, consideration should be given to (marsden v winch at [50]): (a) the past circumstances, including the reasons for the original decision and the evidence upon which it was based, (b) whether there is a likelihood of the orders being varied in a significant way as a result of a new hearing, and (c) if there is such a likelihood, whether the asserted need for variation of the orders outweighs the potential detriment to the child or children which the fresh litigation will cause. [27] in baisman & cartmill [2022] fedcfamc1a 36 at [11], the court stated that any change or any non-disclosed evidence from a previous proceeding must be “significant” to justify revisiting parenting arrangements. [28] in dl & w (2012) flc 93–496 at [77] and carriel & lendrum (2015) flc 93–640 at [56], the court stated that in such a consideration as set out above, the court is not required to adopt the process as set out in goode & goode (2006) flc 93–286 , nor is the court required to discretely address and consider many of the s 60cc of the act factors.  the past circumstances, including the reasons for the original decision and the evidence upon which it was based, (b) whether there is a likelihood of the orders being varied in a significant way as a result of a new hearing, and (c) if there is such a likelihood, whether the asserted need for variation of the orders outweighs the potential detriment to the child or children which the fresh litigation will cause.   whether there is a likelihood of the orders being varied in a significant way as a result of a new hearing, and (c) if there is such a likelihood, whether the asserted need for variation of the orders outweighs the potential detriment to the child or children which the fresh litigation will cause.   if there is such a likelihood, whether the asserted need for variation of the orders outweighs the potential detriment to the child or children which the fresh litigation will cause.   per original)
discussion  the child x and the parties’ twin daughters, y and z, were due to spend time with the father in sydney in the 2023 school holidays. the child x did not join the daughters on the trip. in late 2023 at the airport in queensland the maternal grandmother, who was present there with the daughters, was verbally abused (including swearing) by the father who apparently was objecting to the presence of the maternal grandfather. the daughters were crying. the father had yelled at the daughters to hurry up, (b) since mid-2023 x has refused to take any phone calls from the father, and he has not seen the father since this time, (c) in early 2024 the mother overheard a telephone call that the father had with z, the father had said that the mother would go to gaol, the mother would have to pay the father’s court fees, the mother was a liar, the mother would not let him see z, and this child came to the mother crying and distressed.   since mid-2023 x has refused to take any phone calls from the father, and he has not seen the father since this time, (c) in early 2024 the mother overheard a telephone call that the father had with z, the father had said that the mother would go to gaol, the mother would have to pay the father’s court fees, the mother was a liar, the mother would not let him see z, and this child came to the mother crying and distressed.   in early 2024 the mother overheard a telephone call that the father had with z, the father had said that the mother would go to gaol, the mother would have to pay the father’s court fees, the mother was a liar, the mother would not let him see z, and this child came to the mother crying and distressed.   ‘i am scared of what dad is going to do to me next time he sees me don't make me go': (b) 'i really don't want daddy to swear at me, i hate it when he calls me a stupid idiot, and cunt', and (c) 'i am scared dad is going to hit me or twist my arm behind my back again. mum why are you making me go'.   'i really don't want daddy to swear at me, i hate it when he calls me a stupid idiot, and cunt', and (c) 'i am scared dad is going to hit me or twist my arm behind my back again. mum why are you making me go'.   'i am scared dad is going to hit me or twist my arm behind my back again. mum why are you making me go'.   the child x’s views in relation to spending time with the father have changed and he has become oppositional to spending time with the father. this child has not seen the father since mid-2023 and has refused to take any phone calls from the father since this time. when required to transition into the father’s care in late 2023 he exhibited disturbing self-harming behaviour. he has expressed fear of the father. his relationship with the father overall has deteriorated since the court’s orders of 27 march 2023, (b) the father’s behaviour in front of the children since the orders of 27 march 2023 is of significant concern, for example, in late 2023 at the airport in queensland he swore at the maternal grandmother in front of the children and yelled at the children. another example is the telephone call the father had with the child z in early 2024 when he had stated to that child, inter alia, that the mother would go to gaol, and the mother was a liar, resulting in the child coming to the mother crying and distressed, the mother has ceased telephone communication between the three youngest children the father since about early 2024. on the mother’s evidence, there is a significant suggestion that the children have been adversely emotionally affected by the father’s behaviour since the orders of 27 march 2023, (c) concerns are raised by the mother in relation to the father’s mental health and physical well-being, including, for example, the father’s behaviour in early 2023 in telling the children that he had an illness and not long to live, as well as the father informing ms f (x’s counsellor) that he had only 6 months to live, (d) the mother’s significant difficulties in communicating with the father since the orders of 27 march 2023, including the father’s erratic communications with the mother since late 2023 and the mother experiencing consequential distress and anxiety.   the father’s behaviour in front of the children since the orders of 27 march 2023 is of significant concern, for example, in late 2023 at the airport in queensland he swore at the maternal grandmother in front of the children and yelled at the children. another example is the telephone call the father had with the child z in early 2024 when he had stated to that child, inter alia, that the mother would go to gaol, and the mother was a liar, resulting in the child coming to the mother crying and distressed, the mother has ceased telephone communication between the three youngest children the father since about early 2024. on the mother’s evidence, there is a significant suggestion that the children have been adversely emotionally affected by the father’s behaviour since the orders of 27 march 2023, (c) concerns are raised by the mother in relation to the father’s mental health and physical well-being, including, for example, the father’s behaviour in early 2023 in telling the children that he had an illness and not long to live, as well as the father informing ms f (x’s counsellor) that he had only 6 months to live, (d) the mother’s significant difficulties in communicating with the father since the orders of 27 march 2023, including the father’s erratic communications with the mother since late 2023 and the mother experiencing consequential distress and anxiety.   concerns are raised by the mother in relation to the father’s mental health and physical well-being, including, for example, the father’s behaviour in early 2023 in telling the children that he had an illness and not long to live, as well as the father informing ms f (x’s counsellor) that he had only 6 months to live, (d) the mother’s significant difficulties in communicating with the father since the orders of 27 march 2023, including the father’s erratic communications with the mother since late 2023 and the mother experiencing consequential distress and anxiety.   the mother’s significant difficulties in communicating with the father since the orders of 27 march 2023, including the father’s erratic communications with the mother since late 2023 and the mother experiencing consequential distress and anxiety.
associate: dated: 7 may 2024
dated: 7 may 2024
appendix
minute of orders in the federal circuit and family court of australia at parramatta file no. pac6181/2022 between mr galvis applicant and ms galvis respondent pending further order:
in the federal circuit and family court of australia at parramatta file no. pac6181/2022 between mr galvis applicant and ms galvis respondent pending further order:
at parramatta file no. pac6181/2022 between mr galvis applicant and ms galvis respondent pending further order:
between mr galvis applicant and ms galvis respondent pending further order:
applicant and ms galvis respondent pending further order:
and ms galvis respondent pending further order:
respondent pending further order:
pending further order:
6.2 with such frequency as recommended by the children’s treating general practitioner, and 6.3 at such times as may be facilitated by the nominated therapist, and for such period of time as recommended by the therapist, for the purpose of therapeutic intervention and counselling regarding their respective relationship(s) with the husband.
8.1 a list of 3 proposed single expert psychiatrists or clinical psychologists, and 8.2 the curriculum vitae for each proposed single expert: and 8.3 a summary of available dates for interview and estimated costs, 8.4 for consideration by the parties for appointment as a single expert pursuant to division 7.1.2 of the rules to enquire into and report upon matters relating to the welfare of the children.
with the husband by his lawyers to copy the wife to all communications with the husband’s expert.