last updated: 17 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
laramie & laramie [2024] fedcfamc2f 574
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
parental responsibility  advise the father in writing not less than twenty-eight (28) days in advance of any decision on major long-term issues in relation to the children proposed to be made by the mother, (b) provide the father with all relevant information relating to the long-term issue which is in the possession of the mother, (c) provide any necessary authorities to enable the father to obtain any additional information from any relevant health or education institution, (d) give consideration to any response from the father before making a decision, and (e) inform the father of any decision made as soon as reasonably practicable and no later than seven (7) days after the making of the decision.   provide the father with all relevant information relating to the long-term issue which is in the possession of the mother, (c) provide any necessary authorities to enable the father to obtain any additional information from any relevant health or education institution, (d) give consideration to any response from the father before making a decision, and (e) inform the father of any decision made as soon as reasonably practicable and no later than seven (7) days after the making of the decision.   provide any necessary authorities to enable the father to obtain any additional information from any relevant health or education institution, (d) give consideration to any response from the father before making a decision, and (e) inform the father of any decision made as soon as reasonably practicable and no later than seven (7) days after the making of the decision.   give consideration to any response from the father before making a decision, and (e) inform the father of any decision made as soon as reasonably practicable and no later than seven (7) days after the making of the decision.   inform the father of any decision made as soon as reasonably practicable and no later than seven (7) days after the making of the decision.
live with
time with  week 1: from 9:00am until 5:00pm each saturday and sunday, and each alternate week thereafter, and (b) week 2: from 3:00pm until 7:00pm on thursday.   week 2: from 3:00pm until 7:00pm on thursday.   week 1: from 12:00pm saturday until 12:00pm sunday, and each alternate week thereafter, and (b) week 2: from 3:00pm until 7:00pm on thursday.   each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm on friday to 5.00 pm on the following sunday.
school holidays   the children shall spend the first half of the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods with the father in even numbered years and the second half of the school holiday in odd numbered years, (b) the children shall spend the second half of the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods with the mother in even numbered years and the first half of the school holiday in odd numbered years, (c) the children shall spend the christmas school holidays with each parents in alternating weeks, commencing on the first week of the school holidays with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.   the children shall spend the second half of the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods with the mother in even numbered years and the first half of the school holiday in odd numbered years, (c) the children shall spend the christmas school holidays with each parents in alternating weeks, commencing on the first week of the school holidays with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.   the children shall spend the christmas school holidays with each parents in alternating weeks, commencing on the first week of the school holidays with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years.   school holidays shall commence from 9.00am on the day after the last required day of school attendance for term 4 and shall conclude at 5.00pm on the last day prior to the first day of required school attendance for term 1, (b) changeover is to occur as agreed, and failing agreement, as follows: (i) in respect of short school holidays, at 5.00pm on the mid-point day between the first and last day of each school holiday period, (ii) in respect of christmas school holidays, at 5.00pm on the first saturday of the school holiday period and each saturday thereafter, (iii) in the event that there are two consecutive 'mid-point days', then changeover is to occur at 5.00pm on the first of those two 'mid-point days',   changeover is to occur as agreed, and failing agreement, as follows: (i) in respect of short school holidays, at 5.00pm on the mid-point day between the first and last day of each school holiday period, (ii) in respect of christmas school holidays, at 5.00pm on the first saturday of the school holiday period and each saturday thereafter, (iii) in the event that there are two consecutive 'mid-point days', then changeover is to occur at 5.00pm on the first of those two 'mid-point days',   in respect of short school holidays, at 5.00pm on the mid-point day between the first and last day of each school holiday period, (ii) in respect of christmas school holidays, at 5.00pm on the first saturday of the school holiday period and each saturday thereafter,  ) in respect of christmas school holidays, at 5.00pm on the first saturday of the school holiday period and each saturday thereafter,  i) in the event that there are two consecutive 'mid-point days', then changeover is to occur at 5.00pm on the first of those two 'mid-point days',
special occasions  with father from 5.00pm on christmas eve until 5:00pm on christmas day in odd numbered years and from 5.00pm christmas day until 5.00pm boxing day in even numbered years (but only after the father has completed the circle of security course), (b) with mother from 5.00pm on christmas eve until 5:00pm on christmas day in even numbered years and from 5.00pm christmas day until 5.00pm boxing day in odd numbered years, (c) with the father from 5.00pm on the thursday immediately prior to good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 9.00am on the tuesday immediately following easter monday (or otherwise the commencement of school as applicable) in even numbered years (but only after the father has completed the circle of security course), (d) with the mother from 5.00pm on the thursday immediately prior to good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 9.00am on the tuesday immediately following easter monday (or otherwise the commencement of school as applicable) in odd numbered years, (e) the children shall spend mother's day with the mother in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (f) the children shall spend father's day with the father in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (g) on each of the children's birthdays in each year, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not ordinarily with pursuant to these orders as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement as follows: (i) for a period of (4) four hours from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.   with mother from 5.00pm on christmas eve until 5:00pm on christmas day in even numbered years and from 5.00pm christmas day until 5.00pm boxing day in odd numbered years, (c) with the father from 5.00pm on the thursday immediately prior to good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 9.00am on the tuesday immediately following easter monday (or otherwise the commencement of school as applicable) in even numbered years (but only after the father has completed the circle of security course), (d) with the mother from 5.00pm on the thursday immediately prior to good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 9.00am on the tuesday immediately following easter monday (or otherwise the commencement of school as applicable) in odd numbered years, (e) the children shall spend mother's day with the mother in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (f) the children shall spend father's day with the father in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (g) on each of the children's birthdays in each year, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not ordinarily with pursuant to these orders as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement as follows: (i) for a period of (4) four hours from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.   with the father from 5.00pm on the thursday immediately prior to good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 9.00am on the tuesday immediately following easter monday (or otherwise the commencement of school as applicable) in even numbered years (but only after the father has completed the circle of security course), (d) with the mother from 5.00pm on the thursday immediately prior to good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 9.00am on the tuesday immediately following easter monday (or otherwise the commencement of school as applicable) in odd numbered years, (e) the children shall spend mother's day with the mother in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (f) the children shall spend father's day with the father in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (g) on each of the children's birthdays in each year, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not ordinarily with pursuant to these orders as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement as follows: (i) for a period of (4) four hours from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.   with the mother from 5.00pm on the thursday immediately prior to good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years and from 5.00pm easter saturday until 9.00am on the tuesday immediately following easter monday (or otherwise the commencement of school as applicable) in odd numbered years, (e) the children shall spend mother's day with the mother in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (f) the children shall spend father's day with the father in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (g) on each of the children's birthdays in each year, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not ordinarily with pursuant to these orders as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement as follows: (i) for a period of (4) four hours from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.   the children shall spend mother's day with the mother in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (f) the children shall spend father's day with the father in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (g) on each of the children's birthdays in each year, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not ordinarily with pursuant to these orders as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement as follows: (i) for a period of (4) four hours from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.   the children shall spend father's day with the father in each year from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (g) on each of the children's birthdays in each year, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not ordinarily with pursuant to these orders as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement as follows: (i) for a period of (4) four hours from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.   on each of the children's birthdays in each year, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not ordinarily with pursuant to these orders as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement as follows: (i) for a period of (4) four hours from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.   for a period of (4) four hours from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.   any changeovers that occur on a day that the children are attending daycare or school shall occur to and from daycare or school unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, and (b) all other changeovers shall occur at mcdonalds, suburb b.   all other changeovers shall occur at mcdonalds, suburb b.
facetime/phone/electronic communication
international travel  neither parent shall take the children to a country that is subject to a “do not travel” alert issued by the department of foreign affairs and trade at or about the time of either parent’s intended travel with the children, and (b) other than in the case of an emergency, prior to any international travel, the parent intending to travel with the children is to give to the other parent: (i) not less than four (4) weeks’ prior written notice as to: the intended destination, the proposed date of departure and date of return, and arrangements to be made for communication between the children and the remaining parent during that period of travel. (ii) not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed departure date, written notice of: proposed travel itinerary, flight details, contact details for the parent and the children, and set arrangements for communication between the children and the remaining parent during that period of travel.   other than in the case of an emergency, prior to any international travel, the parent intending to travel with the children is to give to the other parent: (i) not less than four (4) weeks’ prior written notice as to: the intended destination, the proposed date of departure and date of return, and arrangements to be made for communication between the children and the remaining parent during that period of travel. (ii) not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed departure date, written notice of: proposed travel itinerary, flight details, contact details for the parent and the children, and set arrangements for communication between the children and the remaining parent during that period of travel.   not less than four (4) weeks’ prior written notice as to: the intended destination, the proposed date of departure and date of return, and arrangements to be made for communication between the children and the remaining parent during that period of travel. (ii) not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed departure date, written notice of: proposed travel itinerary, flight details, contact details for the parent and the children, and set arrangements for communication between the children and the remaining parent during that period of travel.  ) not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed departure date, written notice of: proposed travel itinerary, flight details, contact details for the parent and the children, and set arrangements for communication between the children and the remaining parent during that period of travel.
restraints/ injunctions  making critical or derogatory remarks in relation to the other parent or members of that parent's family in the presence or hearing of the children or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any other third party who is denigrating the children, (b) showing the children any document associated with these proceedings, (c) using the children as messengers between the parties,   showing the children any document associated with these proceedings, (c) using the children as messengers between the parties,   using the children as messengers between the parties,
note: the form of the order is subject to the entry in the court’s records.
note: this copy of the court’s reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 10.14(b) federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13 federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).
part xivb of the family law act 1975 (cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify persons, associated persons, or witnesses involved in family law proceedings.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
material relied upon  amended initiating application filed 18 september 2023, (b) his affidavit filed 6 march 2024, (c) affidavit of ms d filed 6 march 2024, (d) affidavit of ms e filed 6 march 2024, (e) affidavit of mr f filed 15 march 2024, (f) case outline filed 4 april 2024.   his affidavit filed 6 march 2024, (c) affidavit of ms d filed 6 march 2024, (d) affidavit of ms e filed 6 march 2024, (e) affidavit of mr f filed 15 march 2024, (f) case outline filed 4 april 2024.   affidavit of ms d filed 6 march 2024, (d) affidavit of ms e filed 6 march 2024, (e) affidavit of mr f filed 15 march 2024, (f) case outline filed 4 april 2024.   affidavit of ms e filed 6 march 2024, (e) affidavit of mr f filed 15 march 2024, (f) case outline filed 4 april 2024.   affidavit of mr f filed 15 march 2024, (f) case outline filed 4 april 2024.   case outline filed 4 april 2024.   amended response fled 30 november 2023, (b) her affidavit filed 5 march 2024, (c) affidavit of the maternal grandmother filed 5 march 2024, (d) notice of risk filed 17 february 2024, (e) case outline filed 4 april 2024,   her affidavit filed 5 march 2024, (c) affidavit of the maternal grandmother filed 5 march 2024, (d) notice of risk filed 17 february 2024, (e) case outline filed 4 april 2024,   affidavit of the maternal grandmother filed 5 march 2024, (d) notice of risk filed 17 february 2024, (e) case outline filed 4 april 2024,   notice of risk filed 17 february 2024, (e) case outline filed 4 april 2024,   case outline filed 4 april 2024,   family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (b) case outline filed 8 april 2024, (c) minute of order.   case outline filed 8 april 2024, (c) minute of order.   minute of order.   exhibit a: j contact service report, pp 39 – 42 of father’s tender bundle (“ftb”), (b) exhibit b: psychologist’s notes (pp 94 – 105 of mother’s tender bundle (“mtb”), (c) exhibit c: social media screenshot, (d) exhibit d: bundle of text message exchanges between mother and father, (e) exhibit e: patient health summary, pp 115 – 117 mtb, (f) exhibit f: mother’s witness statement to police dated 30 september 2022, pp 7 – 8 mtb, (g) exhibit g: h child care centre enrolment form, pp 90 – 117 ftb, (h) exhibit h: contact record with dcj, p 44 ftb, (i) exhibit i: k health service file note, p 63 ftb, (j) exhibit j: j contact service reports, pp 22 – 60 of icl’s tender bundle (“icl tb”), (k) exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit b: psychologist’s notes (pp 94 – 105 of mother’s tender bundle (“mtb”), (c) exhibit c: social media screenshot, (d) exhibit d: bundle of text message exchanges between mother and father, (e) exhibit e: patient health summary, pp 115 – 117 mtb, (f) exhibit f: mother’s witness statement to police dated 30 september 2022, pp 7 – 8 mtb, (g) exhibit g: h child care centre enrolment form, pp 90 – 117 ftb, (h) exhibit h: contact record with dcj, p 44 ftb, (i) exhibit i: k health service file note, p 63 ftb, (j) exhibit j: j contact service reports, pp 22 – 60 of icl’s tender bundle (“icl tb”), (k) exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit c: social media screenshot, (d) exhibit d: bundle of text message exchanges between mother and father, (e) exhibit e: patient health summary, pp 115 – 117 mtb, (f) exhibit f: mother’s witness statement to police dated 30 september 2022, pp 7 – 8 mtb, (g) exhibit g: h child care centre enrolment form, pp 90 – 117 ftb, (h) exhibit h: contact record with dcj, p 44 ftb, (i) exhibit i: k health service file note, p 63 ftb, (j) exhibit j: j contact service reports, pp 22 – 60 of icl’s tender bundle (“icl tb”), (k) exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit d: bundle of text message exchanges between mother and father, (e) exhibit e: patient health summary, pp 115 – 117 mtb, (f) exhibit f: mother’s witness statement to police dated 30 september 2022, pp 7 – 8 mtb, (g) exhibit g: h child care centre enrolment form, pp 90 – 117 ftb, (h) exhibit h: contact record with dcj, p 44 ftb, (i) exhibit i: k health service file note, p 63 ftb, (j) exhibit j: j contact service reports, pp 22 – 60 of icl’s tender bundle (“icl tb”), (k) exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit e: patient health summary, pp 115 – 117 mtb, (f) exhibit f: mother’s witness statement to police dated 30 september 2022, pp 7 – 8 mtb, (g) exhibit g: h child care centre enrolment form, pp 90 – 117 ftb, (h) exhibit h: contact record with dcj, p 44 ftb, (i) exhibit i: k health service file note, p 63 ftb, (j) exhibit j: j contact service reports, pp 22 – 60 of icl’s tender bundle (“icl tb”), (k) exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit f: mother’s witness statement to police dated 30 september 2022, pp 7 – 8 mtb, (g) exhibit g: h child care centre enrolment form, pp 90 – 117 ftb, (h) exhibit h: contact record with dcj, p 44 ftb, (i) exhibit i: k health service file note, p 63 ftb, (j) exhibit j: j contact service reports, pp 22 – 60 of icl’s tender bundle (“icl tb”), (k) exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit g: h child care centre enrolment form, pp 90 – 117 ftb, (h) exhibit h: contact record with dcj, p 44 ftb, (i) exhibit i: k health service file note, p 63 ftb, (j) exhibit j: j contact service reports, pp 22 – 60 of icl’s tender bundle (“icl tb”), (k) exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit h: contact record with dcj, p 44 ftb, (i) exhibit i: k health service file note, p 63 ftb, (j) exhibit j: j contact service reports, pp 22 – 60 of icl’s tender bundle (“icl tb”), (k) exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit i: k health service file note, p 63 ftb, (j) exhibit j: j contact service reports, pp 22 – 60 of icl’s tender bundle (“icl tb”), (k) exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit j: j contact service reports, pp 22 – 60 of icl’s tender bundle (“icl tb”), (k) exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit k: family report of ms g dated 4 july 2023, (l) exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit l: k health service file note, p 81 mtb, (m) exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit m: father’s final minute of order, (n) exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.   exhibit n: mother’s final minute of order.
evidence
the father’s evidence
evidence of ms e
evidence of mr f
the mother’s evidence
evidence of the maternal grandmother
family report
... the mother said that the last occasion the father (allegedly) sexually assaulted her was when she woke to find the father engaging in sexual activity with her. she said she addressed this with the father who was dismissive and not conceding any fault for his behaviour. the mother said she worried this was an escalation of the father’s behaviour and led to her realising, “if i don’t do something now, he is going to start physically pushing me down and doing it.”
... the writer’s observation of the relationship between the father and the children is that it is close and connected and that both children feel secure in his care and use the father as a safe base. the father demonstrated he was attuned to the children’s needs, he ably provided for all of their needs during the observation session and there was no evidence to support he is not able to provide for the children’s day-to-day needs when the children are in his care. in summary, on the basis of the observation session and noting no collateral material to the contrary, the writer is of the view that the children feel comfortable in the father’s care and that the father can provide appropriately for the day-to-day care needs of the children. noting the observations by the writer regarding the nature of the children’s relationship with the father, it is of some concern that the mother presented as somewhat dismissive and minimising the strength of the relationship the children have with the father. further, she appeared to be raising relatively minor issues to place barriers in the path of the children spending increased and unsupervised time with the father. the mother’s approach in this regard may be because the mother is not able to separate her own experience of the father from the children’s separate and different experience of the father. the mother’s responses in this regard would be understandable if the court accepts the father has perpetrated family violence as alleged. noting, however, that the mother agrees the children will spend unsupervised and overnight time with the father in the future, it will be essential for the mother to develop greater insight into the importance of a relationship for the children with the father, and that she comes to understand that the children’s relationship with their father is likely to be different from that which she had with the father. it is noted that although the mother seems resistant to the children having a relationship with the father, the children have been able to develop a close and connected relationship with the father while living with the mother which means to date she has demonstrated the ability to facilitate a meaningful relationship for the children with the father, despite her personal views of him. the writer’s view is that there is currently insufficient information to support the children are at unacceptable risk of harm in the care of the father. if the court accepted this, then it would be of benefit for the children to spend gradually increasing and unsupervised time with their father. the increase in time should take into account the children’s ages and stages of development and in this matter given [y] is the youngest, her needs should be given paramount consideration. the father’s proposal of building to an equal time arrangement would not be supported given the children’s very young ages2, the need to assess how the children manage the increasing time, and the lack of any functional co-parenting relationship. the writer does consider3, however, that it would be appropriate for the children to spend substantial and significant time with the father, and the recommendations made are designed to provide some developmentally appropriate guidance as to the graduation in time. if the court finds there are limitations in the father’s parenting capacity as alleged by the mother, the mother’s proposal of the children building to four nights a fortnight with the father may be appropriate. the ability and willingness of the parents to communicate and collaborate about the needs of the children is a key issue in this matter. specifically, the mother is not willing to communicate with the father. this lack of ability to make shared decisions for the children is unfortunate given both parents appear to have the capacity to make child focussed decisions for [x] and [y]. given the current situation, at this time it is recommended the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children. the allocation of parental responsibility could, however, be re-visited at a later date after the parents attend the keeping contact program or similar.  unsel] yes. so what you’re essentially saying is, it’s to the benefit of the children to not just see their father on the weekend but have an experience of them – parenting them during their midweek routines. correct? [witness] yes. if there’s not unacceptable risk, and if the court finds the mother is able to emotionally manage that and support that. ... [counsel] i understand, but if the mother’s presentation is for a reason not to do with anything that would cause you to label as unacceptable risk, your recommendation accommodates that the mother has got certain feelings about the father and having to interact with him. is that right? [witness] it does. and i – i think there’s a balance. there’s two things to think about there – is – i do think the court needs to think about how the mother’s emotional state will impact on the children if they’re spending that significant time with the father. but also, if the court was to find that the children in the mother’s household were going to have a negative view of the father – or imply, because of the mother’s anxiety, that there’s something bad or wrong with the father – and sometimes it’s important to ensure the children have their own experience of that person so that – that parent – separate from that of their lived with parent. so that – there are a couple of considerations. it’s a balance.  tness] ... but physical force is not always used or needed to coerce someone into behaving in a certain way. so i’m mindful of that. i think i can say – to clarify things – if the court was to find that the father had a mistaken belief – that he wasn’t deliberately disregarding the mother’s personal boundaries – if he wasn’t lacking empathy, then i wouldn’t hold those same concerns.  unsel] the mother’s evidence is that the father dismisses her suggestions and tends to demean or not place any weight on things that she makes a comment about or suggestion about. that poses a risk, doesn’t it, for these children if that were the case? [witness] so is this a risk or are you asking me about shared parental responsibility? [counsel] yes. well, parental responsibility – if parents can’t reach an agreement – genuinely reach an agreement – that poses a risk for the children, doesn’t it? [witness] yes. i think if his honour found that the parents were not able to collaborate in a respectful manner – if one parent was dismissive or derogatory or demeaning, then, yes, i think that would act against the parents equally sharing parental responsibility.  unsel] but assuming that his honour is going to be asked to make a finding that the father has in fact been a perpetrator of controlling coercive conduct towards the mother throughout the relationship. and assume that his honour is satisfied, on the evidence, that that’s the case. what does that mean, a) for the mother, in terms of her having to deal with the father, and b) for the father, in terms of his parenting capacity. and i might just ask you, the third question will be what – what can we do about that, if anything? [witness] i think it’s really important that you have put those two together, in terms of it’s not just about the father’s parenting capacity, it’s also about the impact on the mother, because the reality is the children are going to live primarily with their mother, in my proposal, in terms of she’s, clearly, the children’s primary attachment figure. and in circumstances, if i accept those, the hypothetical circumstance of family violence and that they will remain living with her. so the importance to the children then is making sure that primary parent is as best supported as they can be to meet all of the practical, emotional, relational needs of those children. so i think that they cannot be looked at separately, they must be looked at together. [counsel] yes? [witness] because the children are not living just with one parent or another parent. this is their life. and so it’s important to look at those two together. in terms of thinking about, well, what does that mean for the children, in terms of the father’s parenting. and if we’re talking about controlling and coercive behaviours, then there is a greater risk that the father will parent in a controlling and coercive way with the children. so that may escalate to the use of force if they’re not compliant with him, if you accept that he has thrown one of the children, as alleged by the mother. so it’s about – it’s a range of things. so if we think about the first is the empathy, which i’ve already spoken about. so to really understand what’s happening for that child, to respond appropriately, to meet their emotional needs. that’s the cornerstone, that’s what we’re looking for, that’s what we’re talking about when we talk about parenting capacity. [counsel] yes? [witness] those things. it’s not necessarily – yes, keeping them, doing all the basic needs is important, feeding them, housing them, clothing them, those sorts of things, they’re important. but when i’m talking about parenting capacity, i’m talking about those deeper emotional relational issues. so there is that. there is the potential for role modelling, in terms of gendered roles. so if the father had clear views about power relationships between men and women, and we’ve got two little girls here, then that could be sending some powerful messages to them, which they may internalise. and then in their relationships, that may heighten their vulnerability to dynamics such as family violence, if they consider that this is an appropriate and normal way that they should be treated. in terms of what we do about that, well, we think about, well, what’s the benefit of a relationship with their dad? and generally, kids benefit from having a relationship with both parents. we just need it to be safe and to be something which – and i’m not just talking physically safe, but also meeting their emotional needs. [counsel] yes? [witness] if you were to say, look, i think these children are physically safe with their dad, but i’m worried about these emotional issues, then you would be talking about limiting the time. not necessarily supervising it, but limiting that time. so they’re having, hopefully, the best of their dad, but most of their time they’re with their mum, who role models something different. but they’re still having that exposure to their dad. so they’re not – in their head, if they would have no time or limited time with him, then they may come to idealise him, which is also not necessarily in their best interests when we’re talking about coming into adolescence. so i think, again, it is finding that balance. ... [his honour] sorry. can i just ask a question, just on this topic of alleged controlling and coercive behaviour by the father during the party’s relationship. if you look at paragraph 90 of your family report, which appears to be confined to sexual behaviour by the father. are any of those factors or matters that you raise in paragraph 90, such as limited insight, lack of empathy, and so on, do any of those matters that you have referred to in paragraph 90, would they apply to this broader assumed scenario of there having been a pattern of controlling behaviour by the father, towards the mother, during their relationship? [witness] yes. [his honour] could you unpack that for the court please? [witness] so, in terms of why that would be the case, your honour? [his honour] yes? [witness] so, in terms of if we’re thinking about or if the court accepts that the father has engaged in a controlling manner with the mother, then the court has to, in my view, think about what does that mean for his parenting of the children. and if he has no insight into that, then the likelihood of change is low, and he’s likely to engage with the children in similar ways. not – to be clear, not necessarily around sexual harm, but in terms of breaching their boundaries, not understanding what might be distressing for them and responding appropriately. it’s particularly as children get older and when they enter this adolescent stage of development, when children are wanting to, well, it’s appropriate, it’s a normal stage of development, where it is the time when they express their own needs over those of the parents. there’s a real shift in the parent-child relationship. and they’re looking to arrange the world to suit their own needs. and that can be quite triggering for someone, if you accept that the father has a behaviour to engage in controlling behaviour in his close relationships. these are little girls. if he has views about gender norms and stereotypes, then he may have expectations of the children which are different to the children’s expectations and desires. and that can really, that’s why we see lots of tension – that’s why see lots of tension in adolescent parent-child relationships. ... [his honour] and she – in terms of that, if the mother – if, in fact, the court finds that there has been a pattern of controlling coercive conduct and the mother was a victim of that, that would have certain impacts on her capacity, wouldn’t it, in terms of having to communicate with the father – or her? [witness] yes. [his honour] her ability, i should say, to communicate with the father? [witness] yes. i wouldn’t just say it’s her ability, it’s about the emotional responses that might trigger for her.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc(2) primary considerations a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.  b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence  the mother’s evidence in this context was quite detailed, and referred, inter alia, to events with associated dates and to relevant conversations with the father, (b) the mother’s evidence was plausible. for example, her evidence that she wore baggy shapeless clothes to effectively deter the father from his sexual demands, (c) certain parts of the affidavit evidence of the maternal grandmother was consistent and supportive of the mother’s evidence relating to coercive and/or controlling family violence, for example, see paragraphs 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 37, 39, 40, 42, 43, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 62 of the affidavit of the maternal grandmother, which the court accepts, (d) the father, in oral evidence, conceded that: (i) he used to place his hand on the mother’s upper thigh (underneath her skirt) during car travel and would, on occasion, despite the mother pushing his hand away, return his hand to the mother’s thigh as before, (ii) when the mother’s breasts were still tender after the birth of x, he was still trying to touch them, (iii) the mother had asked him during their relationship to be careful as to how he touched the mother in front of x, (iv) he had called the mother an idiot when the child x was a baby, (v) he had sexual intercourse with the mother about 10 days after the mother’s operation in 2021 despite being aware that after that operation the mother was in pain. (the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context that she had told the father that she did not think it was safe to have sex because it could damage the area of the operation), (vi) during the relationship he had accessed the mother’s telephone messages and the mother had thereby experienced a lack of privacy. additionally, the court observes that the father had told his psychologist during therapeutic treatment in about late 2022 that he often patted the wife on her bottom. (e) certain of the father’s text messages to the mother after the above sexual incident of mid-2022, including disclosures to her of a past sexual assault upon the father by his cousin (see annexure i to the mother’s trial affidavit), tend to support the mother’s version of the above sexual incident. for example, the court refers to the father’s text message to the mother that, inter alia, he “fucked up”, he was sorry, “obviously it was wrong”, and “i’ll be forever sorry”, and his message stating that he had decided to tell the mother about his childhood sexual abuse because “i thought it might explain why im [sic] so shit”. the court should state that the father’s version of this incident was that he, whilst the mother was asleep, so as to initiate sex, placed his hand on her pyjamas and gently rubbed her leg around the top of her thigh and kissed her on the cheek, the serious nature of the father’s apologies referred to above do not sit comfortably with the father’s somewhat benign version of what occurred. (f) the mother’s text messages to the father after the above sexual incident of mid-2022 are supportive of her version of this incident. for example, “you expect me to show love through sexual action when you tried to do stuff while i was unconscious”, “i am so upset and beside myself that it came to that. you kept ignoring me about my body and how i wanted it to be treated, and then it reached that point. i don’t trust you and i don’t know how i will get past that. ... you need to stop looking at me like you are the victim because you made me one”, “no i meant what happened to you to think that behaviour is acceptable. you do not listen to me when i say stop touching me”, and “everything is sexual, i am right about that”. the mother’s significant upset as revealed in her above messages does not sit comfortably with the father’s version. (g) the mother attended upon the police following separation on about late 2022 to make a written statement to them at that time. her statement (exhibit f) refers, inter alia, to the father’s pressure upon the mother of a sexual nature during their relationship and the mother’s related sense of being controlled by the father, the father seeking to control the manner in which the mother dressed herself, the deterioration of the mother’s mental health over the years due to the parties’ relationship including her being on antidepressants consistently since 2012, the mother being scared of being forced to do things that she does not want to do as she has for many years, the mother feeling that the father does not respect her boundaries and she has always felt the pressure of this, and the mother’s worry that if the father does not have control over her anymore due to their relationship ending he will transfer (his control) to the children and the father will become controlling of them as they grow up. the court does not accept that the mother’s purpose in approaching the police was to complain about domestic violence for the sole purpose of having her name removed from a lease with the father.   the mother’s evidence was plausible. for example, her evidence that she wore baggy shapeless clothes to effectively deter the father from his sexual demands, (c) certain parts of the affidavit evidence of the maternal grandmother was consistent and supportive of the mother’s evidence relating to coercive and/or controlling family violence, for example, see paragraphs 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 37, 39, 40, 42, 43, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 62 of the affidavit of the maternal grandmother, which the court accepts, (d) the father, in oral evidence, conceded that: (i) he used to place his hand on the mother’s upper thigh (underneath her skirt) during car travel and would, on occasion, despite the mother pushing his hand away, return his hand to the mother’s thigh as before, (ii) when the mother’s breasts were still tender after the birth of x, he was still trying to touch them, (iii) the mother had asked him during their relationship to be careful as to how he touched the mother in front of x, (iv) he had called the mother an idiot when the child x was a baby, (v) he had sexual intercourse with the mother about 10 days after the mother’s operation in 2021 despite being aware that after that operation the mother was in pain. (the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context that she had told the father that she did not think it was safe to have sex because it could damage the area of the operation), (vi) during the relationship he had accessed the mother’s telephone messages and the mother had thereby experienced a lack of privacy. additionally, the court observes that the father had told his psychologist during therapeutic treatment in about late 2022 that he often patted the wife on her bottom. (e) certain of the father’s text messages to the mother after the above sexual incident of mid-2022, including disclosures to her of a past sexual assault upon the father by his cousin (see annexure i to the mother’s trial affidavit), tend to support the mother’s version of the above sexual incident. for example, the court refers to the father’s text message to the mother that, inter alia, he “fucked up”, he was sorry, “obviously it was wrong”, and “i’ll be forever sorry”, and his message stating that he had decided to tell the mother about his childhood sexual abuse because “i thought it might explain why im [sic] so shit”. the court should state that the father’s version of this incident was that he, whilst the mother was asleep, so as to initiate sex, placed his hand on her pyjamas and gently rubbed her leg around the top of her thigh and kissed her on the cheek, the serious nature of the father’s apologies referred to above do not sit comfortably with the father’s somewhat benign version of what occurred. (f) the mother’s text messages to the father after the above sexual incident of mid-2022 are supportive of her version of this incident. for example, “you expect me to show love through sexual action when you tried to do stuff while i was unconscious”, “i am so upset and beside myself that it came to that. you kept ignoring me about my body and how i wanted it to be treated, and then it reached that point. i don’t trust you and i don’t know how i will get past that. ... you need to stop looking at me like you are the victim because you made me one”, “no i meant what happened to you to think that behaviour is acceptable. you do not listen to me when i say stop touching me”, and “everything is sexual, i am right about that”. the mother’s significant upset as revealed in her above messages does not sit comfortably with the father’s version. (g) the mother attended upon the police following separation on about late 2022 to make a written statement to them at that time. her statement (exhibit f) refers, inter alia, to the father’s pressure upon the mother of a sexual nature during their relationship and the mother’s related sense of being controlled by the father, the father seeking to control the manner in which the mother dressed herself, the deterioration of the mother’s mental health over the years due to the parties’ relationship including her being on antidepressants consistently since 2012, the mother being scared of being forced to do things that she does not want to do as she has for many years, the mother feeling that the father does not respect her boundaries and she has always felt the pressure of this, and the mother’s worry that if the father does not have control over her anymore due to their relationship ending he will transfer (his control) to the children and the father will become controlling of them as they grow up. the court does not accept that the mother’s purpose in approaching the police was to complain about domestic violence for the sole purpose of having her name removed from a lease with the father.   certain parts of the affidavit evidence of the maternal grandmother was consistent and supportive of the mother’s evidence relating to coercive and/or controlling family violence, for example, see paragraphs 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 37, 39, 40, 42, 43, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 62 of the affidavit of the maternal grandmother, which the court accepts, (d) the father, in oral evidence, conceded that: (i) he used to place his hand on the mother’s upper thigh (underneath her skirt) during car travel and would, on occasion, despite the mother pushing his hand away, return his hand to the mother’s thigh as before, (ii) when the mother’s breasts were still tender after the birth of x, he was still trying to touch them, (iii) the mother had asked him during their relationship to be careful as to how he touched the mother in front of x, (iv) he had called the mother an idiot when the child x was a baby, (v) he had sexual intercourse with the mother about 10 days after the mother’s operation in 2021 despite being aware that after that operation the mother was in pain. (the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context that she had told the father that she did not think it was safe to have sex because it could damage the area of the operation), (vi) during the relationship he had accessed the mother’s telephone messages and the mother had thereby experienced a lack of privacy. additionally, the court observes that the father had told his psychologist during therapeutic treatment in about late 2022 that he often patted the wife on her bottom. (e) certain of the father’s text messages to the mother after the above sexual incident of mid-2022, including disclosures to her of a past sexual assault upon the father by his cousin (see annexure i to the mother’s trial affidavit), tend to support the mother’s version of the above sexual incident. for example, the court refers to the father’s text message to the mother that, inter alia, he “fucked up”, he was sorry, “obviously it was wrong”, and “i’ll be forever sorry”, and his message stating that he had decided to tell the mother about his childhood sexual abuse because “i thought it might explain why im [sic] so shit”. the court should state that the father’s version of this incident was that he, whilst the mother was asleep, so as to initiate sex, placed his hand on her pyjamas and gently rubbed her leg around the top of her thigh and kissed her on the cheek, the serious nature of the father’s apologies referred to above do not sit comfortably with the father’s somewhat benign version of what occurred. (f) the mother’s text messages to the father after the above sexual incident of mid-2022 are supportive of her version of this incident. for example, “you expect me to show love through sexual action when you tried to do stuff while i was unconscious”, “i am so upset and beside myself that it came to that. you kept ignoring me about my body and how i wanted it to be treated, and then it reached that point. i don’t trust you and i don’t know how i will get past that. ... you need to stop looking at me like you are the victim because you made me one”, “no i meant what happened to you to think that behaviour is acceptable. you do not listen to me when i say stop touching me”, and “everything is sexual, i am right about that”. the mother’s significant upset as revealed in her above messages does not sit comfortably with the father’s version. (g) the mother attended upon the police following separation on about late 2022 to make a written statement to them at that time. her statement (exhibit f) refers, inter alia, to the father’s pressure upon the mother of a sexual nature during their relationship and the mother’s related sense of being controlled by the father, the father seeking to control the manner in which the mother dressed herself, the deterioration of the mother’s mental health over the years due to the parties’ relationship including her being on antidepressants consistently since 2012, the mother being scared of being forced to do things that she does not want to do as she has for many years, the mother feeling that the father does not respect her boundaries and she has always felt the pressure of this, and the mother’s worry that if the father does not have control over her anymore due to their relationship ending he will transfer (his control) to the children and the father will become controlling of them as they grow up. the court does not accept that the mother’s purpose in approaching the police was to complain about domestic violence for the sole purpose of having her name removed from a lease with the father.   the father, in oral evidence, conceded that: (i) he used to place his hand on the mother’s upper thigh (underneath her skirt) during car travel and would, on occasion, despite the mother pushing his hand away, return his hand to the mother’s thigh as before, (ii) when the mother’s breasts were still tender after the birth of x, he was still trying to touch them, (iii) the mother had asked him during their relationship to be careful as to how he touched the mother in front of x, (iv) he had called the mother an idiot when the child x was a baby, (v) he had sexual intercourse with the mother about 10 days after the mother’s operation in 2021 despite being aware that after that operation the mother was in pain. (the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context that she had told the father that she did not think it was safe to have sex because it could damage the area of the operation), (vi) during the relationship he had accessed the mother’s telephone messages and the mother had thereby experienced a lack of privacy. additionally, the court observes that the father had told his psychologist during therapeutic treatment in about late 2022 that he often patted the wife on her bottom. (e) certain of the father’s text messages to the mother after the above sexual incident of mid-2022, including disclosures to her of a past sexual assault upon the father by his cousin (see annexure i to the mother’s trial affidavit), tend to support the mother’s version of the above sexual incident. for example, the court refers to the father’s text message to the mother that, inter alia, he “fucked up”, he was sorry, “obviously it was wrong”, and “i’ll be forever sorry”, and his message stating that he had decided to tell the mother about his childhood sexual abuse because “i thought it might explain why im [sic] so shit”. the court should state that the father’s version of this incident was that he, whilst the mother was asleep, so as to initiate sex, placed his hand on her pyjamas and gently rubbed her leg around the top of her thigh and kissed her on the cheek, the serious nature of the father’s apologies referred to above do not sit comfortably with the father’s somewhat benign version of what occurred. (f) the mother’s text messages to the father after the above sexual incident of mid-2022 are supportive of her version of this incident. for example, “you expect me to show love through sexual action when you tried to do stuff while i was unconscious”, “i am so upset and beside myself that it came to that. you kept ignoring me about my body and how i wanted it to be treated, and then it reached that point. i don’t trust you and i don’t know how i will get past that. ... you need to stop looking at me like you are the victim because you made me one”, “no i meant what happened to you to think that behaviour is acceptable. you do not listen to me when i say stop touching me”, and “everything is sexual, i am right about that”. the mother’s significant upset as revealed in her above messages does not sit comfortably with the father’s version. (g) the mother attended upon the police following separation on about late 2022 to make a written statement to them at that time. her statement (exhibit f) refers, inter alia, to the father’s pressure upon the mother of a sexual nature during their relationship and the mother’s related sense of being controlled by the father, the father seeking to control the manner in which the mother dressed herself, the deterioration of the mother’s mental health over the years due to the parties’ relationship including her being on antidepressants consistently since 2012, the mother being scared of being forced to do things that she does not want to do as she has for many years, the mother feeling that the father does not respect her boundaries and she has always felt the pressure of this, and the mother’s worry that if the father does not have control over her anymore due to their relationship ending he will transfer (his control) to the children and the father will become controlling of them as they grow up. the court does not accept that the mother’s purpose in approaching the police was to complain about domestic violence for the sole purpose of having her name removed from a lease with the father.   he used to place his hand on the mother’s upper thigh (underneath her skirt) during car travel and would, on occasion, despite the mother pushing his hand away, return his hand to the mother’s thigh as before, (ii) when the mother’s breasts were still tender after the birth of x, he was still trying to touch them, (iii) the mother had asked him during their relationship to be careful as to how he touched the mother in front of x, (iv) he had called the mother an idiot when the child x was a baby, (v) he had sexual intercourse with the mother about 10 days after the mother’s operation in 2021 despite being aware that after that operation the mother was in pain. (the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context that she had told the father that she did not think it was safe to have sex because it could damage the area of the operation), (vi) during the relationship he had accessed the mother’s telephone messages and the mother had thereby experienced a lack of privacy.  ) when the mother’s breasts were still tender after the birth of x, he was still trying to touch them, (iii) the mother had asked him during their relationship to be careful as to how he touched the mother in front of x, (iv) he had called the mother an idiot when the child x was a baby, (v) he had sexual intercourse with the mother about 10 days after the mother’s operation in 2021 despite being aware that after that operation the mother was in pain. (the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context that she had told the father that she did not think it was safe to have sex because it could damage the area of the operation), (vi) during the relationship he had accessed the mother’s telephone messages and the mother had thereby experienced a lack of privacy.  i) the mother had asked him during their relationship to be careful as to how he touched the mother in front of x, (iv) he had called the mother an idiot when the child x was a baby, (v) he had sexual intercourse with the mother about 10 days after the mother’s operation in 2021 despite being aware that after that operation the mother was in pain. (the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context that she had told the father that she did not think it was safe to have sex because it could damage the area of the operation), (vi) during the relationship he had accessed the mother’s telephone messages and the mother had thereby experienced a lack of privacy.  ) he had called the mother an idiot when the child x was a baby, (v) he had sexual intercourse with the mother about 10 days after the mother’s operation in 2021 despite being aware that after that operation the mother was in pain. (the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context that she had told the father that she did not think it was safe to have sex because it could damage the area of the operation), (vi) during the relationship he had accessed the mother’s telephone messages and the mother had thereby experienced a lack of privacy.   he had sexual intercourse with the mother about 10 days after the mother’s operation in 2021 despite being aware that after that operation the mother was in pain. (the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context that she had told the father that she did not think it was safe to have sex because it could damage the area of the operation), (vi) during the relationship he had accessed the mother’s telephone messages and the mother had thereby experienced a lack of privacy.  ) during the relationship he had accessed the mother’s telephone messages and the mother had thereby experienced a lack of privacy.
additionally, the court observes that the father had told his psychologist during therapeutic treatment in about late 2022 that he often patted the wife on her bottom. (e) certain of the father’s text messages to the mother after the above sexual incident of mid-2022, including disclosures to her of a past sexual assault upon the father by his cousin (see annexure i to the mother’s trial affidavit), tend to support the mother’s version of the above sexual incident. for example, the court refers to the father’s text message to the mother that, inter alia, he “fucked up”, he was sorry, “obviously it was wrong”, and “i’ll be forever sorry”, and his message stating that he had decided to tell the mother about his childhood sexual abuse because “i thought it might explain why im [sic] so shit”. the court should state that the father’s version of this incident was that he, whilst the mother was asleep, so as to initiate sex, placed his hand on her pyjamas and gently rubbed her leg around the top of her thigh and kissed her on the cheek, the serious nature of the father’s apologies referred to above do not sit comfortably with the father’s somewhat benign version of what occurred. (f) the mother’s text messages to the father after the above sexual incident of mid-2022 are supportive of her version of this incident. for example, “you expect me to show love through sexual action when you tried to do stuff while i was unconscious”, “i am so upset and beside myself that it came to that. you kept ignoring me about my body and how i wanted it to be treated, and then it reached that point. i don’t trust you and i don’t know how i will get past that. ... you need to stop looking at me like you are the victim because you made me one”, “no i meant what happened to you to think that behaviour is acceptable. you do not listen to me when i say stop touching me”, and “everything is sexual, i am right about that”. the mother’s significant upset as revealed in her above messages does not sit comfortably with the father’s version. (g) the mother attended upon the police following separation on about late 2022 to make a written statement to them at that time. her statement (exhibit f) refers, inter alia, to the father’s pressure upon the mother of a sexual nature during their relationship and the mother’s related sense of being controlled by the father, the father seeking to control the manner in which the mother dressed herself, the deterioration of the mother’s mental health over the years due to the parties’ relationship including her being on antidepressants consistently since 2012, the mother being scared of being forced to do things that she does not want to do as she has for many years, the mother feeling that the father does not respect her boundaries and she has always felt the pressure of this, and the mother’s worry that if the father does not have control over her anymore due to their relationship ending he will transfer (his control) to the children and the father will become controlling of them as they grow up. the court does not accept that the mother’s purpose in approaching the police was to complain about domestic violence for the sole purpose of having her name removed from a lease with the father.   certain of the father’s text messages to the mother after the above sexual incident of mid-2022, including disclosures to her of a past sexual assault upon the father by his cousin (see annexure i to the mother’s trial affidavit), tend to support the mother’s version of the above sexual incident. for example, the court refers to the father’s text message to the mother that, inter alia, he “fucked up”, he was sorry, “obviously it was wrong”, and “i’ll be forever sorry”, and his message stating that he had decided to tell the mother about his childhood sexual abuse because “i thought it might explain why im [sic] so shit”. the court should state that the father’s version of this incident was that he, whilst the mother was asleep, so as to initiate sex, placed his hand on her pyjamas and gently rubbed her leg around the top of her thigh and kissed her on the cheek, the serious nature of the father’s apologies referred to above do not sit comfortably with the father’s somewhat benign version of what occurred. (f) the mother’s text messages to the father after the above sexual incident of mid-2022 are supportive of her version of this incident. for example, “you expect me to show love through sexual action when you tried to do stuff while i was unconscious”, “i am so upset and beside myself that it came to that. you kept ignoring me about my body and how i wanted it to be treated, and then it reached that point. i don’t trust you and i don’t know how i will get past that. ... you need to stop looking at me like you are the victim because you made me one”, “no i meant what happened to you to think that behaviour is acceptable. you do not listen to me when i say stop touching me”, and “everything is sexual, i am right about that”. the mother’s significant upset as revealed in her above messages does not sit comfortably with the father’s version. (g) the mother attended upon the police following separation on about late 2022 to make a written statement to them at that time. her statement (exhibit f) refers, inter alia, to the father’s pressure upon the mother of a sexual nature during their relationship and the mother’s related sense of being controlled by the father, the father seeking to control the manner in which the mother dressed herself, the deterioration of the mother’s mental health over the years due to the parties’ relationship including her being on antidepressants consistently since 2012, the mother being scared of being forced to do things that she does not want to do as she has for many years, the mother feeling that the father does not respect her boundaries and she has always felt the pressure of this, and the mother’s worry that if the father does not have control over her anymore due to their relationship ending he will transfer (his control) to the children and the father will become controlling of them as they grow up. the court does not accept that the mother’s purpose in approaching the police was to complain about domestic violence for the sole purpose of having her name removed from a lease with the father.   the mother’s text messages to the father after the above sexual incident of mid-2022 are supportive of her version of this incident. for example, “you expect me to show love through sexual action when you tried to do stuff while i was unconscious”, “i am so upset and beside myself that it came to that. you kept ignoring me about my body and how i wanted it to be treated, and then it reached that point. i don’t trust you and i don’t know how i will get past that. ... you need to stop looking at me like you are the victim because you made me one”, “no i meant what happened to you to think that behaviour is acceptable. you do not listen to me when i say stop touching me”, and “everything is sexual, i am right about that”. the mother’s significant upset as revealed in her above messages does not sit comfortably with the father’s version. (g) the mother attended upon the police following separation on about late 2022 to make a written statement to them at that time. her statement (exhibit f) refers, inter alia, to the father’s pressure upon the mother of a sexual nature during their relationship and the mother’s related sense of being controlled by the father, the father seeking to control the manner in which the mother dressed herself, the deterioration of the mother’s mental health over the years due to the parties’ relationship including her being on antidepressants consistently since 2012, the mother being scared of being forced to do things that she does not want to do as she has for many years, the mother feeling that the father does not respect her boundaries and she has always felt the pressure of this, and the mother’s worry that if the father does not have control over her anymore due to their relationship ending he will transfer (his control) to the children and the father will become controlling of them as they grow up. the court does not accept that the mother’s purpose in approaching the police was to complain about domestic violence for the sole purpose of having her name removed from a lease with the father.   the mother attended upon the police following separation on about late 2022 to make a written statement to them at that time. her statement (exhibit f) refers, inter alia, to the father’s pressure upon the mother of a sexual nature during their relationship and the mother’s related sense of being controlled by the father, the father seeking to control the manner in which the mother dressed herself, the deterioration of the mother’s mental health over the years due to the parties’ relationship including her being on antidepressants consistently since 2012, the mother being scared of being forced to do things that she does not want to do as she has for many years, the mother feeling that the father does not respect her boundaries and she has always felt the pressure of this, and the mother’s worry that if the father does not have control over her anymore due to their relationship ending he will transfer (his control) to the children and the father will become controlling of them as they grow up. the court does not accept that the mother’s purpose in approaching the police was to complain about domestic violence for the sole purpose of having her name removed from a lease with the father.   the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father perpetrating coercive and/or controlling family violence against the mother during their relationship are serious and of concern. however, the court finds that the father has likely developed some insight, albeit not fulsome insight, into his past adverse behaviour towards the mother during their relationship, in particular in relation to his adverse sexual behaviour towards her. he demonstrated some such insight during his oral evidence, particularly when asked to consider the mother’s emotional position, whilst acknowledging that he maintained his significant denials in relation to his adverse behaviour. the court observes that the family report writer had commented in her family report (paragraph 42) that the mother’s “greatest concern in the relationship was the alleged repeated sexual assaults on her by the father.” in the immediate aftermath of the sexual incident of mid-2022, the father was significantly apologetic to the mother in relation to this incident (albeit and again, in these proceedings, he denied the mother’s version), whilst suggesting to her that a previous sexual assault upon him may have contributed to his conduct. the father then, in late 2022, sought therapeutic psychological treatment in relation to, inter alia, the previous sexual assault upon him. in this psychological treatment he referred to the mother’s “complaint around his hypersexual behaviour noticeable since having children”. the father told the psychologist that the mother had questioned him about touching the children inappropriately and he “felt quite upset”. the psychologist had stated in late 2022, inter alia, that the father’s goals in therapy were to understand if/how his past is impacting him (e.g. over sexualisation), improve self-worth and self-confidence. the psychologist had stated in late 2022 that the father was motivated to improve himself. in late 2022 the psychologist reported that the father wanted to take a break from therapy, the father’s mental state was stable, and he stated, inter alia, that the father had been engaged with him, reflective and responsive. in oral evidence, the father stated that he consults with his therapeutic counsellor each month and was open to further discuss with that counsellor the past sexual assault upon him. he stated that he had attended upon counsellors or psychologists over the years. he stated he was presently on medication (in relation to his mental health). in oral evidence the father stated he had completed a parenting after separation course. he stated that one matter he had learnt from the course was that he should remain child centric and see things from the child’s perspective. he stated that he listens to the children if they have any issues. in this context he stated that if, for example, the children were upset, he gets on their level and tries to be sympathetic. he related how he sympathetically deals with the child x when she becomes upset on having to leave his care. in oral evidence the father stated that the past sexual assault upon him had no ongoing impact on his relationship with the children. he stated he would not do anything to harm the children. the court takes into account the affidavit evidence of the father’s new partner ms d, aged 32 years, filed 6 march 2024, in which she states, inter alia, that she and the father commenced a relationship in 2023 and the father moved into her home at suburb l in early 2024. she has met the children. she enjoys spending time and playing with them. she relates her observations of the children’s positive relationship with the father. ms d was not cross-examined. (b) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, provide for a gradual introduction and build-up of unsupervised time between the children and the father. such gradual build up should enable the children to adjust to increased time with the father, enable the father to adjust to having to parent the children over an increased period of time, and enable the mother to emotionally adjust to the children spending increasingly longer time periods with the father. (c) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, effectively require the father to complete the circle of security course before his daytime unsupervised time with the children progresses to overnight time. (d) the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father’s perpetration of controlling and/or coercive family violence towards the mother at least implicitly included findings relating to the father having expressed anger (and subsequent silent treatment) towards the mother, particularly when she would not comply with his demands, because the court had accepted the mother’s evidence in this context.
the court observes that the family report writer had commented in her family report (paragraph 42) that the mother’s “greatest concern in the relationship was the alleged repeated sexual assaults on her by the father.” in the immediate aftermath of the sexual incident of mid-2022, the father was significantly apologetic to the mother in relation to this incident (albeit and again, in these proceedings, he denied the mother’s version), whilst suggesting to her that a previous sexual assault upon him may have contributed to his conduct. the father then, in late 2022, sought therapeutic psychological treatment in relation to, inter alia, the previous sexual assault upon him. in this psychological treatment he referred to the mother’s “complaint around his hypersexual behaviour noticeable since having children”. the father told the psychologist that the mother had questioned him about touching the children inappropriately and he “felt quite upset”. the psychologist had stated in late 2022, inter alia, that the father’s goals in therapy were to understand if/how his past is impacting him (e.g. over sexualisation), improve self-worth and self-confidence. the psychologist had stated in late 2022 that the father was motivated to improve himself. in late 2022 the psychologist reported that the father wanted to take a break from therapy, the father’s mental state was stable, and he stated, inter alia, that the father had been engaged with him, reflective and responsive. in oral evidence, the father stated that he consults with his therapeutic counsellor each month and was open to further discuss with that counsellor the past sexual assault upon him. he stated that he had attended upon counsellors or psychologists over the years. he stated he was presently on medication (in relation to his mental health). in oral evidence the father stated he had completed a parenting after separation course. he stated that one matter he had learnt from the course was that he should remain child centric and see things from the child’s perspective. he stated that he listens to the children if they have any issues. in this context he stated that if, for example, the children were upset, he gets on their level and tries to be sympathetic. he related how he sympathetically deals with the child x when she becomes upset on having to leave his care. in oral evidence the father stated that the past sexual assault upon him had no ongoing impact on his relationship with the children. he stated he would not do anything to harm the children. the court takes into account the affidavit evidence of the father’s new partner ms d, aged 32 years, filed 6 march 2024, in which she states, inter alia, that she and the father commenced a relationship in 2023 and the father moved into her home at suburb l in early 2024. she has met the children. she enjoys spending time and playing with them. she relates her observations of the children’s positive relationship with the father. ms d was not cross-examined. (b) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, provide for a gradual introduction and build-up of unsupervised time between the children and the father. such gradual build up should enable the children to adjust to increased time with the father, enable the father to adjust to having to parent the children over an increased period of time, and enable the mother to emotionally adjust to the children spending increasingly longer time periods with the father. (c) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, effectively require the father to complete the circle of security course before his daytime unsupervised time with the children progresses to overnight time. (d) the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father’s perpetration of controlling and/or coercive family violence towards the mother at least implicitly included findings relating to the father having expressed anger (and subsequent silent treatment) towards the mother, particularly when she would not comply with his demands, because the court had accepted the mother’s evidence in this context.
the father then, in late 2022, sought therapeutic psychological treatment in relation to, inter alia, the previous sexual assault upon him. in this psychological treatment he referred to the mother’s “complaint around his hypersexual behaviour noticeable since having children”. the father told the psychologist that the mother had questioned him about touching the children inappropriately and he “felt quite upset”. the psychologist had stated in late 2022, inter alia, that the father’s goals in therapy were to understand if/how his past is impacting him (e.g. over sexualisation), improve self-worth and self-confidence. the psychologist had stated in late 2022 that the father was motivated to improve himself. in late 2022 the psychologist reported that the father wanted to take a break from therapy, the father’s mental state was stable, and he stated, inter alia, that the father had been engaged with him, reflective and responsive. in oral evidence, the father stated that he consults with his therapeutic counsellor each month and was open to further discuss with that counsellor the past sexual assault upon him. he stated that he had attended upon counsellors or psychologists over the years. he stated he was presently on medication (in relation to his mental health). in oral evidence the father stated he had completed a parenting after separation course. he stated that one matter he had learnt from the course was that he should remain child centric and see things from the child’s perspective. he stated that he listens to the children if they have any issues. in this context he stated that if, for example, the children were upset, he gets on their level and tries to be sympathetic. he related how he sympathetically deals with the child x when she becomes upset on having to leave his care. in oral evidence the father stated that the past sexual assault upon him had no ongoing impact on his relationship with the children. he stated he would not do anything to harm the children. the court takes into account the affidavit evidence of the father’s new partner ms d, aged 32 years, filed 6 march 2024, in which she states, inter alia, that she and the father commenced a relationship in 2023 and the father moved into her home at suburb l in early 2024. she has met the children. she enjoys spending time and playing with them. she relates her observations of the children’s positive relationship with the father. ms d was not cross-examined. (b) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, provide for a gradual introduction and build-up of unsupervised time between the children and the father. such gradual build up should enable the children to adjust to increased time with the father, enable the father to adjust to having to parent the children over an increased period of time, and enable the mother to emotionally adjust to the children spending increasingly longer time periods with the father. (c) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, effectively require the father to complete the circle of security course before his daytime unsupervised time with the children progresses to overnight time. (d) the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father’s perpetration of controlling and/or coercive family violence towards the mother at least implicitly included findings relating to the father having expressed anger (and subsequent silent treatment) towards the mother, particularly when she would not comply with his demands, because the court had accepted the mother’s evidence in this context.
in oral evidence, the father stated that he consults with his therapeutic counsellor each month and was open to further discuss with that counsellor the past sexual assault upon him. he stated that he had attended upon counsellors or psychologists over the years. he stated he was presently on medication (in relation to his mental health). in oral evidence the father stated he had completed a parenting after separation course. he stated that one matter he had learnt from the course was that he should remain child centric and see things from the child’s perspective. he stated that he listens to the children if they have any issues. in this context he stated that if, for example, the children were upset, he gets on their level and tries to be sympathetic. he related how he sympathetically deals with the child x when she becomes upset on having to leave his care. in oral evidence the father stated that the past sexual assault upon him had no ongoing impact on his relationship with the children. he stated he would not do anything to harm the children. the court takes into account the affidavit evidence of the father’s new partner ms d, aged 32 years, filed 6 march 2024, in which she states, inter alia, that she and the father commenced a relationship in 2023 and the father moved into her home at suburb l in early 2024. she has met the children. she enjoys spending time and playing with them. she relates her observations of the children’s positive relationship with the father. ms d was not cross-examined. (b) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, provide for a gradual introduction and build-up of unsupervised time between the children and the father. such gradual build up should enable the children to adjust to increased time with the father, enable the father to adjust to having to parent the children over an increased period of time, and enable the mother to emotionally adjust to the children spending increasingly longer time periods with the father. (c) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, effectively require the father to complete the circle of security course before his daytime unsupervised time with the children progresses to overnight time. (d) the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father’s perpetration of controlling and/or coercive family violence towards the mother at least implicitly included findings relating to the father having expressed anger (and subsequent silent treatment) towards the mother, particularly when she would not comply with his demands, because the court had accepted the mother’s evidence in this context.
in oral evidence the father stated he had completed a parenting after separation course. he stated that one matter he had learnt from the course was that he should remain child centric and see things from the child’s perspective. he stated that he listens to the children if they have any issues. in this context he stated that if, for example, the children were upset, he gets on their level and tries to be sympathetic. he related how he sympathetically deals with the child x when she becomes upset on having to leave his care. in oral evidence the father stated that the past sexual assault upon him had no ongoing impact on his relationship with the children. he stated he would not do anything to harm the children. the court takes into account the affidavit evidence of the father’s new partner ms d, aged 32 years, filed 6 march 2024, in which she states, inter alia, that she and the father commenced a relationship in 2023 and the father moved into her home at suburb l in early 2024. she has met the children. she enjoys spending time and playing with them. she relates her observations of the children’s positive relationship with the father. ms d was not cross-examined. (b) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, provide for a gradual introduction and build-up of unsupervised time between the children and the father. such gradual build up should enable the children to adjust to increased time with the father, enable the father to adjust to having to parent the children over an increased period of time, and enable the mother to emotionally adjust to the children spending increasingly longer time periods with the father. (c) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, effectively require the father to complete the circle of security course before his daytime unsupervised time with the children progresses to overnight time. (d) the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father’s perpetration of controlling and/or coercive family violence towards the mother at least implicitly included findings relating to the father having expressed anger (and subsequent silent treatment) towards the mother, particularly when she would not comply with his demands, because the court had accepted the mother’s evidence in this context.
in oral evidence the father stated that the past sexual assault upon him had no ongoing impact on his relationship with the children. he stated he would not do anything to harm the children. the court takes into account the affidavit evidence of the father’s new partner ms d, aged 32 years, filed 6 march 2024, in which she states, inter alia, that she and the father commenced a relationship in 2023 and the father moved into her home at suburb l in early 2024. she has met the children. she enjoys spending time and playing with them. she relates her observations of the children’s positive relationship with the father. ms d was not cross-examined. (b) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, provide for a gradual introduction and build-up of unsupervised time between the children and the father. such gradual build up should enable the children to adjust to increased time with the father, enable the father to adjust to having to parent the children over an increased period of time, and enable the mother to emotionally adjust to the children spending increasingly longer time periods with the father. (c) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, effectively require the father to complete the circle of security course before his daytime unsupervised time with the children progresses to overnight time. (d) the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father’s perpetration of controlling and/or coercive family violence towards the mother at least implicitly included findings relating to the father having expressed anger (and subsequent silent treatment) towards the mother, particularly when she would not comply with his demands, because the court had accepted the mother’s evidence in this context.
the court takes into account the affidavit evidence of the father’s new partner ms d, aged 32 years, filed 6 march 2024, in which she states, inter alia, that she and the father commenced a relationship in 2023 and the father moved into her home at suburb l in early 2024. she has met the children. she enjoys spending time and playing with them. she relates her observations of the children’s positive relationship with the father. ms d was not cross-examined. (b) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, provide for a gradual introduction and build-up of unsupervised time between the children and the father. such gradual build up should enable the children to adjust to increased time with the father, enable the father to adjust to having to parent the children over an increased period of time, and enable the mother to emotionally adjust to the children spending increasingly longer time periods with the father. (c) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, effectively require the father to complete the circle of security course before his daytime unsupervised time with the children progresses to overnight time. (d) the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father’s perpetration of controlling and/or coercive family violence towards the mother at least implicitly included findings relating to the father having expressed anger (and subsequent silent treatment) towards the mother, particularly when she would not comply with his demands, because the court had accepted the mother’s evidence in this context.   the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, provide for a gradual introduction and build-up of unsupervised time between the children and the father. such gradual build up should enable the children to adjust to increased time with the father, enable the father to adjust to having to parent the children over an increased period of time, and enable the mother to emotionally adjust to the children spending increasingly longer time periods with the father. (c) the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, effectively require the father to complete the circle of security course before his daytime unsupervised time with the children progresses to overnight time. (d) the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father’s perpetration of controlling and/or coercive family violence towards the mother at least implicitly included findings relating to the father having expressed anger (and subsequent silent treatment) towards the mother, particularly when she would not comply with his demands, because the court had accepted the mother’s evidence in this context.   the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, effectively require the father to complete the circle of security course before his daytime unsupervised time with the children progresses to overnight time. (d) the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father’s perpetration of controlling and/or coercive family violence towards the mother at least implicitly included findings relating to the father having expressed anger (and subsequent silent treatment) towards the mother, particularly when she would not comply with his demands, because the court had accepted the mother’s evidence in this context.   the court acknowledges that its above findings relating to the father’s perpetration of controlling and/or coercive family violence towards the mother at least implicitly included findings relating to the father having expressed anger (and subsequent silent treatment) towards the mother, particularly when she would not comply with his demands, because the court had accepted the mother’s evidence in this context.
there is no evidence that post separation (september 2022) to date, the father has exhibited significant anger towards the mother, the children or third parties, whilst acknowledging that the father’s time with the children post separation has usually been supervised. the father’s demeanour when giving his oral evidence was calm. he did not exhibit overt aggression when being cross-examined. the father is ingesting regular medication for his mental health and the court infers that his mood is likely usually stable. the father acknowledged that during the relationship when the children were particularly young he could experience frustration in seeking to put a child to bed. however, in oral evidence, he stated that in more recent times when putting the youngest child to bed he did not experience any such frustration. the father is employed on a full-time basis with a company as a professional and appears to have been employed consistently for some significant time.   again, the court does not accept, on the balance of probabilities, that the father has deliberately physically mistreated the children in the past, including in relation to the alleged deliberate dropping of the eldest child when she was quite young. the court refers to the mother’s oral evidence relating to the father’s positive parenting skills. the court refers to the children’s meaningful relationship with the father and the family report writer’s positive observations of the children with the father. the court takes into account the positive supervision reports from j contact service in respect to the father. (f) the court takes into account the children’s meaningful relationship with the father, in this context the family report writer had confirmed in her oral evidence that she had observed that the children had “a really warm, loving, connected relationship with their dad, and were able to use him as a secure base.” (g) should the children spend time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, but subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, the mother should not experience significant anxiety such that her parenting capacity would be adversely affected. (h) taking the above matters into account, the court would assess that there is probably a low risk that the children would be exposed to the father exerting, or seeking to exert, coercive and/or controlling behaviour over them when spending time with him.   the court takes into account the children’s meaningful relationship with the father, in this context the family report writer had confirmed in her oral evidence that she had observed that the children had “a really warm, loving, connected relationship with their dad, and were able to use him as a secure base.” (g) should the children spend time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, but subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, the mother should not experience significant anxiety such that her parenting capacity would be adversely affected. (h) taking the above matters into account, the court would assess that there is probably a low risk that the children would be exposed to the father exerting, or seeking to exert, coercive and/or controlling behaviour over them when spending time with him.   should the children spend time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed final parenting orders, but subject to the court’s exceptions to those proposed orders as discussed above under the meaningful relationship primary consideration, the mother should not experience significant anxiety such that her parenting capacity would be adversely affected. (h) taking the above matters into account, the court would assess that there is probably a low risk that the children would be exposed to the father exerting, or seeking to exert, coercive and/or controlling behaviour over them when spending time with him.   taking the above matters into account, the court would assess that there is probably a low risk that the children would be exposed to the father exerting, or seeking to exert, coercive and/or controlling behaviour over them when spending time with him.
section 60cc(3) additional considerations a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family. k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter. l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility
summary
associate: dated: 7 may 2024
dated: 7 may 2024