last updated: 20 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
heyden & lester [2021] fedcfamc2f 447
orders
the court orders that:  the applicant to attend at 9am, and (b) the respondent to attend at 10:30am.   the respondent to attend at 10:30am.
microsoft teams links will be provided to the parties prior by the court child expert prior to the event.  any agreement reached between the parties, (b) identification of key issues requiring resolution (c) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   identification of key issues requiring resolution (c) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   notice of address of service (b) response to initiating application setting out with precision the final orders sought (c) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, (d) supporting affidavit, (e) supporting affidavit in relation to the interim application, noting the provisions of rule 5.09 of the federal circuit and family court (family law) rules 2021.   response to initiating application setting out with precision the final orders sought (c) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, (d) supporting affidavit, (e) supporting affidavit in relation to the interim application, noting the provisions of rule 5.09 of the federal circuit and family court (family law) rules 2021.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, (d) supporting affidavit, (e) supporting affidavit in relation to the interim application, noting the provisions of rule 5.09 of the federal circuit and family court (family law) rules 2021.   supporting affidavit, (e) supporting affidavit in relation to the interim application, noting the provisions of rule 5.09 of the federal circuit and family court (family law) rules 2021.   supporting affidavit in relation to the interim application, noting the provisions of rule 5.09 of the federal circuit and family court (family law) rules 2021.
and the court directs that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
please read, you don’t know who your [sic] dealing with. this is only a small list of things [mr heyden], the drug-dealing low-life thief, thug, lying coward, and drug addict, has done to my family.
orders delivered
associate: dated: 24 november 2021
dated: 24 november 2021