last updated: 9 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
baier & pitter [2024] fedcfamc2f 586
orders
the court orders that:  the mother will consult with the father, in writing, not less than seven (7) days prior to any decision being made and seek the father’s input into the decision regarding medical matters or changing the children’s surname. (b) the father will respond once, in writing, to the mother’s proposed decision within seven (7) days of receiving such information. (c) the mother will consider the father’s response to any decision proposed, and (d) the mother will advise the father, in writing, not less than seven (7) days after any major, long-term decision has been made for the children.   the father will respond once, in writing, to the mother’s proposed decision within seven (7) days of receiving such information. (c) the mother will consider the father’s response to any decision proposed, and (d) the mother will advise the father, in writing, not less than seven (7) days after any major, long-term decision has been made for the children.   the mother will consider the father’s response to any decision proposed, and (d) the mother will advise the father, in writing, not less than seven (7) days after any major, long-term decision has been made for the children.   the mother will advise the father, in writing, not less than seven (7) days after any major, long-term decision has been made for the children.   prior to the commencement of any time with the children, the father must have attended and completed the post orders parenting program in person and must provide the mother with a certificate of completion within 48 hours of receiving such certificate, (b) within thirty (30) days of the date of these orders, the father must complete a hair follicle test and provide the results of such test to the mother, and (c) the father must not be under the influence of illicit substances or alcohol when the children are in his care.   within thirty (30) days of the date of these orders, the father must complete a hair follicle test and provide the results of such test to the mother, and (c) the father must not be under the influence of illicit substances or alcohol when the children are in his care.   the father must not be under the influence of illicit substances or alcohol when the children are in his care.   in the event the father lives in the city b area: (i) the children’s supervised time with the father will occur once per fortnight, subject to availability at the service. (ii) the supervised time will occur at the city b contact service. (iii) the father will be responsible for the entire cost of the supervision. (b) in the event the father lives outside the city b area time will occur on the following conditions: (i) the father must give the mother fourteen (14) days’ written notice of his intention to spend time with the children, (ii) the father will be responsible for the entire costs of the supervision, (iii) the father must hold a valid driver’s licence and must provide to the mother a copy of such valid driver’s licence at least forty-eight (48) days before such time is to commence, (iv) supervised time will occur not more than four (4) hours per day, and (v) supervised time will occur on weekends.   the children’s supervised time with the father will occur once per fortnight, subject to availability at the service. (ii) the supervised time will occur at the city b contact service. (iii) the father will be responsible for the entire cost of the supervision.  ) the supervised time will occur at the city b contact service. (iii) the father will be responsible for the entire cost of the supervision.  i) the father will be responsible for the entire cost of the supervision.   in the event the father lives outside the city b area time will occur on the following conditions: (i) the father must give the mother fourteen (14) days’ written notice of his intention to spend time with the children, (ii) the father will be responsible for the entire costs of the supervision, (iii) the father must hold a valid driver’s licence and must provide to the mother a copy of such valid driver’s licence at least forty-eight (48) days before such time is to commence, (iv) supervised time will occur not more than four (4) hours per day, and (v) supervised time will occur on weekends.   the father must give the mother fourteen (14) days’ written notice of his intention to spend time with the children, (ii) the father will be responsible for the entire costs of the supervision, (iii) the father must hold a valid driver’s licence and must provide to the mother a copy of such valid driver’s licence at least forty-eight (48) days before such time is to commence, (iv) supervised time will occur not more than four (4) hours per day, and (v) supervised time will occur on weekends.  ) the father will be responsible for the entire costs of the supervision, (iii) the father must hold a valid driver’s licence and must provide to the mother a copy of such valid driver’s licence at least forty-eight (48) days before such time is to commence, (iv) supervised time will occur not more than four (4) hours per day, and (v) supervised time will occur on weekends.  i) the father must hold a valid driver’s licence and must provide to the mother a copy of such valid driver’s licence at least forty-eight (48) days before such time is to commence, (iv) supervised time will occur not more than four (4) hours per day, and (v) supervised time will occur on weekends.  ) supervised time will occur not more than four (4) hours per day, and (v) supervised time will occur on weekends.   supervised time will occur on weekends.
recovery order  to find and recover the children x (born in 2018) & y (born in 2018) and to deliver the said children to the mother, or to a place as the mother and the person effecting such recovery agree to be appropriate, and (b) to stop and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the said children may be found.   to stop and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the said children may be found.
restraints  locating or attempting to locate the mother and the children’s residence, (b) communicating or attempting to communicate with the children’s school or organiser of any extra-curricular activity, (c) attending the children’s school or school event or school function organised by the children’s school/s, and (d) removing or attempting to remove or procuring another person to remove the children from any school, institution or at any other place in which the children attend or are placed by the mother from time to time.   communicating or attempting to communicate with the children’s school or organiser of any extra-curricular activity, (c) attending the children’s school or school event or school function organised by the children’s school/s, and (d) removing or attempting to remove or procuring another person to remove the children from any school, institution or at any other place in which the children attend or are placed by the mother from time to time.   attending the children’s school or school event or school function organised by the children’s school/s, and (d) removing or attempting to remove or procuring another person to remove the children from any school, institution or at any other place in which the children attend or are placed by the mother from time to time.   removing or attempting to remove or procuring another person to remove the children from any school, institution or at any other place in which the children attend or are placed by the mother from time to time.
non-denigration  not denigrate the other party or the other party’s family or associates in the presence or hearing of the children and shall remove the children from the presence of others who may be doing so. (b) respect the privacy of the other parties and not question the children about the personal life of the other parties or family or associates of the other parties or allow a third party to do so. (c) speak of the other parties respectfully and use their best endeavours to ensure third parties do so in the presence or hearing of the children and if the children are present and this is occurring, they are to remove the children. (d) not ask the children who they want to spend time with or live with. (e) not expose the children to any form of family violence or domestic violence. (f) ensure that there is no corporal punishment or threat of corporal punishment to the children whilst in their respective care, and (g) ensure that the children are not exposed to abuse, neglect, or family violence whilst in their care.   respect the privacy of the other parties and not question the children about the personal life of the other parties or family or associates of the other parties or allow a third party to do so. (c) speak of the other parties respectfully and use their best endeavours to ensure third parties do so in the presence or hearing of the children and if the children are present and this is occurring, they are to remove the children. (d) not ask the children who they want to spend time with or live with. (e) not expose the children to any form of family violence or domestic violence. (f) ensure that there is no corporal punishment or threat of corporal punishment to the children whilst in their respective care, and (g) ensure that the children are not exposed to abuse, neglect, or family violence whilst in their care.   speak of the other parties respectfully and use their best endeavours to ensure third parties do so in the presence or hearing of the children and if the children are present and this is occurring, they are to remove the children. (d) not ask the children who they want to spend time with or live with. (e) not expose the children to any form of family violence or domestic violence. (f) ensure that there is no corporal punishment or threat of corporal punishment to the children whilst in their respective care, and (g) ensure that the children are not exposed to abuse, neglect, or family violence whilst in their care.   not ask the children who they want to spend time with or live with. (e) not expose the children to any form of family violence or domestic violence. (f) ensure that there is no corporal punishment or threat of corporal punishment to the children whilst in their respective care, and (g) ensure that the children are not exposed to abuse, neglect, or family violence whilst in their care.   not expose the children to any form of family violence or domestic violence. (f) ensure that there is no corporal punishment or threat of corporal punishment to the children whilst in their respective care, and (g) ensure that the children are not exposed to abuse, neglect, or family violence whilst in their care.   ensure that there is no corporal punishment or threat of corporal punishment to the children whilst in their respective care, and (g) ensure that the children are not exposed to abuse, neglect, or family violence whilst in their care.   ensure that the children are not exposed to abuse, neglect, or family violence whilst in their care.
procedural
the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge cope
introduction
outline of procedural history
current living arrangements
risk factors
family violence
mental health
drug and alcohol abuse
child safety and wellbeing
issues for determination
material relied on
the mother   affidavit of the mother filed on 27 march 2024, and (b) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed on 30 december 2024.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed on 30 december 2024.   amended amended initiating application filed by the mother on 3 april 2024, (d) affidavit of mr g filed by the mother on 27 march 2024, and (e) affidavit of ms h filed by the mother on 28 march 2024.   affidavit of mr g filed by the mother on 27 march 2024, and (e) affidavit of ms h filed by the mother on 28 march 2024.   affidavit of ms h filed by the mother on 28 march 2024.
the father
independent children’s lawyer
tendered material
the proposals  per the original)
the evidence and witnesses
it’s my case that i am rightfully returned the property that is mine... in relation to [x] and [y], they are to be returned safely unharmed to me.   he refused to recognise his own signature on an authority annexed to the solicitor’s letter, stating that it was his “autograph”, that he included with his autograph words to the effect that he “reserved all his rights” (clarified to mean all his rights as a private man), (b) he refused to accept what he viewed as an attempt to associate him as a person or living being with that name on the authority, (c) he refused to accept that the letter was a letter from a lawyer because it was a copy and not the original, and (d) he refused to accept that the letter was sent on his instructions or that he instructed those lawyers to act for him in relation to other matters.   he refused to accept what he viewed as an attempt to associate him as a person or living being with that name on the authority, (c) he refused to accept that the letter was a letter from a lawyer because it was a copy and not the original, and (d) he refused to accept that the letter was sent on his instructions or that he instructed those lawyers to act for him in relation to other matters.   he refused to accept that the letter was a letter from a lawyer because it was a copy and not the original, and (d) he refused to accept that the letter was sent on his instructions or that he instructed those lawyers to act for him in relation to other matters.   he refused to accept that the letter was sent on his instructions or that he instructed those lawyers to act for him in relation to other matters.
mr g – maternal grandfather
ms h – maternal grandmother
dr f - family report writer  the mother have sole parental responsibility for the care of the children and that the children live with her, (b) the father continue to have twice weekly phone contact with the children, and (c) should the court order contact between the father and the children, that it be supervised.   the father continue to have twice weekly phone contact with the children, and (c) should the court order contact between the father and the children, that it be supervised.   should the court order contact between the father and the children, that it be supervised.
jurisdictional issue
i, the living man, [mr pitter] of the family [pitter], by accommodation of [mr pitter].  ] finally, judges administer justice according to law. they are not required to expend judicial time, a scarce public resource, on applications that have no legal foundation and involve a deluded understanding of the law.
the legal principles
... as was recognised by hale lj (as her ladyship then was) in re c and b (children) (care order: future harm) [2001] 1 f.l.r 611 at [28], in child-related proceedings, a comparatively small risk of really serious harm can justify action, while even the virtual certainty of slight harm might not. it could hardly be otherwise, because no prudent adult would willingly expose a child to the risk of sexual abuse when there is an unacceptably high chance of its occurrence, even though the chance is not proven by the evidence to be probable. requiring the proof of any possible future child abuse as a probability would pervert the law as settled by the high court in m v m and malec. (emphasis in the original)
39. ...   it is now well established that “unacceptable risk” includes not merely physical harm but also includes an assessment of the risk of emotional harm: see a v a [1998] famca 25, (1998) flc 92-800 at 84,996, m v m (1988) 166 clr 69 at 77. (2) such an unacceptable risk can include any or all matters that compromise the safety, welfare and well-being of a child, and is examined in light of an accumulation of factors proved: see director general, department of family and community services (nsw) and the colt children [2013] nswchc 5 at [146]–[148]. (3) the components which lead to a conclusion that an unacceptable risk exists need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of “unacceptable risk” from the accumulation of factors, none or only some of which are proved to that standard: see johnson & page [2007] famca 1235, (2007) flc 93-344 at [68], endorsing and applying the principles set out in a paper prepared by the hon john fogarty am, “unacceptable risk: a return to basics” (2006) 20 australian journal of family law 249. (4) while each factor establishing risk need not be proved to the standard of s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), insofar as determining whether an unacceptable risk exists involves a prediction of the future, based on findings of fact: “the confidence one will have in the prediction will be, in part, a reflection of the confidence one has in the factual findings that base the prediction”.
application of the law
consideration of the s 60cc(2) primary considerations   risk arising from his impulsivity, his lack of insight and his views as to his ownership of the children. i am satisfied that he feels completely justified in removing the children from their mother on the previous occasion. he has expressed no regret for doing so and had no insight into the potential harms that may be suffered by such young children removed from the primary care giver. (b) his mental health is possibly a risk, but it is unknown to what (if any) extent due to his failures to engage in this process. certainly, the engagement with a gp and e hospital in 2021 was voluntary, which is a reassuring sign. unfortunately, he did not engage with the family report and there is no current mental health assessment, (c) the unknowns around his drug use, (d) the unknowns around his living arrangements, and (e) the language he used when talking about his five year old daughters as “young women” a term of reference commonly reserved for adults.   his mental health is possibly a risk, but it is unknown to what (if any) extent due to his failures to engage in this process. certainly, the engagement with a gp and e hospital in 2021 was voluntary, which is a reassuring sign. unfortunately, he did not engage with the family report and there is no current mental health assessment, (c) the unknowns around his drug use, (d) the unknowns around his living arrangements, and (e) the language he used when talking about his five year old daughters as “young women” a term of reference commonly reserved for adults.   the unknowns around his drug use, (d) the unknowns around his living arrangements, and (e) the language he used when talking about his five year old daughters as “young women” a term of reference commonly reserved for adults.   the unknowns around his living arrangements, and (e) the language he used when talking about his five year old daughters as “young women” a term of reference commonly reserved for adults.   the language he used when talking about his five year old daughters as “young women” a term of reference commonly reserved for adults.
consideration of the s 60cc(3) additional considerations
determination
parental responsibility  the father is of the view that the children are his property, (b) where he has previously absconded with the children, (c) where i have made a finding that he is an unacceptable risk of harm, and (d) where i am satisfied that communication with him for the purpose of decision making would be well-nigh impossible given his conduct during the trial.   where he has previously absconded with the children, (c) where i have made a finding that he is an unacceptable risk of harm, and (d) where i am satisfied that communication with him for the purpose of decision making would be well-nigh impossible given his conduct during the trial.   where i have made a finding that he is an unacceptable risk of harm, and (d) where i am satisfied that communication with him for the purpose of decision making would be well-nigh impossible given his conduct during the trial.   where i am satisfied that communication with him for the purpose of decision making would be well-nigh impossible given his conduct during the trial.
living arrangements
other orders
in conclusion
associate: dated: 14 may 2024
dated: 14 may 2024
[1] exhibit m10[2] hickson & matthew [2022] fedcfamc1a 161.