last updated: 31 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
parry & sadler [2024] fedcfamc2f 603
orders
the court orders:
recovery order  to find and recover the child and deliver the child to the father at such place as the father and the person effecting such recovery agree to be appropriate, and (b) to stop and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the child may be found.   to stop and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the child may be found.   from 26 may 2024 until 16 june 2024 by facetime, skype or telephone call (“the call”) for no more than 30 minutes, each sunday at 5.00pm, with the mother to arrange for the call to the father’s mobile phone, for the purposes of the call the following shall apply: (i) the call shall be supervised by b contact centre suburb d (“b contact centre”) (or if b contact centre is unable to accommodate such time, then in accordance with the time available to b contact centre), and (ii) if b contact centre does not offer supervised call facilities, then the father shall supervise the call, (b) from the week beginning 17 june 2024 until the week beginning 9 december 2024, supervised time at b contact centre for a period of no more than two (2) hours each alternate week and for this purpose the following applies: (i) that within (7) days of the date of the making of these orders, each parent shall attend b contact centre to make arrangements for an intake interview at the parents own cost and to otherwise comply in every respect with the guidelines of b contact centre, and (ii) the costs of supervised visitations to be borne solely by the mother, (c) from the saturday, 21 december 2024 until 14 june 2025, each alternate saturday from 10.00am until 4.00pm, (d) from 28 june 2025 until 13 december 2025, each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday, (e) thereafter, each alternate weekend from after school friday (or 3.00pm on a non-school day) until 4.00pm on sunday, and (f) from the week beginning 17 june 2024, by telephone, facetime or skype each wednesday at 6.00pm with the mother to make the call and the father to facilitate the call.   the call shall be supervised by b contact centre suburb d (“b contact centre”) (or if b contact centre is unable to accommodate such time, then in accordance with the time available to b contact centre), and (ii) if b contact centre does not offer supervised call facilities, then the father shall supervise the call,  ) if b contact centre does not offer supervised call facilities, then the father shall supervise the call,   from the week beginning 17 june 2024 until the week beginning 9 december 2024, supervised time at b contact centre for a period of no more than two (2) hours each alternate week and for this purpose the following applies: (i) that within (7) days of the date of the making of these orders, each parent shall attend b contact centre to make arrangements for an intake interview at the parents own cost and to otherwise comply in every respect with the guidelines of b contact centre, and (ii) the costs of supervised visitations to be borne solely by the mother, (c) from the saturday, 21 december 2024 until 14 june 2025, each alternate saturday from 10.00am until 4.00pm, (d) from 28 june 2025 until 13 december 2025, each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday, (e) thereafter, each alternate weekend from after school friday (or 3.00pm on a non-school day) until 4.00pm on sunday, and (f) from the week beginning 17 june 2024, by telephone, facetime or skype each wednesday at 6.00pm with the mother to make the call and the father to facilitate the call.   that within (7) days of the date of the making of these orders, each parent shall attend b contact centre to make arrangements for an intake interview at the parents own cost and to otherwise comply in every respect with the guidelines of b contact centre, and (ii) the costs of supervised visitations to be borne solely by the mother,  ) the costs of supervised visitations to be borne solely by the mother,   from the saturday, 21 december 2024 until 14 june 2025, each alternate saturday from 10.00am until 4.00pm, (d) from 28 june 2025 until 13 december 2025, each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday, (e) thereafter, each alternate weekend from after school friday (or 3.00pm on a non-school day) until 4.00pm on sunday, and (f) from the week beginning 17 june 2024, by telephone, facetime or skype each wednesday at 6.00pm with the mother to make the call and the father to facilitate the call.   from 28 june 2025 until 13 december 2025, each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday, (e) thereafter, each alternate weekend from after school friday (or 3.00pm on a non-school day) until 4.00pm on sunday, and (f) from the week beginning 17 june 2024, by telephone, facetime or skype each wednesday at 6.00pm with the mother to make the call and the father to facilitate the call.   thereafter, each alternate weekend from after school friday (or 3.00pm on a non-school day) until 4.00pm on sunday, and (f) from the week beginning 17 june 2024, by telephone, facetime or skype each wednesday at 6.00pm with the mother to make the call and the father to facilitate the call.   from the week beginning 17 june 2024, by telephone, facetime or skype each wednesday at 6.00pm with the mother to make the call and the father to facilitate the call.
school holidays  in the first week of the school holiday periods in the even numbered years, and (b) in the second week of the school holiday periods in the odd numbered years.   in the second week of the school holiday periods in the odd numbered years.
christmas  with the father from 12.00pm on christmas eve until 12.00pm on boxing day in the even numbered years, and (b) with the mother from 12.00pm on christmas eve until 12.00pm on boxing day in odd numbered years.   with the mother from 12.00pm on christmas eve until 12.00pm on boxing day in odd numbered years.
easter time  with the father from after school on the thursday before good friday until 3.00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and (b) with the mother from after school on the thursday before good friday until 3.00pm on easter monday in even numbered years.   with the mother from after school on the thursday before good friday until 3.00pm on easter monday in even numbered years.
new years eve/day  with the father from 12.00pm new years eve to 12.00pm new years day in odd numbered years, and (b) with the mother from 12.00pm new years eve to 12.00pm new years day in even numbered years.   with the mother from 12.00pm new years eve to 12.00pm new years day in even numbered years.
birthdays
parent’s birthday  for the mother’s birthday: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day and the mother is residing outside of region e then the immediately preceding saturday from 9.00am to 5.00pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a school day and the mother is residing inside of region e then from after school to 7.30pm, and (iii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (b) for the father’s birthday: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day then from after school (or 3.00pm on a non-school day) to 7.30pm, and (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm.   if the birthday falls on a school day and the mother is residing outside of region e then the immediately preceding saturday from 9.00am to 5.00pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a school day and the mother is residing inside of region e then from after school to 7.30pm, and (iii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm,  ) if the birthday falls on a school day and the mother is residing inside of region e then from after school to 7.30pm, and (iii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm,  i) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm,   for the father’s birthday: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day then from after school (or 3.00pm on a non-school day) to 7.30pm, and (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm.   if the birthday falls on a school day then from after school (or 3.00pm on a non-school day) to 7.30pm, and (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm.  ) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm.
child’s birthday  should the time be with the mother: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day and the mother is residing outside of region e then the immediately preceding saturday from 9.00am to 5.00pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a school day and the mother is residing inside of region e then from after school to 7.00pm, and (iii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm, (b) should the time be with the father: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day then from after school (or 3.00pm on a non-schoolday) to 7.00pm, and (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm.   if the birthday falls on a school day and the mother is residing outside of region e then the immediately preceding saturday from 9.00am to 5.00pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a school day and the mother is residing inside of region e then from after school to 7.00pm, and (iii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm,  ) if the birthday falls on a school day and the mother is residing inside of region e then from after school to 7.00pm, and (iii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm,   should the time be with the father: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day then from after school (or 3.00pm on a non-schoolday) to 7.00pm, and (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm.   if the birthday falls on a school day then from after school (or 3.00pm on a non-schoolday) to 7.00pm, and (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 5.00pm.
fathers’ day and mothers’ day  with the father from 9.00am to 5.00pm on father’s day, and (b) with the mother from 9.00am to 5.00pm on mother’s day.   with the mother from 9.00am to 5.00pm on mother’s day.
other events
changeovers  for orders 7(b) and 7(c), at b contact centre suburb d and the costs of the contact centre is to be paid solely by the mother, (b) for orders 7(d) and 7(e): (i) on the first fortnight of the month, at f venue located at g street, town f, and (ii) on the second fortnight of the month, at suburb d train station located at h street, suburb d, (c) for orders 10, 13, 15, 16 and 23: (i) on even numbered years, at f venue, and (ii) on odd numbered years, at suburb d train station, (d) for orders 19(a) and 19(b) and 21: (i) on the mother’s birthday and mother’s day, at f venue and (ii) on the father’s birthday and father’s day, at suburb d train station.   for orders 7(d) and 7(e): (i) on the first fortnight of the month, at f venue located at g street, town f, and (ii) on the second fortnight of the month, at suburb d train station located at h street, suburb d, (c) for orders 10, 13, 15, 16 and 23: (i) on even numbered years, at f venue, and (ii) on odd numbered years, at suburb d train station, (d) for orders 19(a) and 19(b) and 21: (i) on the mother’s birthday and mother’s day, at f venue and (ii) on the father’s birthday and father’s day, at suburb d train station.   on the first fortnight of the month, at f venue located at g street, town f, and (ii) on the second fortnight of the month, at suburb d train station located at h street, suburb d,  ) on the second fortnight of the month, at suburb d train station located at h street, suburb d,   for orders 10, 13, 15, 16 and 23: (i) on even numbered years, at f venue, and (ii) on odd numbered years, at suburb d train station, (d) for orders 19(a) and 19(b) and 21: (i) on the mother’s birthday and mother’s day, at f venue and (ii) on the father’s birthday and father’s day, at suburb d train station.   on even numbered years, at f venue, and (ii) on odd numbered years, at suburb d train station,  ) on odd numbered years, at suburb d train station,   for orders 19(a) and 19(b) and 21: (i) on the mother’s birthday and mother’s day, at f venue and (ii) on the father’s birthday and father’s day, at suburb d train station.   on the mother’s birthday and mother’s day, at f venue and (ii) on the father’s birthday and father’s day, at suburb d train station.  ) on the father’s birthday and father’s day, at suburb d train station.
the child’s personal property
mother’s mental health
counselling  the family reports in this matter, (b) a copy of these orders, and (c) a copy of the judgment.   a copy of these orders, and (c) a copy of the judgment.   a copy of the judgment.
communication
communication between parents
communication with the child
medical  updated family report of ms k dated 28 november 2023, filed under cover affidavit dated 2 december 2023, (b) the updated family report of ms k dated 14 february 2024, (c) a copy of the reasons for judgment, and (d) a copy of these orders,   the updated family report of ms k dated 14 february 2024, (c) a copy of the reasons for judgment, and (d) a copy of these orders,   a copy of the reasons for judgment, and (d) a copy of these orders,   a copy of these orders,
to any medical practitioner/s including counsellor/s, psychiatrist/s, psychologist/s and therapist/s for the child and for the parents.
education
passport
overseas travel  the travel does not exceed 14 days’ in length, no more than once per calendar year, (b) unless otherwise agreed in writing, the child is always to travel accompanied by the travelling parent, (c) the mother shall provide the father at least 30 days’ notice of the following: (i) an itinerary to include the departure and return dates, the country or countries which the child will be travelling to, the approximate dates on which the child will arrive and depart each country and a contact telephone number and address at which the child can be contacted and where he will be staying, and (ii) a copy of the tickets in the mother’s and child’s names for the departure and return flights, (d) the father shall release to the mother the child’s passport by providing it directly or posting via registered mail to the mother’s nominated postal address at least 14 days prior to the departure date, and (e) the mother be permitted to travel to an overseas destination which is not a signatory to the hague convention unless written consent is obtained at least 30 days prior to the travel. such consent is not required in the event that a necessary flight change is required at a non-hague convention country.   unless otherwise agreed in writing, the child is always to travel accompanied by the travelling parent, (c) the mother shall provide the father at least 30 days’ notice of the following: (i) an itinerary to include the departure and return dates, the country or countries which the child will be travelling to, the approximate dates on which the child will arrive and depart each country and a contact telephone number and address at which the child can be contacted and where he will be staying, and (ii) a copy of the tickets in the mother’s and child’s names for the departure and return flights, (d) the father shall release to the mother the child’s passport by providing it directly or posting via registered mail to the mother’s nominated postal address at least 14 days prior to the departure date, and (e) the mother be permitted to travel to an overseas destination which is not a signatory to the hague convention unless written consent is obtained at least 30 days prior to the travel. such consent is not required in the event that a necessary flight change is required at a non-hague convention country.   the mother shall provide the father at least 30 days’ notice of the following: (i) an itinerary to include the departure and return dates, the country or countries which the child will be travelling to, the approximate dates on which the child will arrive and depart each country and a contact telephone number and address at which the child can be contacted and where he will be staying, and (ii) a copy of the tickets in the mother’s and child’s names for the departure and return flights, (d) the father shall release to the mother the child’s passport by providing it directly or posting via registered mail to the mother’s nominated postal address at least 14 days prior to the departure date, and (e) the mother be permitted to travel to an overseas destination which is not a signatory to the hague convention unless written consent is obtained at least 30 days prior to the travel. such consent is not required in the event that a necessary flight change is required at a non-hague convention country.   an itinerary to include the departure and return dates, the country or countries which the child will be travelling to, the approximate dates on which the child will arrive and depart each country and a contact telephone number and address at which the child can be contacted and where he will be staying, and (ii) a copy of the tickets in the mother’s and child’s names for the departure and return flights,  ) a copy of the tickets in the mother’s and child’s names for the departure and return flights,   the father shall release to the mother the child’s passport by providing it directly or posting via registered mail to the mother’s nominated postal address at least 14 days prior to the departure date, and (e) the mother be permitted to travel to an overseas destination which is not a signatory to the hague convention unless written consent is obtained at least 30 days prior to the travel. such consent is not required in the event that a necessary flight change is required at a non-hague convention country.   the mother be permitted to travel to an overseas destination which is not a signatory to the hague convention unless written consent is obtained at least 30 days prior to the travel. such consent is not required in the event that a necessary flight change is required at a non-hague convention country.
dispute resolution
explaination of orders
omnibus  not consume alcohol to excess, noting that this would include any volume that would render them unable to legally drive a motor vehicle or remain in the company of others consuming alcohol to excess, (b) not consume, or expose the child to anyone who is under the influence of, any illicit substances whilst the child is in their care, save for those prescribed by a medical practitioner, (c) not encourage or permit the child to refer to either parents’ partners as ‘mum’ or ‘dad’ or any like term, (d) respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child in relation to the other parent’s private life, (e) not denigrate the other parent or their family in the hearing or presence of the child and shall use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate the other parent or their family in the hearing or presence of the child, (f) not denigrate or insult the other parent or discuss any matters in dispute between them in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate, insult or discuss matters in dispute with the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, and (g) not watch media content, where media content includes television, video, and electronic games, which is not rated at the australian standard for the child’s age.   not consume, or expose the child to anyone who is under the influence of, any illicit substances whilst the child is in their care, save for those prescribed by a medical practitioner, (c) not encourage or permit the child to refer to either parents’ partners as ‘mum’ or ‘dad’ or any like term, (d) respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child in relation to the other parent’s private life, (e) not denigrate the other parent or their family in the hearing or presence of the child and shall use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate the other parent or their family in the hearing or presence of the child, (f) not denigrate or insult the other parent or discuss any matters in dispute between them in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate, insult or discuss matters in dispute with the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, and (g) not watch media content, where media content includes television, video, and electronic games, which is not rated at the australian standard for the child’s age.   not encourage or permit the child to refer to either parents’ partners as ‘mum’ or ‘dad’ or any like term, (d) respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child in relation to the other parent’s private life, (e) not denigrate the other parent or their family in the hearing or presence of the child and shall use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate the other parent or their family in the hearing or presence of the child, (f) not denigrate or insult the other parent or discuss any matters in dispute between them in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate, insult or discuss matters in dispute with the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, and (g) not watch media content, where media content includes television, video, and electronic games, which is not rated at the australian standard for the child’s age.   respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child in relation to the other parent’s private life, (e) not denigrate the other parent or their family in the hearing or presence of the child and shall use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate the other parent or their family in the hearing or presence of the child, (f) not denigrate or insult the other parent or discuss any matters in dispute between them in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate, insult or discuss matters in dispute with the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, and (g) not watch media content, where media content includes television, video, and electronic games, which is not rated at the australian standard for the child’s age.   not denigrate the other parent or their family in the hearing or presence of the child and shall use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate the other parent or their family in the hearing or presence of the child, (f) not denigrate or insult the other parent or discuss any matters in dispute between them in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate, insult or discuss matters in dispute with the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, and (g) not watch media content, where media content includes television, video, and electronic games, which is not rated at the australian standard for the child’s age.   not denigrate or insult the other parent or discuss any matters in dispute between them in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate, insult or discuss matters in dispute with the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, and (g) not watch media content, where media content includes television, video, and electronic games, which is not rated at the australian standard for the child’s age.   not watch media content, where media content includes television, video, and electronic games, which is not rated at the australian standard for the child’s age.
procedural
it is noted:
reasons for judgment
judge goodchild:
introduction
issues in dispute  does the father pose an unacceptable risk of harm to x by reason of alleged family violence or exposure to family violence? (b) will the mother support x’s relationship with the father in the event he is found not to pose an unacceptable risk of harm? (c) which parent x should live, (d) how much time x should spend with the parent with whom he is not living, and (e) how parental responsibility for long-term decisions about x is to be allocated.   will the mother support x’s relationship with the father in the event he is found not to pose an unacceptable risk of harm? (c) which parent x should live, (d) how much time x should spend with the parent with whom he is not living, and (e) how parental responsibility for long-term decisions about x is to be allocated.   which parent x should live, (d) how much time x should spend with the parent with whom he is not living, and (e) how parental responsibility for long-term decisions about x is to be allocated.   how much time x should spend with the parent with whom he is not living, and (e) how parental responsibility for long-term decisions about x is to be allocated.   how parental responsibility for long-term decisions about x is to be allocated.
evidence
relevant facts and procedural background
181(b) the parties and [x] engage in court reportable family therapy with [ms l] from [p centre] with a view to assessing the dynamics within the family, rebuilding [x]’s relationship with his father, supporting [x]’s mental health and supporting the parties to co-parent and communicate, in addition to supporting [ms sadler] to recognise how some of her behaviours may be emotionally damaging to [x] and [x]’s relationship with his father. such a process could also assist in [x] spending time with his father again.
the contravention application
the respondent has ceased making arrangements for the child to attend upon family therapist for counselling.
legal principles
meaning of contravened an order a person is taken for the purposes of this division to have contravened an order under this act affecting children if, and only if:   where the person is bound by the order -- he or she has:  intentionally failed to comply with the order, or (ii) made no reasonable attempt to comply with the order, or  otherwise -- he or she has: (i) intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.  ) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.
note: parenting orders may be subject to any subsequent parenting plan (see section 64d). this means that an action that would otherwise contravene a parenting order may not be a contravention, because of a subsequent inconsistent parenting plan. whether this is the case or not depends on the terms of the parenting order.
meaning of reasonable excuse for contravening an order   the circumstances in which a person may be taken to have had, for the purposes of this division, a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act affecting children include, but are not limited to, the circumstances set out in subsections (2), (4), (5), (6) and (7). (2) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act affecting children if: (a) the respondent contravened the order because, or substantially because, he or she did not, at the time of the contravention, understand the obligations imposed by the order on the person who was bound by it, and (b) the court is satisfied that the respondent ought to be excused in respect of the contravention. (3) if a court decides that a person had a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act for the reason referred to in paragraph (2)(a), it is the duty of the court to explain to the person, in language likely to be readily understood by the person, the obligations imposed on him or her by the order and the consequences that may follow if he or she again contravenes the order. (4) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to live with in a way that resulted in the child not living with a person in whose favour the order was made if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the actions constituting the contravention were necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act affecting children if: (a) the respondent contravened the order because, or substantially because, he or she did not, at the time of the contravention, understand the obligations imposed by the order on the person who was bound by it, and (b) the court is satisfied that the respondent ought to be excused in respect of the contravention. (3) if a court decides that a person had a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act for the reason referred to in paragraph (2)(a), it is the duty of the court to explain to the person, in language likely to be readily understood by the person, the obligations imposed on him or her by the order and the consequences that may follow if he or she again contravenes the order. (4) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to live with in a way that resulted in the child not living with a person in whose favour the order was made if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the actions constituting the contravention were necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the respondent contravened the order because, or substantially because, he or she did not, at the time of the contravention, understand the obligations imposed by the order on the person who was bound by it, and (b) the court is satisfied that the respondent ought to be excused in respect of the contravention.   the court is satisfied that the respondent ought to be excused in respect of the contravention.   if a court decides that a person had a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act for the reason referred to in paragraph (2)(a), it is the duty of the court to explain to the person, in language likely to be readily understood by the person, the obligations imposed on him or her by the order and the consequences that may follow if he or she again contravenes the order. (4) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to live with in a way that resulted in the child not living with a person in whose favour the order was made if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the actions constituting the contravention were necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to live with in a way that resulted in the child not living with a person in whose favour the order was made if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the actions constituting the contravention were necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the actions constituting the contravention were necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to spend time with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not spending time together as provided for in the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to spend time together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to spend time together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to communicate with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not having the communication provided for under the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to communicate together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (7) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to which section 65p applies by acting contrary to section 65p if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to communicate together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to which section 65p applies by acting contrary to section 65p if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).
circumstances of contravention
late 2021 – initial session attended, early 2022 – follow up session, planning session with mr parry – attended, early 2022 – skype text messaging session – attended, early 2022 – skype text messaging session – mr parry unable to attend, early 2022 – skype text messaging session – ms sadler unavailable, early 2022 – skype text messaging session – ms sadler cancelled, early 2022 – skype text messaging session – ms sadler 15 mins late, x refuses to progress with session with mr parry, early 2022 – skype text messaging session – completed, early 2022 – video call with mr parry – completed. positive observations between x with mr parry, early 2022 – video call – cancelled by ms sadler, mid-2022 – video call – rescheduled. mid-2022 – video call – x refused, then invited to write email. agreeable to video call on next session. mid-2022 – video call – cancelled by ms sadler, mid-2022 – video call – nil response by ms sadler
a reasonable excuse?
the substantive parenting proceedings
proposals
the expert evidence
the first family report – ms k 13 december 2021
a) [x] lives with the mother. b) the parties and [x] engage in court reportable family therapy with [ms l] from [p centre] with a view to assessing the dynamics within the family, rebuilding [x]’s relationship with his father, supporting [x]’s mental health and supporting the parties to co-parent and communicate, in addition to supporting [ms sadler] to recognise how some of her behaviours may be emotionally damaging to [x] and [x]’s relationship with his father. such a process could also assist in [x] spending time with his father again. c) the family therapist is provided a copy of this family report. d) whilst i have not identified any risks to prevent [x] spending time with his father at this time, my view is that it is possible that [x] will continue to refuse to spend time with his father and may resist spending time with his father in line with the court orders made in december 2017, creating an unhelpful dynamic. the court could order on an interim basis that [x] spends time with his father each alternate weekend from friday until monday before school along with the family engaging in robust family therapy, with [x] being encouraged to spend time with his father. e) an independent children’s lawyer is appointed in the matter to represent [x]. f) the court obtains updated information from police, dcyjma, [x]’s school and the parties respective counsellors to inform the matter. g) [ms sadler] engages in psychiatric assessment to inform the matter, informed by her medical and mental health records. in the interests of thoroughness, the court could also order for [mr parry] to engage in a psychiatric assessment. h) the parties engage in a post-orders parenting programme and triple p parenting programme if they have not done so already. i) the parties communicate via a parenting application. j) neither party engages in discussing adult issues with [x] or these court proceedings, particularly about what [x] has shared with the report writer in this family report. k) that neither party use physical discipline in respect to [x]. the parties engage in family dispute resolution to support them reaching an agreement in respect to final parenting arrangements for [x] following engagement in family therapy. m) if the matter remains before the court, that the matter is informed by an updated family report within a six-to-eight-month period to inform final parenting orders being made.
b) the parties and [x] engage in court reportable family therapy with [ms l] from [p centre] with a view to assessing the dynamics within the family, rebuilding [x]’s relationship with his father, supporting [x]’s mental health and supporting the parties to co-parent and communicate, in addition to supporting [ms sadler] to recognise how some of her behaviours may be emotionally damaging to [x] and [x]’s relationship with his father. such a process could also assist in [x] spending time with his father again. c) the family therapist is provided a copy of this family report. d) whilst i have not identified any risks to prevent [x] spending time with his father at this time, my view is that it is possible that [x] will continue to refuse to spend time with his father and may resist spending time with his father in line with the court orders made in december 2017, creating an unhelpful dynamic. the court could order on an interim basis that [x] spends time with his father each alternate weekend from friday until monday before school along with the family engaging in robust family therapy, with [x] being encouraged to spend time with his father. e) an independent children’s lawyer is appointed in the matter to represent [x]. f) the court obtains updated information from police, dcyjma, [x]’s school and the parties respective counsellors to inform the matter. g) [ms sadler] engages in psychiatric assessment to inform the matter, informed by her medical and mental health records. in the interests of thoroughness, the court could also order for [mr parry] to engage in a psychiatric assessment. h) the parties engage in a post-orders parenting programme and triple p parenting programme if they have not done so already.
c) the family therapist is provided a copy of this family report. d) whilst i have not identified any risks to prevent [x] spending time with his father at this time, my view is that it is possible that [x] will continue to refuse to spend time with his father and may resist spending time with his father in line with the court orders made in december 2017, creating an unhelpful dynamic. the court could order on an interim basis that [x] spends time with his father each alternate weekend from friday until monday before school along with the family engaging in robust family therapy, with [x] being encouraged to spend time with his father. e) an independent children’s lawyer is appointed in the matter to represent [x]. f) the court obtains updated information from police, dcyjma, [x]’s school and the parties respective counsellors to inform the matter. g) [ms sadler] engages in psychiatric assessment to inform the matter, informed by her medical and mental health records. in the interests of thoroughness, the court could also order for [mr parry] to engage in a psychiatric assessment. h) the parties engage in a post-orders parenting programme and triple p parenting programme if they have not done so already.
d) whilst i have not identified any risks to prevent [x] spending time with his father at this time, my view is that it is possible that [x] will continue to refuse to spend time with his father and may resist spending time with his father in line with the court orders made in december 2017, creating an unhelpful dynamic. the court could order on an interim basis that [x] spends time with his father each alternate weekend from friday until monday before school along with the family engaging in robust family therapy, with [x] being encouraged to spend time with his father. e) an independent children’s lawyer is appointed in the matter to represent [x]. f) the court obtains updated information from police, dcyjma, [x]’s school and the parties respective counsellors to inform the matter. g) [ms sadler] engages in psychiatric assessment to inform the matter, informed by her medical and mental health records. in the interests of thoroughness, the court could also order for [mr parry] to engage in a psychiatric assessment. h) the parties engage in a post-orders parenting programme and triple p parenting programme if they have not done so already.
e) an independent children’s lawyer is appointed in the matter to represent [x]. f) the court obtains updated information from police, dcyjma, [x]’s school and the parties respective counsellors to inform the matter. g) [ms sadler] engages in psychiatric assessment to inform the matter, informed by her medical and mental health records. in the interests of thoroughness, the court could also order for [mr parry] to engage in a psychiatric assessment. h) the parties engage in a post-orders parenting programme and triple p parenting programme if they have not done so already.
f) the court obtains updated information from police, dcyjma, [x]’s school and the parties respective counsellors to inform the matter. g) [ms sadler] engages in psychiatric assessment to inform the matter, informed by her medical and mental health records. in the interests of thoroughness, the court could also order for [mr parry] to engage in a psychiatric assessment. h) the parties engage in a post-orders parenting programme and triple p parenting programme if they have not done so already.
g) [ms sadler] engages in psychiatric assessment to inform the matter, informed by her medical and mental health records. in the interests of thoroughness, the court could also order for [mr parry] to engage in a psychiatric assessment. h) the parties engage in a post-orders parenting programme and triple p parenting programme if they have not done so already.
h) the parties engage in a post-orders parenting programme and triple p parenting programme if they have not done so already.
j) neither party engages in discussing adult issues with [x] or these court proceedings, particularly about what [x] has shared with the report writer in this family report. k) that neither party use physical discipline in respect to [x].
k) that neither party use physical discipline in respect to [x].
m) if the matter remains before the court, that the matter is informed by an updated family report within a six-to-eight-month period to inform final parenting orders being made.
the family therapy summary report – ms l 14 september 2022
the second family report – ms k 28 november 2023
a) if the court orders for [x] to remain living with his mother, that [x] spends time with his father in line with his wishes and if [x] expresses a wish to spend time with his father, [ms sadler] does all in her power to contact [mr parry] and facilitate this to occur. if this were ordered that [mr parry] is permitted to send birthday cards, letters and presents to [x] on special occasions by an agreed form of communication between [ms sadler] and [mr parry] and that there is a bi-yearly process for [ms sadler] to keep [mr parry] updated about [x]’s development, health, wellbeing and educational process. b) if [x] is ordered to live with his father, [x] has supervised face to face contact with his mother on a weekly or fortnightly basis. concurrently, [ms sadler] engages in robust, regular therapeutic support to help her navigate [x] being resident with his father and to ensure she does not undermine this placement and to reflect on her ability to support [x] having a relationship with both parents. c) following a period of six months, [x] could build up to spending time with his mother each alternate weekend and for half of all school and public holidays, subject to [ms sadler] evidencing an ability to undermine [x]’s placement with his father and to work within court ordered parenting arrangements. d) if [x] were ordered to live with his father, it would be important for him, his father, and his mother to engage in regular, consistent therapeutic support with a suitably qualified professional to support them to navigate such a big adjustment. it will be important that such support is in place prior to [x] moving into his father’s care if this were ordered and would include safety planning for [x] should his mental health deteriorate. such therapy could be informed by the family reports completed by the report writer and the report completed by [ms l] from [p centre].
b) if [x] is ordered to live with his father, [x] has supervised face to face contact with his mother on a weekly or fortnightly basis. concurrently, [ms sadler] engages in robust, regular therapeutic support to help her navigate [x] being resident with his father and to ensure she does not undermine this placement and to reflect on her ability to support [x] having a relationship with both parents. c) following a period of six months, [x] could build up to spending time with his mother each alternate weekend and for half of all school and public holidays, subject to [ms sadler] evidencing an ability to undermine [x]’s placement with his father and to work within court ordered parenting arrangements. d) if [x] were ordered to live with his father, it would be important for him, his father, and his mother to engage in regular, consistent therapeutic support with a suitably qualified professional to support them to navigate such a big adjustment. it will be important that such support is in place prior to [x] moving into his father’s care if this were ordered and would include safety planning for [x] should his mental health deteriorate. such therapy could be informed by the family reports completed by the report writer and the report completed by [ms l] from [p centre].
c) following a period of six months, [x] could build up to spending time with his mother each alternate weekend and for half of all school and public holidays, subject to [ms sadler] evidencing an ability to undermine [x]’s placement with his father and to work within court ordered parenting arrangements. d) if [x] were ordered to live with his father, it would be important for him, his father, and his mother to engage in regular, consistent therapeutic support with a suitably qualified professional to support them to navigate such a big adjustment. it will be important that such support is in place prior to [x] moving into his father’s care if this were ordered and would include safety planning for [x] should his mental health deteriorate. such therapy could be informed by the family reports completed by the report writer and the report completed by [ms l] from [p centre].
d) if [x] were ordered to live with his father, it would be important for him, his father, and his mother to engage in regular, consistent therapeutic support with a suitably qualified professional to support them to navigate such a big adjustment. it will be important that such support is in place prior to [x] moving into his father’s care if this were ordered and would include safety planning for [x] should his mental health deteriorate. such therapy could be informed by the family reports completed by the report writer and the report completed by [ms l] from [p centre].
the third family report – ms k 14 february 2024  any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, and (b) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.
x
x’s mental health
the father  parry] presented as a level-headed, kind man whose priority was to be a good father to [x]. in all our discussions, [mr parry] demonstrated a child-centred perspective. ... in our early sessions, in 2017-18, while he had no contact with [x], [mr parry] was highly anxious and distressed about his son’s welfare, and he was grieving the loss of his relationship with him. ... when [ms sadler] has failed to comply with the access orders, he has been frustrated, and concerned that [ms sadler] was exerting undue pressure on [x]. when [ms sadler] made malicious allegations about [mr parry]’s behaviour, he was initially hurt and insulted and worried that others (e.g. [x]’s teachers) might be wary of him as a result. over time, [mr parry] has come to expect such defamatory allegations from [ms sadler], and his attitude was more one of resignation. .... i anticipate that, if he can be provided with legal support to facilitate stability in all aspects of [x]’s life in the future, further psychological support for [mr parry] will not be required.
the mother
the mother’s health
history: very stressed [x] not wanting to go to fathers [ms sadler] has been speaking to child safety child safety visiting on thursday [ms sadler] concern for [x]’s safety threatening emails from [x]’s dad usually has very limited time with father [x] gets very anxious, gets angry, doesn’t want to talk or visit father child safety advised mhcp for [ms sadler] and [x], cert for [x] for school  dical conditions]. ptsd. diagnosed with depression at 14. [self-harm] at 21 followed by a stay in psych ward. dfv – current ex partner is using child as a pawn. dvo in place. has lived in shelters with child – been physically emotionally and financially abused by child’s father. currently is caring for a friend with cancer. previously alcoholic – sober for 13 years. client appears sensible and has many protective factors in relation to the care of her son and the distress is experiencing having to visit his father.
this session had been booked as a phone sesion with mum however mum got mixed up and arrived at the centre with the child. child and mum currently living [in region e] due to dfv. client is articulate and animated with expressions. client is currently not attending school due to the dfv and misses his mates. enjoys [sporting activities at] school client does not wish to have any contact with his father at the present time. client has [pets] client was born at full term with [a medical condition] which has now [healed]. client describes that dad “has got gotten nasty since he broke up with his girlfriend” seeing client again on monday as this was his original session time   sadler] is experiencing great distress and multiple panic attacks in her day to day life. ... [v centre] referred [ms sadler] to [bb centre] and we are the only support in place at the moment. a referral to [cc organisation] has also been made to focus on the mental health of [ms sadler’s] son [x]. ... [ms sadler] gets upset multiple times during our meetings and gets very overwhelmed on a day to day basis. [ms sadler] is showing very clear signs of an anxiety disorder. [ms sadler] gets overwhelmed by day to day tasks which prevents her of living a joyful life and prevents her of getting things done which she needs to do. she has stated in our meetings that she prefers to stay at home because then ‘nothing can go wrong’. [ms sadler] is extremely anxious about it anything happens to her son stating that ‘he is her everything’. her son witnesses her getting emotional and overwhelmed.
situation [ms sadler] referred for assessment and managing anxiety and depression. history of domestic violence, has been moving homes in escape from ex partner. has 12yr old son in her care. background 48yr old female, looks older than biological age, single mother to 12yr old son [x]. history of domestic violence, separated from ex partner past 9 years. has been living “on the run” from her ex since. depression and anxiety related symptoms, loss and grief, was a carer for a gentleman for 6yrs prior to his demise recently – left are looking for new accommodation. assessment general appearance neat and appropriately dressed, wearing shorts and white summer blouse. maintained eye contact, nil mannerisms noted. mood very depressed, tearful, speech coherent, regular and normal rate and rhythm, preoccupied about people spying on her, denies visual hallucinations, admits to occasional auditory hallucinations, persecutory delusions, believes special messages appear on her mobile phone and tv, very hyper-vigilant, delusional, believes she has been hacked into, paranoid about people, very unsettled to sign [y centre] consent form, lacks insight and judgement, well orientated, alert and cognition intact risk nil risk of harm – protective factor namely her young son. moderate to high risk of nutritional deficits – survives on coffee mainly, poor dietary intake, risk of poor self-care, erratic sleep patterns
the paternal grandmother
the relevant legal prnciples
what parenting orders are in x’s best interests?  the parents consult the other in relation to the decision to be made, (g) the parents make “a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue”, and (h) the decision be made jointly by the parents.   the parents make “a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue”, and (h) the decision be made jointly by the parents.   the decision be made jointly by the parents.
credit
primary considerations
the benefit of the child having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents
need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence
allegations of family violence
... [x] has expressed his strong wish not to spend time or speak with [mr parry] since [early] 2021. he continues to verbally tell me that he does not want to spend time with [mr parry] at his home and becomes distraught, upset and agitated when i encourage him to speak with [mr parry] [sic] and spend time with him. [x] has also threatened to hurt himself, or run away if he is required to see [mr parry] at his home. [x] has told me that [mr parry] has told him various times words to the effect ‘you are a silly boy’, and ‘you are weak’ and [x] has said he then goes into the bathroom and looks in the mirror and tells himself ‘i am a silly boy. i am weak’. i currently hold genuine concerns for [x]’s safety and wellbeing while spending time in [mr parry]’s care, including him running away and the emotional and psychological impacts he is experiencing from [mr parry]’s behaviour towards him and the continuation of being subjected and exposed to emotional and psychological abuse by [mr parry]. [x] would tell me [mr parry]’s behaviour includes physically hitting him and smacking him when he is in trouble, and he would make nasty and negative comments towards him mentally.
that the respondent cannot stop me from seeking any help that the said child [x] may need or having a say in where we can live that we can reside where-ever we wish. that the [55]klm from [x]’s school be removed. if we so wish we can move to another state or country for our own protection. we have had to move to other places including a womens shelter for our own protection from the respondent.   sadler] presents as a difficult historian, tangential in nature with timelines difficult to follow. ascertain the following: ... - articulated physical violence as primary reasons for relationship breakdown between [x] and father, however described incidents were difficult to isolate as to conflict between parents or incidents directly impacting [x]. [ms sadler] describes her relationship and post separation experience as categorised by domestic and family violence. - dvo previous in place for two years, expired in 2020. nil since. - questioned [ms sadler] on 3 occasions as to child protection reporting (phrases used by clinician – reported to child safety, reported to child protection) however nil answer provided. this enquiry was in the context of [ms sadler] using multiple times ‘he [assaulted x], ‘he [assaults x], ‘it’s child abuse’.
regarding fa, [x] reported a wish not to spend time with him, advising that he has ‘[assaulted]’ [x]. he was unsure as to when this occurred or what else had occurred in the context of the ‘[assault]’. he was unable to identify any other information for ceasing time or his wish to not spend time with his fa.
exposure to psychological harm
... enmeshment can mean for children, and as they grow into adulthood, is that they can develop an over-concern for others or how others are, and that can often lead to a loss of autonomous development, so a lack of an ability to make their own decisions or to think about what their own needs are over other people’s needs. .... which again then leads into adulthood a pattern of behaviour where they don’t have an ability to think for themselves, where they may need to be overly reliant on a parent, even as an adult, or on partners as they move into, you know, partner relationships. ... it certainly does have impacts on people as they move into their adulthood, especially for children during an adolescent period where actually one of their key developmental tasks is developing their identity and being able to think about, “well, who am i? what do i like? what’s going to be important for me?” and that’s really crucial for being able to move forwards as an adult that is well-functioning, that is less likely to suffer from mental health difficulties, and that then is able to engage in relationships that are positive and where they are not in relationships where they are overly reliant on others or dependent on others.
additional considerations
any views expressed by the child and any factors such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
... [x] described his father as “nasty, mean, ungrateful” and said that he had his own room at his father’s home and that he had a television in his room. he alleged that his father was always “[assaulting] me for no reason”. [x] said that when he gives his father stuff, his father doesn’t say thanks and that he doesn’t use things he has bought for his father, such as some [gifts]. [x] told me that his father never played with him and that he only rides his bike with him every two weeks. he told me that once he cut his hair off because he felt like he was “doing a lot wrong” and that his father didn’t notice. ... [x] alleged that his father used to say to him “i was mean and an idiot” and that he had stopped seeing his father because “he’s messed with me and mum, like since i was two years old, he was mean to me and mum. he abused mum. mum used to say dad used to hit her and that’s why i’m ([x]’s mother) not with him ([x]’s father) anymore”. ... [x] said that he did not want to see or talk to his father and that he wanted to stay with his mother all the time, telling me “i wouldn’t live with dad, i’d run away”.
... [x] shared views that he wanted to live with his mother “all of the time” and to spend “no time” with his father. when the report writer asked how [x] would feel if the judge ordered for him to spend time with his father, [x] said that he simply wouldn’t do it. when the report writer asked [x] if he might like to spend some time with his father, for example, go to a café for a drink together, [x] said that he might want to do that at a later stage. he said that he remembered his father’s number and that if he wanted to contact his father, he could do this from a telephone box. [x] said that if the judge ordered him to live with his father, he wouldn’t do this, stating that his father would ask him too many questions, such as “why didn’t you see me for three years” and stated that everything would be wrong with living with his father. [x] said that he simply would not want to go to live with his father and “wouldn’t do it”.
54. ... there are many factors that may go to the weight that should be given to the wishes of children and these will vary from case to case and is undesirable and indeed impossible to catalogue or confine them in the manner suggested. ultimately it is a process of intuitive synthesis on the part of any trial judge weighing up all the evidence relevant to the wishes of the children and applying it in a common sense way as one of the factors in the overall assessment of the children’s best interests.
nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and other persons
extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunities to participate in making decisions to spend time with and to communicate with the child
extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled or failed to fulfil the parents’ obligations to maintain the child
the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including likely effect on the child of any separation from either parent or any other child or other person
practical difficulty and expense of child spending time with and communicating with their parent and whether that will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relationships and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
maturity, sex and lifestyle of the child
attitude to the child and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family
whether it would be preferable to make the orders that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings
overall conclusion on primary and additional considerations
dated: 15 may 2024