last updated: 31 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
arora & dash (no 3) [2024] fedcfamc2f 680
orders
the court orders that:  the words in paragraph 2 being ‘resume’ and ‘reference checks’ be deleted, (b) paragraph 4 be amended to make reference to only: (i) the dates of counselling undertaken, (ii) the identity of the counselling service, and (iii) the location of counselling undertaken by the respondent under the c company employee assistance program.   paragraph 4 be amended to make reference to only: (i) the dates of counselling undertaken, (ii) the identity of the counselling service, and (iii) the location of counselling undertaken by the respondent under the c company employee assistance program.   the dates of counselling undertaken, (ii) the identity of the counselling service, and (iii) the location of counselling undertaken by the respondent under the c company employee assistance program.  ) the identity of the counselling service, and (iii) the location of counselling undertaken by the respondent under the c company employee assistance program.  i) the location of counselling undertaken by the respondent under the c company employee assistance program.   the dates (b) identification of service providers, and (c) places of such counselling sessions.   identification of service providers, and (c) places of such counselling sessions.   places of such counselling sessions.
with original unredacted documents to be place in a sealed envelope until further order.  the names and contact details of all medical health professionals and allied health practitioners which she has consulted in her own right and with respect to the child of the marriage x born in 2017 as and from mid-2022.
and the court notes that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
background  the proceedings were issued on 4 november 2022, and the matter is coming before me for a final hearing on 12 june 2024. (b) the husband is represented pursuant to the section 102na scheme. (c) the parties commenced cohabitation in late 2015, having married in 2015, and separated around about october 2022. (d) the chief judge made orders on 29 february 2024 and that included the order: within 14 days of the date of these orders, the parties make full and frank disclosure in accordance with their obligations under division 6.1.2 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021. (e) the husband has deposed as follows:[1] on 2 february 2024 i sent a letter to the respondent’s solicitor seeking disclosure documents relevant to the matter. no response has been received and no documents have been provided.   the husband is represented pursuant to the section 102na scheme. (c) the parties commenced cohabitation in late 2015, having married in 2015, and separated around about october 2022. (d) the chief judge made orders on 29 february 2024 and that included the order: within 14 days of the date of these orders, the parties make full and frank disclosure in accordance with their obligations under division 6.1.2 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021. (e) the husband has deposed as follows:[1] on 2 february 2024 i sent a letter to the respondent’s solicitor seeking disclosure documents relevant to the matter. no response has been received and no documents have been provided.   the parties commenced cohabitation in late 2015, having married in 2015, and separated around about october 2022. (d) the chief judge made orders on 29 february 2024 and that included the order: within 14 days of the date of these orders, the parties make full and frank disclosure in accordance with their obligations under division 6.1.2 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021. (e) the husband has deposed as follows:[1] on 2 february 2024 i sent a letter to the respondent’s solicitor seeking disclosure documents relevant to the matter. no response has been received and no documents have been provided.   the chief judge made orders on 29 february 2024 and that included the order: within 14 days of the date of these orders, the parties make full and frank disclosure in accordance with their obligations under division 6.1.2 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021. (e) the husband has deposed as follows:[1] on 2 february 2024 i sent a letter to the respondent’s solicitor seeking disclosure documents relevant to the matter. no response has been received and no documents have been provided.   the husband has deposed as follows:[1] on 2 february 2024 i sent a letter to the respondent’s solicitor seeking disclosure documents relevant to the matter. no response has been received and no documents have been provided.
now produced and shown to me at the time of swearing this affidavit and marked exhibit “[a]-1” is a copy of the letter sent to the respondent’s solicitor on 2 february 2024. on 22 february 2024 i sent an email to the respondent’s solicitor requesting information and documents in relation to the default notice and discussions with [c company].[2] i did not receive a response. on 28 february 2024 i sent a further request following up my email and emphasized the urgency of the matter. i did not receive a response. now produced and shown to me at the time of swearing this affidavit and marked exhibit “[a]-2” is a copy of the emails i sent to the respondent’s solicitor. i say that the respondent has not provided updated any disclosure documents whatsoever after the orders made by chief justice alstergren in compliance and readiness hearing on 29 february 2024.   counsel appearing for the objector to the subpoenas, the wife, asserts that documents were provided up to date at a time in february, however, it appears common ground that no further documents or information have been provided after the orders of the chief judge. (g) the husband alleges that there are relevant documents and information that he has not been provided with. i am not going to make a finding one way or the other at this point in time. (h) the wife alleges that the husband is using the subpoena process to oppress her and to invade her privacy by seeking details of every phone call provided.   the husband alleges that there are relevant documents and information that he has not been provided with. i am not going to make a finding one way or the other at this point in time. (h) the wife alleges that the husband is using the subpoena process to oppress her and to invade her privacy by seeking details of every phone call provided.   the wife alleges that the husband is using the subpoena process to oppress her and to invade her privacy by seeking details of every phone call provided.
documents and things you must produce from your possession, custody or control 1. a copy of this subpoena copy of employment records including - resume, reference checks and offer letters and current employment contract for [c company] employee [ms dash], dob [...] 1986. copy of leave records including details of carer and sick leaves and annual leaves taken during previous 2 years for [ms dash], dob [...] 1986. complete details of employee assistance program (eap) counselling undertaken by [ms dash], dob [...] 1986 including details of counselling provider and notes and reports from the counselling sessions. details of open and closed accounts (personal, business and [c company] trade/trading) details & copies of all bank statements for the last 3 years in the name of [ms dash], dob [...] 1986. details of work hours, shift patterns for previous 18 months for [c company] employee [ms dash], dob [...] 1986. copies of all emails received and sent regarding the home loan account bsb: [ending [...] acc: [ending ...91] in the name of [ms dash], dob [...] 1986.
documents and things you must produce from your possession, custody or control 1. a copy of this subpoena copies of all call records, including incoming and outgoing calls along with call duration, for the mobile phone number [ending [...]], for the period from [late] 2022 to [early] 2024. any text messages, multimedia messages, or instant messages sent or received by the mobile phone number [ending [...]], for the period from [late] 2022 to [early] 2024. any internet browsing history or data usage records associated with the mobile phone number [ending [...]], for the period from [late] 2022 to [early] 2024. details of any other mobile number or nbn connection or any other [b company] service in the name of [ms dash], date of birth [...] 1986.
apparent relevance test
the degree of relevance for this purpose is not high: the inspecting party need only show a legitimate forensic purpose in the inspection. a party is entitled to inspect documents not only to see if they contain relevant facts, but also to see if they contain information which may be proved otherwise than through that document. accordingly, the bar is not set very high in respect to the question of relevance in a civil proceeding as between strangers. it should be less so in family law proceedings provided the pursuit of information is genuinely designed to assist in determining the issue and not for some illicit or harassing type of reason. the onus in establishing the relevance lies on the person seeking the production of the documents either by way of subpoena or through discovery.[6] in hatton[7] the full court supported the “apparent relevance” test. this is the same test referred to above by byrne j. that latter case was a commercial one. it is hard to see how it could be argued that cases in the family court of australia should be conducted on a more strenuous test basis than those as between strangers in a commercial cause. that is particularly so having regard to the philosophy that this court has traditionally espoused in relation to disclosure.[8] ] a stranger’s documents will be made available to the parties in the proceedings where that is requisite for the purpose of justice. although, as moffit p said,[9] the documents will be made available so far as is necessary for the proper conduct of the litigation, that necessity will generally be met by the documents having apparent relevance to the issues in the proceedings. as was pointed out by his honour, concepts of disclosure, and particularly its extent, vary. in this court there is a heavy obligation on parties in property cases to make complete disclosure. the requirements of justice, in those cases, may well require a stranger to disclose those documents more fully than in other courts where there are lesser requirements for disclosure.  the relevance of documents was not limited to documents directly admissible in themselves in proof of an issue raised in pleadings, and (2) if a class of document which has material forensic relevance could be shown to exist, then a subpoena would not normally be set aside. in white v tulloch (1995) flc 92-640, the full court of the family court referred to the test in terms of documents having "a sufficient apparent connection to justify their production or inspection". in trade practices commission v arnotts ltd (no 2) (1989) 21 fcr 306, beaumont j saw relevance as something where a document "could possibly throw light on the issues in the main case". in portal software international pty ltd v bodsworth, [2005] nswsc 1115, brereton j looked at a number of authorities including of this court and said:
thus it is plainly not the question at this (first) stage whether the documents, production of which is sought, will definitely advance the case of the parties issuing the subpoena, nor whether they will be admissible in evidence at the trial. it is sufficient that they could "possibly throw light" on the issues in the substantive proceedings, or that it appears to be "on the cards" that they will do so. what are the issues in the proceedings will appear from the pleadings (where there are pleadings), the affidavits, and the legal principles which govern the claims for relief in the substantive proceedings. counsel for the objector did not dispute that what i had there said summarised the law. in papadopoulos and papadopoulos (no 2) [2007] famca 1683, i observed: the question of what is relevant takes on significance. the objective must be to assist the parties and the court in the determination of the issues in dispute. how does one determine that at an early stage? this issue was considered in the victorian supreme court in killorgan investments pty ltd v baycorp advantage business information services limited and ors where byrne j said: the degree of relevance for this purpose is not high: the inspecting party need only show a legitimate forensic purpose in the inspection. a party is entitled to inspect documents not only to see if they contain relevant facts, but also to see if they contain information which may be proved otherwise than through that document. accordingly, the bar is not set very high in respect to the question of relevance in a civil proceeding as between strangers. it should be less so in family law proceedings provided the pursuit of information is genuinely designed to assist in determining the issue and not for some illicit or harassing type of reason. the onus in establishing the relevance lies on the person seeking the production of the documents either by way of subpoena or through discovery.
associate: dated: 14 june 2024
dated: 14 june 2024
[1] affidavit of the husband filed 3 may 2024.[2] c company is the mortgagee of the former matrimonial home and the parties are in arrears of mortgage payments.
[3] supreme court (vic), marks j no 268/87 3 april 1987 (unreported).
[4] o’sullivan v herdmans ltd [1987] 3 all er 129.
[5] [2002] vsc 270 4 july 2002 (unreported).[6] a & a and ors [2005] famca 561, also hatton v attorney-general of commonwealth of australia and ors [2000] famca 892, (2000) flc 93-038
[7] ibid.
[8] see briese [1985] famca 23; (1985) 10 fam lr 642[9] in the well-known decision of national employers mutual general association ltd v waind and hill [1978] 1 nswlr 372[10] on the jointly owned former matrimonial home which the husband seeks the sale of and the wife opposes a sale and seeks the opportunity to retain that property.