last updated: 31 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
beshara & kassem [2024] fedcfamc2f 649
orders
pending further order the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
3.1 the payment necessary to meet the necessary selling and legal costs associated with the sale, 3.2 the payment of such sum as is required to discharge the mortgage secured over the former matrimonial home, 3.3 the payment to the applicant in sum of $150,000, or as she may direct in writing by way of interim property distribution, 3.4 the payment to the respondent in sum of $100,000, or as he may direct in writing, by way of interim property distribution, and 3.5 the balance to be held in the trust account of the koutzoumis lawyers pending further order or written agreement between the parties.
4. that the application for spouse maintenance be dismissed.   exhibit a: notice of assessment for fy22 and fy23, (b) exhibit b: letter from hikma legal dated wednesday 1 may 2024.   exhibit b: letter from hikma legal dated wednesday 1 may 2024.
consideration
wife’s interim application for partial property settlement of $50,000 to pay legal fees  the exercise of discretion: ss 79 and 80(1)(h) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”) confer power on the court to make orders for a partial distribution of property prior to the final hearing. that is: (a) section 79 confers a discrete power to make orders for property settlement and the court may exercise that power through “a succession of orders until the power ... is exhausted” or until a final order dealing with all the known property of the parties is made: strahan & strahan (interim property orders) [2011] famcafc 126, (2011) flc 93-466 (“strahan”) at [110], quoting gabel & yardley [2008] famcafc 162, (2008) flc 93-386 at [57]. (b) section 80 is not, in itself, a source of jurisdiction for such an order to be made. rather, the section is an “enabling provision” that provides various ways in which the general power in s 79 of the act may be exercised in individual cases: davidson and davidson (no 2) [1994] famca 33, (1994) flc 92-469 at 80,875 and yunghanns & yunghanns [1999] famca 64, (1999) flc 92-836 at [118]. this includes, by s 80(1)(h), the making of “a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order”. (2) there are three stages to the hearing of an application for interim property adjustment orders: (i) the first two stages were described in strahan at 85,645–85,646, with the first being a “procedural step” which requires an analysis of whether the circumstances of the case triggers the court’s power to invoke s 80(1)(h) of the act to make an order for partial property adjustment. at this stage, the “overarching consideration” is the interests of justice: strahan at [132]. (ii) the second stage is the “substantive step”, where the provisions of s 79 must be considered and applied, but with limitations, given that it is not the final hearing. (iii) the third stage, although not necessarily to be considered in this order, is to assess whether the applicant for relief has discharged the persuasive burden referred to in medlow & medlow (2016) flc 93-692 (“medlow”) at [86], of establishing that there are sufficient assets available to satisfy the order sought without prejudicing the other party (“the medlow onus”). in that respect, the full court said:   section 79 confers a discrete power to make orders for property settlement and the court may exercise that power through “a succession of orders until the power ... is exhausted” or until a final order dealing with all the known property of the parties is made: strahan & strahan (interim property orders) [2011] famcafc 126, (2011) flc 93-466 (“strahan”) at [110], quoting gabel & yardley [2008] famcafc 162, (2008) flc 93-386 at [57]. (b) section 80 is not, in itself, a source of jurisdiction for such an order to be made. rather, the section is an “enabling provision” that provides various ways in which the general power in s 79 of the act may be exercised in individual cases: davidson and davidson (no 2) [1994] famca 33, (1994) flc 92-469 at 80,875 and yunghanns & yunghanns [1999] famca 64, (1999) flc 92-836 at [118]. this includes, by s 80(1)(h), the making of “a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order”.   section 80 is not, in itself, a source of jurisdiction for such an order to be made. rather, the section is an “enabling provision” that provides various ways in which the general power in s 79 of the act may be exercised in individual cases: davidson and davidson (no 2) [1994] famca 33, (1994) flc 92-469 at 80,875 and yunghanns & yunghanns [1999] famca 64, (1999) flc 92-836 at [118]. this includes, by s 80(1)(h), the making of “a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order”.   there are three stages to the hearing of an application for interim property adjustment orders: (i) the first two stages were described in strahan at 85,645–85,646, with the first being a “procedural step” which requires an analysis of whether the circumstances of the case triggers the court’s power to invoke s 80(1)(h) of the act to make an order for partial property adjustment. at this stage, the “overarching consideration” is the interests of justice: strahan at [132]. (ii) the second stage is the “substantive step”, where the provisions of s 79 must be considered and applied, but with limitations, given that it is not the final hearing. (iii) the third stage, although not necessarily to be considered in this order, is to assess whether the applicant for relief has discharged the persuasive burden referred to in medlow & medlow (2016) flc 93-692 (“medlow”) at [86], of establishing that there are sufficient assets available to satisfy the order sought without prejudicing the other party (“the medlow onus”). in that respect, the full court said:   the first two stages were described in strahan at 85,645–85,646, with the first being a “procedural step” which requires an analysis of whether the circumstances of the case triggers the court’s power to invoke s 80(1)(h) of the act to make an order for partial property adjustment. at this stage, the “overarching consideration” is the interests of justice: strahan at [132]. (ii) the second stage is the “substantive step”, where the provisions of s 79 must be considered and applied, but with limitations, given that it is not the final hearing. (iii) the third stage, although not necessarily to be considered in this order, is to assess whether the applicant for relief has discharged the persuasive burden referred to in medlow & medlow (2016) flc 93-692 (“medlow”) at [86], of establishing that there are sufficient assets available to satisfy the order sought without prejudicing the other party (“the medlow onus”). in that respect, the full court said:  ) the second stage is the “substantive step”, where the provisions of s 79 must be considered and applied, but with limitations, given that it is not the final hearing. (iii) the third stage, although not necessarily to be considered in this order, is to assess whether the applicant for relief has discharged the persuasive burden referred to in medlow & medlow (2016) flc 93-692 (“medlow”) at [86], of establishing that there are sufficient assets available to satisfy the order sought without prejudicing the other party (“the medlow onus”). in that respect, the full court said:  i) the third stage, although not necessarily to be considered in this order, is to assess whether the applicant for relief has discharged the persuasive burden referred to in medlow & medlow (2016) flc 93-692 (“medlow”) at [86], of establishing that there are sufficient assets available to satisfy the order sought without prejudicing the other party (“the medlow onus”). in that respect, the full court said:
the onus was clearly upon [the applicant for relief] to establish that there were sufficient assets available for the interim distribution and that the effect of any interim order was capable of being reversed as part of the final hearing or at least would not defeat [the respondent’s] property claim. the onus was not on the [respondent] to adduce such evidence. (iv) moreover, the evidence required to discharge the medlow onus is such that the court should be “comfortably satisfied” of the sufficiency of assets to ensure that the applicant would receive, at final hearing, no less than the amount sought by way of interim property distribution: widmann & widmann [2016] famca 1164 at [14] and see hardwick & hardwick (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1a 216 at [72].  ) moreover, the evidence required to discharge the medlow onus is such that the court should be “comfortably satisfied” of the sufficiency of assets to ensure that the applicant would receive, at final hearing, no less than the amount sought by way of interim property distribution: widmann & widmann [2016] famca 1164 at [14] and see hardwick & hardwick (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1a 216 at [72].   even if there is sufficiency of evidence to discharge the medlow onus, that is not the end of the matter. an applicant seeking orders for partial property distribution is required to show more “than the mere fact that upon a final hearing the applicant would receive the property being sought (or an amount in excess of the funds being sought) from the other party”: strahan at [139]. (4) the overriding consideration at all stages of the process is that the court is satisfied that it is “just and equitable” to make the order in the circumstances: stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108 at [35] (“stanford”). the determination of that issue should not be approached on the basis of an assumption “that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them”: medlow at [72], quoting stanford at [40]. this applies to an application for an order for a partial distribution of property in interim proceedings as much as it does to an application for the adjustment of property at the final hearing of the matter. (5) in applying these considerations, the exercise of the court’s jurisdiction should be conducted with an appreciation that “as a generality, the interests of the parties and the court are better served by there being one final hearing of s 79 proceedings”: strahan at [177], quoting harris and harris [1993] famca 49, (1993) flc 92-378 at 79,929–79,930. (6) additionally, subsequent to the introduction of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 (cth) (“fcfcoa act”) in september 2021, the court, the parties and their legal advisers are required to have regard to the “overarching purpose” set out in s 67 of the fcfcoa act, which includes the public interest of ensuring that disputes are resolved “as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible”. in respect to comparable provisions set out in ss 56 and 60 of the civil procedure act 2005 (nsw), it has been determined that it will usually be the case those principles are best served by one rather than a multiplicity of hearings: cook by her tutor kristy stewart v riding for the disabled association (nsw) raymond terrace and lower hunter centre [2023] nswsc 1503 at [19]. (7) as a related issue, the manner in which the party seeking a partial property distribution has conducted the proceedings will also be relevant. most relevantly, that includes the extent to which the party and or their legal advisers have complied with their obligations pursuant to ss 67 and 68 of the fcfcoa act to promote the overarching purpose by keeping costs to a reasonable and proportionate amount. to do otherwise, simply provides additional resources to the party to engage in ongoing “lawfare” at a likely disproportionate cost to the parties and to taxpayers. (8) the party seeking the relief carries the persuasive burden of satisfying the court that the circumstances of the case are such that the court should exercise its discretion in their favour. in that respect, as noted by thackray j in strahan at [223]:   the overriding consideration at all stages of the process is that the court is satisfied that it is “just and equitable” to make the order in the circumstances: stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108 at [35] (“stanford”). the determination of that issue should not be approached on the basis of an assumption “that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them”: medlow at [72], quoting stanford at [40]. this applies to an application for an order for a partial distribution of property in interim proceedings as much as it does to an application for the adjustment of property at the final hearing of the matter. (5) in applying these considerations, the exercise of the court’s jurisdiction should be conducted with an appreciation that “as a generality, the interests of the parties and the court are better served by there being one final hearing of s 79 proceedings”: strahan at [177], quoting harris and harris [1993] famca 49, (1993) flc 92-378 at 79,929–79,930. (6) additionally, subsequent to the introduction of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 (cth) (“fcfcoa act”) in september 2021, the court, the parties and their legal advisers are required to have regard to the “overarching purpose” set out in s 67 of the fcfcoa act, which includes the public interest of ensuring that disputes are resolved “as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible”. in respect to comparable provisions set out in ss 56 and 60 of the civil procedure act 2005 (nsw), it has been determined that it will usually be the case those principles are best served by one rather than a multiplicity of hearings: cook by her tutor kristy stewart v riding for the disabled association (nsw) raymond terrace and lower hunter centre [2023] nswsc 1503 at [19]. (7) as a related issue, the manner in which the party seeking a partial property distribution has conducted the proceedings will also be relevant. most relevantly, that includes the extent to which the party and or their legal advisers have complied with their obligations pursuant to ss 67 and 68 of the fcfcoa act to promote the overarching purpose by keeping costs to a reasonable and proportionate amount. to do otherwise, simply provides additional resources to the party to engage in ongoing “lawfare” at a likely disproportionate cost to the parties and to taxpayers. (8) the party seeking the relief carries the persuasive burden of satisfying the court that the circumstances of the case are such that the court should exercise its discretion in their favour. in that respect, as noted by thackray j in strahan at [223]:   in applying these considerations, the exercise of the court’s jurisdiction should be conducted with an appreciation that “as a generality, the interests of the parties and the court are better served by there being one final hearing of s 79 proceedings”: strahan at [177], quoting harris and harris [1993] famca 49, (1993) flc 92-378 at 79,929–79,930. (6) additionally, subsequent to the introduction of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 (cth) (“fcfcoa act”) in september 2021, the court, the parties and their legal advisers are required to have regard to the “overarching purpose” set out in s 67 of the fcfcoa act, which includes the public interest of ensuring that disputes are resolved “as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible”. in respect to comparable provisions set out in ss 56 and 60 of the civil procedure act 2005 (nsw), it has been determined that it will usually be the case those principles are best served by one rather than a multiplicity of hearings: cook by her tutor kristy stewart v riding for the disabled association (nsw) raymond terrace and lower hunter centre [2023] nswsc 1503 at [19]. (7) as a related issue, the manner in which the party seeking a partial property distribution has conducted the proceedings will also be relevant. most relevantly, that includes the extent to which the party and or their legal advisers have complied with their obligations pursuant to ss 67 and 68 of the fcfcoa act to promote the overarching purpose by keeping costs to a reasonable and proportionate amount. to do otherwise, simply provides additional resources to the party to engage in ongoing “lawfare” at a likely disproportionate cost to the parties and to taxpayers. (8) the party seeking the relief carries the persuasive burden of satisfying the court that the circumstances of the case are such that the court should exercise its discretion in their favour. in that respect, as noted by thackray j in strahan at [223]:   additionally, subsequent to the introduction of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 (cth) (“fcfcoa act”) in september 2021, the court, the parties and their legal advisers are required to have regard to the “overarching purpose” set out in s 67 of the fcfcoa act, which includes the public interest of ensuring that disputes are resolved “as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible”. in respect to comparable provisions set out in ss 56 and 60 of the civil procedure act 2005 (nsw), it has been determined that it will usually be the case those principles are best served by one rather than a multiplicity of hearings: cook by her tutor kristy stewart v riding for the disabled association (nsw) raymond terrace and lower hunter centre [2023] nswsc 1503 at [19]. (7) as a related issue, the manner in which the party seeking a partial property distribution has conducted the proceedings will also be relevant. most relevantly, that includes the extent to which the party and or their legal advisers have complied with their obligations pursuant to ss 67 and 68 of the fcfcoa act to promote the overarching purpose by keeping costs to a reasonable and proportionate amount. to do otherwise, simply provides additional resources to the party to engage in ongoing “lawfare” at a likely disproportionate cost to the parties and to taxpayers. (8) the party seeking the relief carries the persuasive burden of satisfying the court that the circumstances of the case are such that the court should exercise its discretion in their favour. in that respect, as noted by thackray j in strahan at [223]:   as a related issue, the manner in which the party seeking a partial property distribution has conducted the proceedings will also be relevant. most relevantly, that includes the extent to which the party and or their legal advisers have complied with their obligations pursuant to ss 67 and 68 of the fcfcoa act to promote the overarching purpose by keeping costs to a reasonable and proportionate amount. to do otherwise, simply provides additional resources to the party to engage in ongoing “lawfare” at a likely disproportionate cost to the parties and to taxpayers. (8) the party seeking the relief carries the persuasive burden of satisfying the court that the circumstances of the case are such that the court should exercise its discretion in their favour. in that respect, as noted by thackray j in strahan at [223]:   the party seeking the relief carries the persuasive burden of satisfying the court that the circumstances of the case are such that the court should exercise its discretion in their favour. in that respect, as noted by thackray j in strahan at [223]:
... it is important to note that s 80(1) [or s 90ss(1)] is couched in the permissive. hence, although the court must give consideration to the matters set out in s 79(4) [or s 90sm] when hearing an application for an interim payment, it has no obligation to make an interim order. the court “may” do so if it considers that it should in the exercise of its discretion.   circumstances in which the court has made an order for partial property distribution include, but are not necessarily limited to, where one of the parties has a monopoly in terms of access to the finances and resources of the parties such that they have a significant advantage in the litigation and, conversely, the other party is significantly disadvantaged: see, eg, strahan at [80] and iphostrou & iphostrou and ors [2011] famca 20 at [60]. (10) it is unlikely that the court would grant such relief in circumstances where to do so would “potentially defeat any party’s claim or legitimate expectations in a final hearing”: aitken & murphy (no 2) [2012] famca 239 at [158].  ) it is unlikely that the court would grant such relief in circumstances where to do so would “potentially defeat any party’s claim or legitimate expectations in a final hearing”: aitken & murphy (no 2) [2012] famca 239 at [158].
...  ) finally, among the matters that the court may take into consideration in the exercise of its discretion is the proximity of the final hearing dates and the complexity of the issues involved in determining the likely ability of the court to, if necessary, ‘claw back’ the funds released by way of interim property settlement: pinta & pinta [2022] fedcfamc2f 34 at [115].
wife’s interim spousal maintenance application  a party to a marriage is liable to maintain the other party, to the extent that the first - mentioned party is reasonably able to do so, if, and only if, that other party is unable to support herself or himself adequately whether: (a) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, (b) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   by reason of having the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, (b) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   for any other adequate reason,
having regard to any relevant matter referred to in subsection 75(2).   in proceedings with respect to the maintenance of a party to a marriage, the court may make such order as it considers proper for the provision of maintenance in accordance with this part.   can the applicant support themselves adequately? (2) if not, what are the applicant’s reasonable needs? (3) what capacity does the respondent have to meet those needs? (4) what order is reasonable, having regard to s 75(2) of the act?   if not, what are the applicant’s reasonable needs? (3) what capacity does the respondent have to meet those needs? (4) what order is reasonable, having regard to s 75(2) of the act?   what capacity does the respondent have to meet those needs? (4) what order is reasonable, having regard to s 75(2) of the act?   what order is reasonable, having regard to s 75(2) of the act?   the husband has the above discussed sum of $450,000 available to him to satisfy an order for spousal maintenance, or he has available to him a significant part of such sum. there is force to these submissions having regard to the court’s discussions above relating to this sum of $450,000. (b) the husband has five cars which could be easily sold to satisfy an order for spousal maintenance. retaining one car for his personal use, the husband would have four cars to sell. he has recently sold motor vehicle 1 for about $53,000. there is force to these submissions having regard to the court’s discussions above relating to the sale of one or more of the husband’s cars. (c) whereas the husband for the financial years 2022 and 2023 was earning a taxable income of $302,563 per annum ($3,560 per week after deducting income tax and medicare levy) and $163,071 ($2,231 per week after deducting income tax and medicare levy) respectively, the husband was stated to be now earning only $97,604 per annum ($1,877). she submitted, inter alia, that the husband’s income earning capacity was much greater than $97,604, in the view of the court there is force to this submission. the husband is presently working reduced hours between monday to friday by reason of asserted stress levels, and his asserted need to provide care for the child (see the letter below from his employer dated early 2023). in this context, the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband refers to the husband’s normal working hours during monday to saturday being reduced to 4.5 hours a day, with remuneration being reduced to an annual salary package of $190,000 inclusive of superannuation, with the employer referring, inter alia, to the husband’s personal circumstances, stress that he is currently enduring, and current difficulties. the court observes that the husband’s full-time (non-award) employment contract with the employer made in early 2022 referred to the husband’s hours of work as being monday to friday, 7.00 am to 5.00 pm, and saturday as required by management. the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband states, inter alia:
there is force to these submissions having regard to the court’s discussions above relating to this sum of $450,000. (b) the husband has five cars which could be easily sold to satisfy an order for spousal maintenance. retaining one car for his personal use, the husband would have four cars to sell. he has recently sold motor vehicle 1 for about $53,000. there is force to these submissions having regard to the court’s discussions above relating to the sale of one or more of the husband’s cars. (c) whereas the husband for the financial years 2022 and 2023 was earning a taxable income of $302,563 per annum ($3,560 per week after deducting income tax and medicare levy) and $163,071 ($2,231 per week after deducting income tax and medicare levy) respectively, the husband was stated to be now earning only $97,604 per annum ($1,877). she submitted, inter alia, that the husband’s income earning capacity was much greater than $97,604, in the view of the court there is force to this submission. the husband is presently working reduced hours between monday to friday by reason of asserted stress levels, and his asserted need to provide care for the child (see the letter below from his employer dated early 2023). in this context, the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband refers to the husband’s normal working hours during monday to saturday being reduced to 4.5 hours a day, with remuneration being reduced to an annual salary package of $190,000 inclusive of superannuation, with the employer referring, inter alia, to the husband’s personal circumstances, stress that he is currently enduring, and current difficulties. the court observes that the husband’s full-time (non-award) employment contract with the employer made in early 2022 referred to the husband’s hours of work as being monday to friday, 7.00 am to 5.00 pm, and saturday as required by management. the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband states, inter alia:   the husband has five cars which could be easily sold to satisfy an order for spousal maintenance. retaining one car for his personal use, the husband would have four cars to sell. he has recently sold motor vehicle 1 for about $53,000. there is force to these submissions having regard to the court’s discussions above relating to the sale of one or more of the husband’s cars. (c) whereas the husband for the financial years 2022 and 2023 was earning a taxable income of $302,563 per annum ($3,560 per week after deducting income tax and medicare levy) and $163,071 ($2,231 per week after deducting income tax and medicare levy) respectively, the husband was stated to be now earning only $97,604 per annum ($1,877). she submitted, inter alia, that the husband’s income earning capacity was much greater than $97,604, in the view of the court there is force to this submission. the husband is presently working reduced hours between monday to friday by reason of asserted stress levels, and his asserted need to provide care for the child (see the letter below from his employer dated early 2023). in this context, the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband refers to the husband’s normal working hours during monday to saturday being reduced to 4.5 hours a day, with remuneration being reduced to an annual salary package of $190,000 inclusive of superannuation, with the employer referring, inter alia, to the husband’s personal circumstances, stress that he is currently enduring, and current difficulties. the court observes that the husband’s full-time (non-award) employment contract with the employer made in early 2022 referred to the husband’s hours of work as being monday to friday, 7.00 am to 5.00 pm, and saturday as required by management. the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband states, inter alia:
there is force to these submissions having regard to the court’s discussions above relating to the sale of one or more of the husband’s cars. (c) whereas the husband for the financial years 2022 and 2023 was earning a taxable income of $302,563 per annum ($3,560 per week after deducting income tax and medicare levy) and $163,071 ($2,231 per week after deducting income tax and medicare levy) respectively, the husband was stated to be now earning only $97,604 per annum ($1,877). she submitted, inter alia, that the husband’s income earning capacity was much greater than $97,604, in the view of the court there is force to this submission. the husband is presently working reduced hours between monday to friday by reason of asserted stress levels, and his asserted need to provide care for the child (see the letter below from his employer dated early 2023). in this context, the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband refers to the husband’s normal working hours during monday to saturday being reduced to 4.5 hours a day, with remuneration being reduced to an annual salary package of $190,000 inclusive of superannuation, with the employer referring, inter alia, to the husband’s personal circumstances, stress that he is currently enduring, and current difficulties. the court observes that the husband’s full-time (non-award) employment contract with the employer made in early 2022 referred to the husband’s hours of work as being monday to friday, 7.00 am to 5.00 pm, and saturday as required by management. the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband states, inter alia:   whereas the husband for the financial years 2022 and 2023 was earning a taxable income of $302,563 per annum ($3,560 per week after deducting income tax and medicare levy) and $163,071 ($2,231 per week after deducting income tax and medicare levy) respectively, the husband was stated to be now earning only $97,604 per annum ($1,877). she submitted, inter alia, that the husband’s income earning capacity was much greater than $97,604, in the view of the court there is force to this submission. the husband is presently working reduced hours between monday to friday by reason of asserted stress levels, and his asserted need to provide care for the child (see the letter below from his employer dated early 2023). in this context, the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband refers to the husband’s normal working hours during monday to saturday being reduced to 4.5 hours a day, with remuneration being reduced to an annual salary package of $190,000 inclusive of superannuation, with the employer referring, inter alia, to the husband’s personal circumstances, stress that he is currently enduring, and current difficulties. the court observes that the husband’s full-time (non-award) employment contract with the employer made in early 2022 referred to the husband’s hours of work as being monday to friday, 7.00 am to 5.00 pm, and saturday as required by management. the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband states, inter alia:
the husband is presently working reduced hours between monday to friday by reason of asserted stress levels, and his asserted need to provide care for the child (see the letter below from his employer dated early 2023). in this context, the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband refers to the husband’s normal working hours during monday to saturday being reduced to 4.5 hours a day, with remuneration being reduced to an annual salary package of $190,000 inclusive of superannuation, with the employer referring, inter alia, to the husband’s personal circumstances, stress that he is currently enduring, and current difficulties. the court observes that the husband’s full-time (non-award) employment contract with the employer made in early 2022 referred to the husband’s hours of work as being monday to friday, 7.00 am to 5.00 pm, and saturday as required by management. the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband states, inter alia:
in this context, the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband refers to the husband’s normal working hours during monday to saturday being reduced to 4.5 hours a day, with remuneration being reduced to an annual salary package of $190,000 inclusive of superannuation, with the employer referring, inter alia, to the husband’s personal circumstances, stress that he is currently enduring, and current difficulties. the court observes that the husband’s full-time (non-award) employment contract with the employer made in early 2022 referred to the husband’s hours of work as being monday to friday, 7.00 am to 5.00 pm, and saturday as required by management. the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband states, inter alia:
the court observes that the husband’s full-time (non-award) employment contract with the employer made in early 2022 referred to the husband’s hours of work as being monday to friday, 7.00 am to 5.00 pm, and saturday as required by management. the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband states, inter alia:
the letter from the husband’s employer dated early 2023 to the husband states, inter alia:
we have reviewed your package in line with your personal circumstances and commitment to [the company], with changes as follows: work services are reduced between monday to friday, with services on a required basis to provide flexibility to you due to stress levels, and in the scenario, you need to provide care for your child as a single parent.
... to allow you to provide care to your child, saturdays will not be included in your work services and [the company] will endeavour to not disturb if deemed unnecessary. remuneration to be reduced to an annual salary package of $100,000 inclusive of superannuation.
however, as submitted by the wife, the husband only spends time with the child every second weekend, from 9.30 am saturday until 3.00 pm on sunday, he is not caring for the child each day of the working week which would impact on his ability to work eight hours per day during the working week. the husband asserts, inter alia, that the breakdown of the marriage has, inter alia, impacted his ability to focus on work significantly. he asserts that this has resulted in the loss of his companies’ contracts and has heavily impacted his income. he asserts that the settlement process has affected him and that currently he refers to the stress and emotions of not being able to see the child on a daily basis. however, the court observes that the husband has adduced no health professional evidence relating to his asserted stress and inability to focus on work significantly. at the outset of his affidavit (paragraph 4) he asserts that he is in good health. the court would assess that the husband’s earning capacity is probably greater than $1,877 per week ($97,604 per annum), he would appear able to work an eight hour day monday to friday, and potentially double his present employment income, as opposed to only working 4.5 hours per day (or providing services “on a required basis” (see his employer’s letter dated early 2023 to himself), and thereby earn a significantly greater income. the court observes that the husband’s latest pay slip from his employer dated early 2024 reveals 97.50 hours of work over [early 2024], equating to about 23 hours work per week. the court observes that at no point in the husband’s employer’s letters dated early 2023 does the employer state that it is unable to offer the father increased work hours, compared to the reduced work hours afforded the husband by the employer in those letters, should the husband’s personal circumstances, as asserted by him to his employer, change. (d) the husband agreed to an interim order by consent in this court on 26 february 2024 that he “be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home”. it was submitted by the wife that this consent order was inconsistent with the husband’s present contention that he presently has no financial capacity to make the mortgage repayment to f bank in relation to the former matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the contents of the consent order speak for themselves. in this context, the court would observe that the husband does not appear to assert any relevant factual matter that has arisen since the consent order was made by the court on 26 february 2024.
the husband asserts, inter alia, that the breakdown of the marriage has, inter alia, impacted his ability to focus on work significantly. he asserts that this has resulted in the loss of his companies’ contracts and has heavily impacted his income. he asserts that the settlement process has affected him and that currently he refers to the stress and emotions of not being able to see the child on a daily basis. however, the court observes that the husband has adduced no health professional evidence relating to his asserted stress and inability to focus on work significantly. at the outset of his affidavit (paragraph 4) he asserts that he is in good health. the court would assess that the husband’s earning capacity is probably greater than $1,877 per week ($97,604 per annum), he would appear able to work an eight hour day monday to friday, and potentially double his present employment income, as opposed to only working 4.5 hours per day (or providing services “on a required basis” (see his employer’s letter dated early 2023 to himself), and thereby earn a significantly greater income. the court observes that the husband’s latest pay slip from his employer dated early 2024 reveals 97.50 hours of work over [early 2024], equating to about 23 hours work per week. the court observes that at no point in the husband’s employer’s letters dated early 2023 does the employer state that it is unable to offer the father increased work hours, compared to the reduced work hours afforded the husband by the employer in those letters, should the husband’s personal circumstances, as asserted by him to his employer, change. (d) the husband agreed to an interim order by consent in this court on 26 february 2024 that he “be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home”. it was submitted by the wife that this consent order was inconsistent with the husband’s present contention that he presently has no financial capacity to make the mortgage repayment to f bank in relation to the former matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the contents of the consent order speak for themselves. in this context, the court would observe that the husband does not appear to assert any relevant factual matter that has arisen since the consent order was made by the court on 26 february 2024.
however, the court observes that the husband has adduced no health professional evidence relating to his asserted stress and inability to focus on work significantly. at the outset of his affidavit (paragraph 4) he asserts that he is in good health. the court would assess that the husband’s earning capacity is probably greater than $1,877 per week ($97,604 per annum), he would appear able to work an eight hour day monday to friday, and potentially double his present employment income, as opposed to only working 4.5 hours per day (or providing services “on a required basis” (see his employer’s letter dated early 2023 to himself), and thereby earn a significantly greater income. the court observes that the husband’s latest pay slip from his employer dated early 2024 reveals 97.50 hours of work over [early 2024], equating to about 23 hours work per week. the court observes that at no point in the husband’s employer’s letters dated early 2023 does the employer state that it is unable to offer the father increased work hours, compared to the reduced work hours afforded the husband by the employer in those letters, should the husband’s personal circumstances, as asserted by him to his employer, change. (d) the husband agreed to an interim order by consent in this court on 26 february 2024 that he “be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home”. it was submitted by the wife that this consent order was inconsistent with the husband’s present contention that he presently has no financial capacity to make the mortgage repayment to f bank in relation to the former matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the contents of the consent order speak for themselves. in this context, the court would observe that the husband does not appear to assert any relevant factual matter that has arisen since the consent order was made by the court on 26 february 2024.
the court would assess that the husband’s earning capacity is probably greater than $1,877 per week ($97,604 per annum), he would appear able to work an eight hour day monday to friday, and potentially double his present employment income, as opposed to only working 4.5 hours per day (or providing services “on a required basis” (see his employer’s letter dated early 2023 to himself), and thereby earn a significantly greater income. the court observes that the husband’s latest pay slip from his employer dated early 2024 reveals 97.50 hours of work over [early 2024], equating to about 23 hours work per week. the court observes that at no point in the husband’s employer’s letters dated early 2023 does the employer state that it is unable to offer the father increased work hours, compared to the reduced work hours afforded the husband by the employer in those letters, should the husband’s personal circumstances, as asserted by him to his employer, change. (d) the husband agreed to an interim order by consent in this court on 26 february 2024 that he “be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home”. it was submitted by the wife that this consent order was inconsistent with the husband’s present contention that he presently has no financial capacity to make the mortgage repayment to f bank in relation to the former matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the contents of the consent order speak for themselves. in this context, the court would observe that the husband does not appear to assert any relevant factual matter that has arisen since the consent order was made by the court on 26 february 2024.
the court observes that at no point in the husband’s employer’s letters dated early 2023 does the employer state that it is unable to offer the father increased work hours, compared to the reduced work hours afforded the husband by the employer in those letters, should the husband’s personal circumstances, as asserted by him to his employer, change. (d) the husband agreed to an interim order by consent in this court on 26 february 2024 that he “be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home”. it was submitted by the wife that this consent order was inconsistent with the husband’s present contention that he presently has no financial capacity to make the mortgage repayment to f bank in relation to the former matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the contents of the consent order speak for themselves. in this context, the court would observe that the husband does not appear to assert any relevant factual matter that has arisen since the consent order was made by the court on 26 february 2024.   the husband agreed to an interim order by consent in this court on 26 february 2024 that he “be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home”. it was submitted by the wife that this consent order was inconsistent with the husband’s present contention that he presently has no financial capacity to make the mortgage repayment to f bank in relation to the former matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the contents of the consent order speak for themselves. in this context, the court would observe that the husband does not appear to assert any relevant factual matter that has arisen since the consent order was made by the court on 26 february 2024.
it was submitted by the wife that this consent order was inconsistent with the husband’s present contention that he presently has no financial capacity to make the mortgage repayment to f bank in relation to the former matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the contents of the consent order speak for themselves. in this context, the court would observe that the husband does not appear to assert any relevant factual matter that has arisen since the consent order was made by the court on 26 february 2024.
husband’s interim application for the former matrimonial home to be sold with the net proceeds of sale, by way of partial property settlement, being paid in the sum of $150,000 to the wife and $100,000 to the husband   the husband, if he indeed cannot presently meet his financial obligations, which is not admitted by the wife, could just as well seek to sell the suburb g property in which he now lives, and thereby obtain some financial relief, yet he adduces no evidence as to why this should not occur. there is force to this submission. if the suburb g property were sold, the wife and child could remain living in the former matrimonial home at least pending final hearing. (b) the husband has access to the above discussed $450,000, or a significant part of it, which could significantly assist him in obtaining financial relief. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above. (c) the husband has a stable of cars which he could sell (in whole or in part) and which could also significantly assist him in obtaining financial relief. (at the interim hearing the wife informed the court that she consents to the sale of the cars provided they were not sold at an undervalue). there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above. (d) the husband has a capacity to earn significantly greater employment income. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above. (e) the husband’s asserted weekly expenses of $4,068 could probably be, again, significantly reduced by reference to the matters in (a) – (c) above. further, that total sum of $4,068 should be revised down because the husband has sold motor vehicle 1 (item 6 in the joint balance sheet), so that $11 for registration fees can be deducted, as well as the h company loan repayment of $350. (f) though the wife’s desire is to retain the matrimonial home unencumbered, it would be open to the court at final hearing, inter alia, to order that she retain the home with some associated mortgage debt. there is force to this submission, and the court refers to its discussions below relating to s 79 final property adjustment outcomes. (g) the husband had agreed to an interim consent order made by the court on 26 february 2024 that he be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above relating to this consent order.   the husband has access to the above discussed $450,000, or a significant part of it, which could significantly assist him in obtaining financial relief. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above. (c) the husband has a stable of cars which he could sell (in whole or in part) and which could also significantly assist him in obtaining financial relief. (at the interim hearing the wife informed the court that she consents to the sale of the cars provided they were not sold at an undervalue). there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above. (d) the husband has a capacity to earn significantly greater employment income. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above. (e) the husband’s asserted weekly expenses of $4,068 could probably be, again, significantly reduced by reference to the matters in (a) – (c) above. further, that total sum of $4,068 should be revised down because the husband has sold motor vehicle 1 (item 6 in the joint balance sheet), so that $11 for registration fees can be deducted, as well as the h company loan repayment of $350. (f) though the wife’s desire is to retain the matrimonial home unencumbered, it would be open to the court at final hearing, inter alia, to order that she retain the home with some associated mortgage debt. there is force to this submission, and the court refers to its discussions below relating to s 79 final property adjustment outcomes. (g) the husband had agreed to an interim consent order made by the court on 26 february 2024 that he be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above relating to this consent order.   the husband has a stable of cars which he could sell (in whole or in part) and which could also significantly assist him in obtaining financial relief. (at the interim hearing the wife informed the court that she consents to the sale of the cars provided they were not sold at an undervalue). there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above. (d) the husband has a capacity to earn significantly greater employment income. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above. (e) the husband’s asserted weekly expenses of $4,068 could probably be, again, significantly reduced by reference to the matters in (a) – (c) above. further, that total sum of $4,068 should be revised down because the husband has sold motor vehicle 1 (item 6 in the joint balance sheet), so that $11 for registration fees can be deducted, as well as the h company loan repayment of $350. (f) though the wife’s desire is to retain the matrimonial home unencumbered, it would be open to the court at final hearing, inter alia, to order that she retain the home with some associated mortgage debt. there is force to this submission, and the court refers to its discussions below relating to s 79 final property adjustment outcomes. (g) the husband had agreed to an interim consent order made by the court on 26 february 2024 that he be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above relating to this consent order.   the husband has a capacity to earn significantly greater employment income. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above. (e) the husband’s asserted weekly expenses of $4,068 could probably be, again, significantly reduced by reference to the matters in (a) – (c) above. further, that total sum of $4,068 should be revised down because the husband has sold motor vehicle 1 (item 6 in the joint balance sheet), so that $11 for registration fees can be deducted, as well as the h company loan repayment of $350. (f) though the wife’s desire is to retain the matrimonial home unencumbered, it would be open to the court at final hearing, inter alia, to order that she retain the home with some associated mortgage debt. there is force to this submission, and the court refers to its discussions below relating to s 79 final property adjustment outcomes. (g) the husband had agreed to an interim consent order made by the court on 26 february 2024 that he be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above relating to this consent order.   the husband’s asserted weekly expenses of $4,068 could probably be, again, significantly reduced by reference to the matters in (a) – (c) above. further, that total sum of $4,068 should be revised down because the husband has sold motor vehicle 1 (item 6 in the joint balance sheet), so that $11 for registration fees can be deducted, as well as the h company loan repayment of $350. (f) though the wife’s desire is to retain the matrimonial home unencumbered, it would be open to the court at final hearing, inter alia, to order that she retain the home with some associated mortgage debt. there is force to this submission, and the court refers to its discussions below relating to s 79 final property adjustment outcomes. (g) the husband had agreed to an interim consent order made by the court on 26 february 2024 that he be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above relating to this consent order.   though the wife’s desire is to retain the matrimonial home unencumbered, it would be open to the court at final hearing, inter alia, to order that she retain the home with some associated mortgage debt. there is force to this submission, and the court refers to its discussions below relating to s 79 final property adjustment outcomes. (g) the husband had agreed to an interim consent order made by the court on 26 february 2024 that he be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above relating to this consent order.   the husband had agreed to an interim consent order made by the court on 26 february 2024 that he be responsible for paying as and when the same fall due, all mortgage repayments in respect of the matrimonial home. there is force to this submission and the court refers to its discussions above relating to this consent order.
associate: dated: 24 may 2024
dated: 24 may 2024