last updated: 18 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
calleja & abayan [2024] fedcfamc2f 688
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
background
interveners
service on creditors
6. the parties serve, upon filing, each of: their amended initiating application and response respectively, along with a copy of these orders, and the balance sheet as described in order 5, (once available), on the below identified creditors:
a. australian tax office, b. tax accountant, c. westpac banking group, d. [c law firm], e. [b law firm], and f. [ms f].
post script
and the court orders by consent that: real property that the nett proceeds from the mortgagee sale of the property situated at and known as [d street, suburb e] in the state of victoria (“[suburb e] property”), more particularly described in land certificate of title volume [...] folio [...], be divided to pay:   as to $40,000 to the respondent, and (b) the balance payable to the applicant. the respondent transfer to the applicant all her rights title and interest in [motor vehicle 2] registered number [...] presently in the applicant’s possession.
3. the applicant otherwise retain for his sole use and benefit absolutely: (a) funds held in any bank and/or financial accounts in the applicant’s sole name,   funds held in any bank and/or financial accounts in the applicant’s sole name,   furniture, chattels and personal belongings currently in his possession, (c) [motor vehicle 3] registered number [...] presently in his possession, (d) the company [g pty ltd] and associated entities under his control and any assets, debts, liabilities and encumbrances associated therewith and hereby indemnifies the respondent as to same.   [motor vehicle 3] registered number [...] presently in his possession, (d) the company [g pty ltd] and associated entities under his control and any assets, debts, liabilities and encumbrances associated therewith and hereby indemnifies the respondent as to same.   the company [g pty ltd] and associated entities under his control and any assets, debts, liabilities and encumbrances associated therewith and hereby indemnifies the respondent as to same.
4. the respondent otherwise retain for her sole use and benefit absolutely: (a) funds held in any bank and/or financial accounts in the respondent’s sole name, (b) furniture, chattels and personal belongings currently in her possession,   funds held in any bank and/or financial accounts in the respondent’s sole name, (b) furniture, chattels and personal belongings currently in her possession,   furniture, chattels and personal belongings currently in her possession,   any superannuation entitlement held in her sole name, (d) [motor vehicle 1] registered number [...] presently in the respondent’s possession. unless otherwise specified in these orders and save for the purposes of enforcing any monies due or transfer assets under these or any subsequent orders: (a) each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, unless otherwise specified in the orders herein, (c) each party foregoes any claims they may have to any inheritances to which the other party is entitled to either presently or in the future, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed   [motor vehicle 1] registered number [...] presently in the respondent’s possession.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, unless otherwise specified in the orders herein, (c) each party foregoes any claims they may have to any inheritances to which the other party is entitled to either presently or in the future, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed   each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, unless otherwise specified in the orders herein, (c) each party foregoes any claims they may have to any inheritances to which the other party is entitled to either presently or in the future, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed   each party foregoes any claims they may have to any inheritances to which the other party is entitled to either presently or in the future, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed
superannuation in accordance with s.90xt(4) of the family law act 1975 (the act) a base amount of $120,000 is allocated to the respondent out of the applicant’s interest in the [super fund 1] (“the fund”). in accordance with paragraph 90xt(1)(a) of the act, whenever a splitable payment within the meaning of section 90xe of the act becomes payable to or on behalf of the applicant from his interest in the fund, the respondent is entitled to be paid (by the trustee of the fund) the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, using a base amount of $120,000 and there is a corresponding reduction in the entitlement the applicant would have but for these orders. the trustee of the fund (“the trustee”) shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary to: (a) calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975 and the family law (superannuation) regulation 2001, the entitlement allocated to the respondent created by the preceding clause, and (b) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the applicant’s interest in the fund. the order have effect from the operative time and the operative time is four (4) business days from the date that a sealed copy of the orders is served upon the trustee. 10. orders 6-9 herein are binding on the trustee. liberty is reserved to the parties and the trustee to apply to the court with respect to orders 6-9 herein. pending compliance with these orders, the applicant is restrained by injunction from: (a) taking any steps or making any elections to the effect of which would convert his present entitlement in the fund to an entitlement whereby he would receive only a pension or annuity in lieu of a lump sum, and (b) receiving, disposing of, encumbering or otherwise dealing with his superannuation entitlements with the fund save as specified in these orders. the respondent forthwith cause a copy of these orders to be served upon the trustee of the fund and request the trustee to note the orders and act in relation to any payment in accordance with the applicant’s obligations. 14. that all previous costs be discharged.   calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975 and the family law (superannuation) regulation 2001, the entitlement allocated to the respondent created by the preceding clause, and (b) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the applicant’s interest in the fund.   pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the applicant’s interest in the fund.   taking any steps or making any elections to the effect of which would convert his present entitlement in the fund to an entitlement whereby he would receive only a pension or annuity in lieu of a lump sum, and (b) receiving, disposing of, encumbering or otherwise dealing with his superannuation entitlements with the fund save as specified in these orders.   receiving, disposing of, encumbering or otherwise dealing with his superannuation entitlements with the fund save as specified in these orders.
associate: dated: 13 june 2024
dated: 13 june 2024