last updated: 1 august 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ryder & brooks (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 708
orders
amended under slip rule 10.13(1)(e)
the court orders that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge street
introduction
submissions
legal principles  the filing of a notice of appeal does not stay the operation or enforcement of the order appealed from, unless otherwise provided by a legislative provision. (2) if an appeal has been started, or a party has applied for leave to appeal against an order, any party may apply for an order staying the operation or enforcement of all, or part, of the order to which the appeal or application relates. (3) an application for a stay must: be filed in the registry in which the order under appeal was made, and be heard by the judge or magistrate who made the order under appeal, unless that judicial officer is unavailable. the making of an order for a stay “is wholly discretionary and the circumstances that would justify an order for a stay depend upon the circumstances of each case” (see friscioni & friscioni [2009] famcafc 43 at [54].
24. in aldridge & keaton [2009] famcafc 106 the following is set out:
17. this is an appeal from a discretionary judgment. there are well established principles on the limits on interference by an appellate court with such a judgment (see house v the king (1936) 55 clr 499, gronow v gronow [1979] hca 63, (1979) 144 clr 513, (1979) flc 90-716). 18. the principles to be applied in determining an application for a stay of orders both in the general law and in respect of parenting proceedings are also well known (see the commissioner of taxation of the commonwealth of australia v myer emporium limited [no.1] [1986] hca 13, (1986) 160 clr 220 at 222, alexander v cambridge credit corporation (1985) 2 nsw lr 685, jennings construction limited v burgundy royale investments pty limited [1986] hca 84, (1986) 161 clr 681, clemett & clemett [1980] famca 90, (1981) flc 91-013, jrn & ken v ieg & blg [1998] hcatrans 263, (1998) 72 aljr 1329 at 1332). the authorities stress the discretionary nature of the application which should be determined on its merits. principles relevant to this matter include the following: the onus to establish a proper basis for the stay is on the applicant for the stay. however it is not necessary for the applicant to demonstrate any “special” or “exceptional” circumstances, a person who has obtained a judgment is entitled to the benefit of that judgment, a person who has obtained a judgment is entitled to presume the judgment is correct, the mere filing of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay, the bona fides of the applicant, a stay may be granted on terms that are fair to all parties – this may involve a court weighing the balance of convenience and the competing rights of the parties, a weighing of the risk that an appeal may be rendered nugatory if a stay is not granted – this will be a substantial factor in determining whether it will be appropriate to grant a stay, some preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal – whether the appellant has an arguable case, the desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living arrangements, the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time, and the best interests of the child the subject of the proceedings are a significant consideration.  ) the principles relating to the granting of a stay pending an appeal are well-known and are conveniently set out by the full court in the decision of aldridge v keaton ... the discretion to stay the operation of orders should only be exercised where circumstances exist which justify a departure from the ordinary rule that a successful litigant is entitled to the fruits of her or her litigation, pending the determination of any appeal. (19) circumstances that might justify a stay of orders pending the outcome of an appeal include the need to prevent the appeal from being rendered nugatory, or where there is a real risk that it will not be possible for a successful appellant to be restored to his or her former position if the orders are executed. in determining that question, the court should consider the prospects of the appeal and where the balance of convenience lies between the parties.
findings and conclusions
costs
costs   subject to subsection (2), subsection 102qab(6) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act must bear the party's own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just. (2a) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to:  the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.
associate: dated: 6 june 2024
dated: 6 june 2024