last updated: 31 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
lambers & earle [2024] fedcfamc2f 816
orders
the court orders that:
“a”   $20,000 to the husband, and (b) the remainder thereon to be deposited into the whitehead legal services pty ltd law practice trust account, e bank, bsb: ..., account number: ...94.   the remainder thereon to be deposited into the whitehead legal services pty ltd law practice trust account, e bank, bsb: ..., account number: ...94.   the wife (or her administrators, executors, beneficiaries, heirs or assigns) is entitled to be paid, using the base amount allocated in the immediately preceding order, the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 (cth), and (b) the entitlement of the husband in the super fund 1 (or the entitlement of such other person who becomes entitled to receive a payment out of the husband's superannuation interest) is correspondingly reduced by force of this order.   the entitlement of the husband in the super fund 1 (or the entitlement of such other person who becomes entitled to receive a payment out of the husband's superannuation interest) is correspondingly reduced by force of this order.   calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975 (cth) and the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 (cth) the entitlement of the wife as set out in the orders preceding this order, and (b) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment from the husband's superannuation interest in super fund 1.   pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment from the husband's superannuation interest in super fund 1.
reasons for judgment(ex tempore reasons, corrected from transcript)
judge stewart  if a party is in default, the court may do any of the following: ... (c) order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, ... (f) make any order that is to take effect if the party does not take a step ordered by the court in proceeding in the time limited in the order, (g) proceed on the non-defaulting party’s evidence together with: (i) if considered appropriate by the court—such evidence as the defaulting party has filed, and (ii) such evidence as tendered during cross-examination by the defaulting party, and (iii) submissions by either party limited to the matters that are the subject of evidence, (h) in exceptional circumstances—proceed on the non-defaulting party’s evidence without hearing from the defaulting party.   order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order,   make any order that is to take effect if the party does not take a step ordered by the court in proceeding in the time limited in the order, (g) proceed on the non-defaulting party’s evidence together with: (i) if considered appropriate by the court—such evidence as the defaulting party has filed, and (ii) such evidence as tendered during cross-examination by the defaulting party, and (iii) submissions by either party limited to the matters that are the subject of evidence, (h) in exceptional circumstances—proceed on the non-defaulting party’s evidence without hearing from the defaulting party.   proceed on the non-defaulting party’s evidence together with: (i) if considered appropriate by the court—such evidence as the defaulting party has filed, and (ii) such evidence as tendered during cross-examination by the defaulting party, and (iii) submissions by either party limited to the matters that are the subject of evidence, (h) in exceptional circumstances—proceed on the non-defaulting party’s evidence without hearing from the defaulting party.   if considered appropriate by the court—such evidence as the defaulting party has filed, and (ii) such evidence as tendered during cross-examination by the defaulting party, and (iii) submissions by either party limited to the matters that are the subject of evidence,  ) such evidence as tendered during cross-examination by the defaulting party, and (iii) submissions by either party limited to the matters that are the subject of evidence,  i) submissions by either party limited to the matters that are the subject of evidence,   in exceptional circumstances—proceed on the non-defaulting party’s evidence without hearing from the defaulting party.
38. ...sometimes, through stubbornness, confusion, misunderstanding, fear or other emotions, a party may not take advantage of the opportunity to be heard, although such opportunity is provided. affording the opportunity is all that the law and principle require. 39. decision makers, including the courts, cannot generally force people to protect their own rights, to adduce evidence or other materials, to present submissions or to act rationally in their own best interests. this consideration may be especially relevant in relation to the family court where emotions, often engendered by the highly personal issues involved, can sometimes cloud rational thought. 40. nor are courts obliged to delay proceedings indefinitely because one party, although proved to be on notice of the proceedings, refuses or fails to appear in person or to be represented by a lawyer, or some other individual permitted to speak for them who can explain the need for an adjournment. the rights of other parties are commonly involved. in the family court, the rights of non-parties (especially children) may be affected. additionally (as this court has itself accepted), the rights of the public in the efficient discharge by courts of their functions must be weighed against the unreasonable delay in concluding litigation. (citations omitted)   the proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home (held in trust in the sum of approximately $135,829) be transferred to her, (b) the husband retain a family motor vehicle and chattels, and (c) there be a $65,000 superannuation split in her favour.   the husband retain a family motor vehicle and chattels, and (c) there be a $65,000 superannuation split in her favour.   there be a $65,000 superannuation split in her favour.   the proceeds of sale of the joint matrimonial home, fixed in the sum of $135,829, (b) motor vehicle 2 valued at $30,000, and encumbered by a loan of approximately $20,000, (c) motor vehicle 1 in the parties’ joint names, with a value estimated by the wife of $5,000 (the husband told me he thought motor vehicle 1 worth only $2,000, but in light of his lack of filed material i propose to take the value at $5,000), (d) miscellaneous matrimonial assets valued at $20,000 and presumably retained by the husband, (e) a balance sheet item valued at $30,000 for “replaced household furniture and items”, and (f) a liability in the form of the wife’s hecs loan, said to be in the sum of approximately $21,500.   motor vehicle 2 valued at $30,000, and encumbered by a loan of approximately $20,000, (c) motor vehicle 1 in the parties’ joint names, with a value estimated by the wife of $5,000 (the husband told me he thought motor vehicle 1 worth only $2,000, but in light of his lack of filed material i propose to take the value at $5,000), (d) miscellaneous matrimonial assets valued at $20,000 and presumably retained by the husband, (e) a balance sheet item valued at $30,000 for “replaced household furniture and items”, and (f) a liability in the form of the wife’s hecs loan, said to be in the sum of approximately $21,500.   motor vehicle 1 in the parties’ joint names, with a value estimated by the wife of $5,000 (the husband told me he thought motor vehicle 1 worth only $2,000, but in light of his lack of filed material i propose to take the value at $5,000), (d) miscellaneous matrimonial assets valued at $20,000 and presumably retained by the husband, (e) a balance sheet item valued at $30,000 for “replaced household furniture and items”, and (f) a liability in the form of the wife’s hecs loan, said to be in the sum of approximately $21,500.   miscellaneous matrimonial assets valued at $20,000 and presumably retained by the husband, (e) a balance sheet item valued at $30,000 for “replaced household furniture and items”, and (f) a liability in the form of the wife’s hecs loan, said to be in the sum of approximately $21,500.   a balance sheet item valued at $30,000 for “replaced household furniture and items”, and (f) a liability in the form of the wife’s hecs loan, said to be in the sum of approximately $21,500.   a liability in the form of the wife’s hecs loan, said to be in the sum of approximately $21,500.   the money held in trust of $135,829, (b) motor vehicle 1, which i value at $5,000, (c) the wife's superannuation of $21,891, and (d) the husband's known superannuation at $85,267, being a total pool of $247,987.   motor vehicle 1, which i value at $5,000, (c) the wife's superannuation of $21,891, and (d) the husband's known superannuation at $85,267, being a total pool of $247,987.   the wife's superannuation of $21,891, and (d) the husband's known superannuation at $85,267, being a total pool of $247,987.   the husband's known superannuation at $85,267, being a total pool of $247,987.
being a total pool of $247,987.
associate: dated: 27 june 2024
dated: 27 june 2024