last updated: 13 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
lavigne & gavin (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 737
orders
the court orders that:
the court directs that:
the court further orders that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
13. it needs to be remembered that in this case both parties place considerable reliance on the comprehensive family report that was prepared in the previous proceedings by [dr s]. i refer briefly to some background in this matter. whilst this matter was resolved by consent after that family report, it is clear that there is a considerable amount of conflict and risk involved that was present in the previous proceedings as well. it is the types of risks that go to psychological harm, as well as physical. there are four children of the relationship, [w] age 12, [x] age 11, [y] age 8 and [z] age six, and as is apparent from their ages, they have different developmental needs that can be challenging in an intact family. 14. [x], is neurodivergent, and that can be very challenging for [x] at times in being able to regulate her emotions. it can be very challenging for the parents and siblings to manage that, because at times she has been physically violent towards her parents and siblings. it is an issue that both parents address with appropriate concern for [x]’s wellbeing, and the wellbeing of the other siblings as well. it is one of the matters that [dr s] addressed comprehensively in her report at lines 1554 to 1566:
i have mixed views about [x]’s capacity to be separated from her mother. i think that [x] is a child who requires a high degree of continuity, structure, and predictability. she may find it difficult to be in any environment away from her home [which is the house she shares with her mother]. for example, there were reports that [x] found it difficult to be in a holiday house with her father. i do not think that this reflects on her attachment towards either parent, but is reflective of her behavioural and neurological vulnerabilities. that is, it is common for children with adhd and behavioural dysregulation to demonstrate regressive behaviours when they are in a new or unfamiliar environment. that said, i think that [x] has a positive relationship with her father and is also able to spend several consecutive nights away from her mother in the care of her father, without significant regression or distress. however, i am strongly of the view that such time needs to be regular, predictable, and predetermined. i do not think that [x] has the capacity to cope with ad hoc, changing, or unstructured living and parenting arrangements.
15. particularly, [dr s] referred to [x] needing a high degree of certainty, structure and predictability, and where she referred to in her view that the time between the children and their parents needed to be regular, predictable and predetermined. it is apparent from the detailed consent orders that the parties entered into that that is what the parties were trying to achieve. 16. it is also clear from [dr s]’s report that the parents have very different parenting styles, which is very common, but can be difficult to navigate. the way the case is described by each of the parties in their respective case outlines gives an indication of just how complex the dynamics are. the father frames the case pursuant to the principles in rice & asplund [1978] famca 84, where the mother has raised very similar allegations that were raised in the previous proceedings to which he refers to having been comprehensively investigated. he emphasises this case is one where the mother is trying to exclude him from the children’s lives. 17. the mother, in contrast, outlines concerns about risk. the material goes into great detail, that include various comments that the children have made that are troubling, and concerns particularly about the father’s ability to regulate his own emotions and appropriately deal with [x] in particular when she is acting out. what struck me when looking at this matter is a comment in the father’s submissions about [dr s]’s report having canvassed the mother’s experience of the father as harassing and threatening, and the father’s experience of the mother as controlling and avoidant. both things can be true at the same time. 18. a troubling aspect of this matter is that on the material that i have seen, from the parties’ material and the extracts annexed to their affidavits with respect to ourfamilywizard, that the conflict between these parents and the children and the communication between the parents and the lack of effective communication is of real concern. the material indicates a continuation of the conflict without much interruption, despite the april 2023 orders, and this raises concerns about the viability of the parents exercising equal shared parental responsibility, unless something changes about that. i also note that the first proceedings began within a month or so of the parties’ separation and involved, at one point, an investigation by child and protective services. 19. it is also clear that what is really challenging for both parents, is they have, four very bright children who are acutely aware of the conflict between their parents and the concerns that each parent has about the other. both the previous family report and also the parties’ most recent affidavit material show that particularly with respect to the older two girls, they have been quite demanding of the parents wanting to know what is going on in the dispute. 20. this can be a very challenging issue for parents to navigate, particularly when the two eldest girls, in some ways have pseudo maturity, and it would be insulting to their intelligence to simply say to them, “do not worry. you do not need to worry about anything. the adults will take care of it”. they know that there are proceedings on foot again. they have recently attended for updated family report interviews, and it is clear that they feel very divided by loyalties, and that the separation was difficult for the parents and for the children to navigate as well. 21. in considering the adjournment application, i have also had the benefit of written submissions by the mother’s counsel, which refers to a high level of anxiety that the mother is experiencing, and the impact upon her of the proceedings. from her perspective, it is argued that adjourning this matter for another hearing leaves the mother in the position of having that application hanging over her head and having the stress and uncertainty involved with respect of that, and that is not something that can be discounted. 22. it is striking that in the affidavit filed by the father on 27 february 2024 and in the supervised reports, it appears that in having particular regard to, the conversations between the father and the children that are set out at pages 24 and 25 of that report that the mother is in a really invidious position. on page 25 of the report, the father is quoted as referring to the rules, needing to finish the visit, and then saying, “if we behave, maybe we can change it”, with [x] replying and saying, “it’s mum, of course she won’t change her mind”. the mother’s concern is for the welfare of the children, and she currently has to manage the children’s resentment of her with respect to the changing parenting arrangements. 23. it is also necessary to make the point that children can want to spend time with a parent in circumstances where that parent is unsafe. what is troubling, is the amount of pressure that the parents and children are under currently. particularly, given that the father is having supervised time at the moment, the mother has to manage the children’s feelings about their resentment about that and expressions of wanting to spend more time with their father, whilst also navigating her concerns about risk. i accept that the father denies the mother’s allegations of risk and would frame it as being a risk on the mother’s side in not facilitating his relationship with the children. certainly, this is a case where the court has to be mindful of the serious allegations of risk that have been raised that the court cannot test at this stage, but that were live issues in the previous proceedings as well, and addressed in some detail in the previous family report.
documents relied upon  affidavit of mr gavin filed 10 may 2024, (b) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed late 2023, and (c) outline of case document filed 13 may 2024.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed late 2023, and (c) outline of case document filed 13 may 2024.   outline of case document filed 13 may 2024.   affidavit of ms lavigne filed 10 may 2024, (b) amended initiating application filed 19 january 2024, (c) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed late 2023, and (d) outline of case document filed 14 may 2024.   amended initiating application filed 19 january 2024, (c) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed late 2023, and (d) outline of case document filed 14 may 2024.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed late 2023, and (d) outline of case document filed 14 may 2024.   outline of case document filed 14 may 2024.   orders made 25 january 2024, (b) final orders made 3 april 2023, and (c) outline of case document filed 14 may 2024.   final orders made 3 april 2023, and (c) outline of case document filed 14 may 2024.   outline of case document filed 14 may 2024.   bundle of supervise reports from 3 february 2024 to 13 april 2024, (b) updated family report of dr t, consultant and forensic psychiatrist of 23 april 2024, and (c) family report of dr s, clinical psychologist of 16 june 2022.   updated family report of dr t, consultant and forensic psychiatrist of 23 april 2024, and (c) family report of dr s, clinical psychologist of 16 june 2022.   family report of dr s, clinical psychologist of 16 june 2022.
issues in dispute and the parties’ respective cases  whether the stay of the final orders of 3 april 2023 and the interim orders made 25 january 2024 are to continue, (b) the unacceptable risk that the father may pose to the children, and (c) the time the children are to spend with the father and if that time be supervised or unsupervised.   the unacceptable risk that the father may pose to the children, and (c) the time the children are to spend with the father and if that time be supervised or unsupervised.   the time the children are to spend with the father and if that time be supervised or unsupervised.
legal principles
determining child’s best interests (1) subject to subsection (4), in determining what is in the child’s best interests, the court must:   consider the matters set out in subsection (2), and (b) if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child—also consider the matters set out in subsection (3).
general considerations (2) for the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), the court must consider the following matters:   what arrangements would promote the safety (including safety from being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, abuse, neglect, or other harm) of:  the child, and (ii) each person who has care of the child (whether or not a person has parental responsibility for the child),  any views expressed by the child, (c) the developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs of the child, (d) the capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have parental responsibility for the child to provide for the child’s developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs, (e) the benefit to the child of being able to have a relationship with the child’s parents, and other people who are significant to the child, where it is safe to do so, (f) anything else that is relevant to the particular circumstances of the child.  ) in considering the matters set out in paragraph (2)(a), the court must include consideration of:   any history of family violence, abuse or neglect involving the child or a person caring for the child (whether or not the person had parental responsibility for the child), and (b) any family violence order that applies or has applied to the child or a member of the child’s family.
unacceptable risk
the mother’s complaint to police about the father’s behaviour – mid-2023
save as necessary to effect the changeover as set out in orders 22 and 23 above, the parties be restrained from coming within 20 meters of each other when the delivering or collecting the children to and from the school that the children attend from time to time.
communication between the parties
in the days prior to [late] 2023, i received 7 ourfamilywizard messages and 7 text messages from [mr gavin] accusing me of neglecting [w] because i had not taken her to the doctor. i did not reply to these messages as i did not need [mr gavin]’s help with [w]’s care, and i had already spoken with [dr u] regarding [w]’s prognosis who had advised me that “virus was going around” and that the bed rest and fluids were all [w] needed. i received these text messages despite order 26 requiring all communication to be only through ourfamilywizard regarding [w]’s illness.
children’s behaviour and expressions of fear
the father disciplining x – late 2023
me: “are you ok?” [x]: “daddy asked me to call him. he told me the police saw him.” me: “ok.” [x]: “daddy reminded me that i just slipped.” me: “ok.” [x]: “daddy said the police told him that what he had done was just parenting and it was ok.” [x]: “daddy said he was really sorry that you called the police.” me: “how do you feel about it all?” [x]: “i’m really confused. maybe i did just slip. maybe it was all my fault because if the police agreed with daddy, then it must be true.”
the children’s school and counselling records
supervised visits and emotional pressure on the children
february 2024 : i was shocked that i didn’t see you at all for a couple of months. i was looking for your care. i really wanted to see you. [w]: i was really scared when i saw [a car], and was scared you guys would start arguing and yelling. [mr gavin] calmly explained to [w] that she should not be scared. [mr gavin]: there are obviously issues but we were never yelling at each other.  : mummy said we can’t see each other on my birthday unless we have a supervisor. it’s not fair for me to not spend time with daddy on my birthday. it’s so unfair...it’s like she doesn’t want me to be with you.” [mr gavin]: i am sorry. that’s out of my control.
children: did you have a place booked for christmas? [mr gavin]: yes. children: did you go? [mr gavin]: no. children: you should have gone. [mr gavin]: i didn’t know if you guys were coming or not.   gavin]: [x] come on...those are the rules. [mr gavin]: if we behave, maybe we can change it. [x]: it’s mum of course she won’t change her mind.  : we should be able to call you at any time. i have [a messaging app], i can text you anytime. [mr gavin]: mummy is not going to like that: [x]: well i can when i figure out how to unblock you.
march 2024  gavin]: how did you message me “i love you daddy’? [x]: you are not meant to be sending messages [z]. [mr gavin]: it’s okay. i just loved the message. [x]: we can’t see what you send but you can see what we send.   gavin]: have you had your tablets today? [x]: i don’t remember...i don’t know. [mr gavin]: is mum not going to giving you your tablets? [x]: i don’t remember. do you want me to call mum and ask? [x] then called [ms lavigne] and asked. [x]: mum said that i did. [mr gavin]: i don’t think you have been.   gavin]: we have 7 minutes left. [x]: no we have 17 minutes. [mr gavin]: [x], we have gone through this before. [x]: i didn’t agree with any of these rules...i don’t agree with any of these. [mr gavin]: i understand but that is the rules at the moment. [x]: i am going to have my full 5 hours and then i have 6 and 6.10pm to pack up. mum said 5 hours. she tells me if its 5 hours then its 5 hours. [mr gavin]: the time we have to be at the door is 5.50. [x]: mum is in charge of this and she says 5 hours. [mr gavin]: i am sorry...it’s completely out of my control.  : if we get a birthday day then can i bring [x]. she didn’t have a birthday day. [x]: it’s okay. it’s not fair for me but you don’t have to lose your special time with dad. if you were in control, you would make it fair and you would talk to mum and compromise (this was about the visits and time that [mr gavin] currently had with the children). [y]: i wish we got a say in this. [x]: mum says we don’t need to...mum says we aren’t allowed to [this was in relation to speaking with the icl] [y]: it’s our lawyer. [x]: she probably gets to speak to her lawyer.  : i don’t know why i need to know everything first. mum lets me know everything first too. when you guys were getting separated, mum told me first. [mr gavin] explained that as she was the eldest, he felt like it was respectful to tell her these important things first.   gavin] said words to the effect of “i have for something to tell you. i can’t see you guys anymore on saturdays. it’s too expensive. i am going to try sort it out”. the children appeared upset and distressed. [mr gavin]: it’s distressing to me as well. [y] then hugged [mr gavin]. [mr gavin]: i can’t keep paying for your and [x]’s [extracurricular activities]. i can’t afford for them. i have got to cut back on some things. i am sorry. [y]: i thought mummy was paying for that. [x]: does mummy know? [mr gavin]: yes. [x]: is she angry/upset. [w]: she wants us to see dad...she’s a bit upset that this is all happening. i am crying on the inside but i am too broken to cry now.
april 2024
conclusion with respect to supervised visits
costs of supervision
family therapy and expert reports
...the combination of the children’s different personalities, needs and interactions creates a very intense family dynamic, requiring a high degree of parental vigilance and consistent, calm and responsive parenting.
i think that all the adults need to be exceptionally mindful of the children’s loyalty to both their parents and their grandparents and the heightened need to preserve the integrity these relationships. whenever the children experience criticism or denigration of their parents or grandparents, they experience, confusion, distress, anger, and a range of other negative psychological experiences. the children do not have the emotional or cognitive capacity to understand the nature of the conflict between the father and paternal grandparents and to expose them to this conflict is directly detrimental to the psychological health and their capacity to adjust to their parents’ separation.
conclusion
dated: 12 june 2024
dear w, x, y and z,my name is judge harland. your parents have asked the court for help to work out the best living arrangements for you and i have been asked to make a temporary decision about this. i have thought a lot about you when making this decision having heard about each of you and how you have been feeling. when parents decide to end their relationship, it can be really hard for everyone. there isn’t just one reason parents separate, and it isn’t anyone’s fault. nothing you said or did caused it. you may have a lot of big feelings about your parents’ separation and you might express them in different ways. it can be a sad and confusing time, sometimes people might also feel angry. everyone in the family might feel differently about it and that is alright.when parents separate it can mean big changes for everyone in the family. parents may miss not having their children around all of the time and children may miss the parent who they are not spending time with. children sometimes feel responsible for how their parents feel as they love them and want them to be happy. you can talk to adults you trust about these issues and feelings, like your teachers and your counsellor whenever you want to. i know you love both your parents very much and want to see them both. you have adults around you who want you to feel safe and happy. i have decided that for the moment the best thing is for you to see your dad with a supervisor. this arrangement won’t be in place forever and is just for now whilst your mum and dad get more help to support for them and for you.w, x, y and z, it is most likely you will each have your own feelings about what is going on in your family. some of those feelings will be the same for all of you, and some feelings may be ones that only you have. i listened to what the experts had to say about each one of you, and i thought about you as individuals as well as a group of siblings when i made my decision about your living arrangements. this is a decision i have made, not your mum or your dad. your parents are seeking help from other adults to make things better for all of you. your parents love you all very much. there are people around you who will continue to be there for you. judge harland