last updated: 1 august 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
martine & carmona [2024] fedcfamc2f 800
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility   ms carmona and mr hooper advise the applicant ms martine of the decision to be made and their views and proposal, (b) within fourteen days thereafter ms martine advise ms carmona and mr hooper of her views and proposal, (c) upon receipt of ms martine's views and proposal ms carmona and mr hooper shall give consideration to them, and (d) thereafter, or if ms martine does not respond within the fourteen day period, ms carmona and mr hooper shall make the decision and immediately advise ms martine of the decision that has been made.   within fourteen days thereafter ms martine advise ms carmona and mr hooper of her views and proposal, (c) upon receipt of ms martine's views and proposal ms carmona and mr hooper shall give consideration to them, and (d) thereafter, or if ms martine does not respond within the fourteen day period, ms carmona and mr hooper shall make the decision and immediately advise ms martine of the decision that has been made.   upon receipt of ms martine's views and proposal ms carmona and mr hooper shall give consideration to them, and (d) thereafter, or if ms martine does not respond within the fourteen day period, ms carmona and mr hooper shall make the decision and immediately advise ms martine of the decision that has been made.   thereafter, or if ms martine does not respond within the fourteen day period, ms carmona and mr hooper shall make the decision and immediately advise ms martine of the decision that has been made.
living arrangements
spend time arrangements during school terms  in week one with ms martine from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) until 5.00 pm on sunday commencing the first friday after third term 2024 has started and each third weekend thereafter, (b) in week two with mr hooper from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) until 5.00 pm on sunday commencing on the second friday after third term 2024 has started and each third weekend thereafter, and (c) in week three with ms carmona from the conclusion of school friday (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) until 5.00 pm on sunday commencing on the third friday after third term 2024 has started and each third weekend thereafter.   in week two with mr hooper from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) until 5.00 pm on sunday commencing on the second friday after third term 2024 has started and each third weekend thereafter, and (c) in week three with ms carmona from the conclusion of school friday (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) until 5.00 pm on sunday commencing on the third friday after third term 2024 has started and each third weekend thereafter.   in week three with ms carmona from the conclusion of school friday (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) until 5.00 pm on sunday commencing on the third friday after third term 2024 has started and each third weekend thereafter.
spend time arrangements during school term holidays  during the second term and third term school holidays in 2024: (i) with ms martine from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term for a period of five nights, (ii) thereafter with mr hooper for a period of five nights, and (iii) thereafter the balance with ms carmona. (b) in 2025 and each school term holidays thereafter: (i) for the term one school holidays with ms martine for the first half and mr hooper for the second half, (ii) for the term two school holidays with mr hooper for the first half and ms carmona for the second half, (iii) for the term three school holidays with ms carmona for the first half and ms martine for the second half, and (iv) at such further and other times and days as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.   with ms martine from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term for a period of five nights, (ii) thereafter with mr hooper for a period of five nights, and (iii) thereafter the balance with ms carmona.  ) thereafter with mr hooper for a period of five nights, and (iii) thereafter the balance with ms carmona.  i) thereafter the balance with ms carmona.   in 2025 and each school term holidays thereafter: (i) for the term one school holidays with ms martine for the first half and mr hooper for the second half, (ii) for the term two school holidays with mr hooper for the first half and ms carmona for the second half, (iii) for the term three school holidays with ms carmona for the first half and ms martine for the second half, and (iv) at such further and other times and days as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.   for the term one school holidays with ms martine for the first half and mr hooper for the second half, (ii) for the term two school holidays with mr hooper for the first half and ms carmona for the second half, (iii) for the term three school holidays with ms carmona for the first half and ms martine for the second half, and (iv) at such further and other times and days as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.  ) for the term two school holidays with mr hooper for the first half and ms carmona for the second half, (iii) for the term three school holidays with ms carmona for the first half and ms martine for the second half, and (iv) at such further and other times and days as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.  i) for the term three school holidays with ms carmona for the first half and ms martine for the second half, and (iv) at such further and other times and days as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.  ) at such further and other times and days as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.   the school term holidays are deemed to commence on the last day of the school term and conclude at 12.00 noon on the day preceding the first day of the new school term when x shall be returned to the care of ms carmona, (b) changeovers shall occur at 12.00 noon save for on the last day of school when changeover shall occur at the time school concludes, and (c) if the school term holiday has an uneven number of days, x shall spend the extra day in the care of the party he is in for the first half of the school holiday period.   changeovers shall occur at 12.00 noon save for on the last day of school when changeover shall occur at the time school concludes, and (c) if the school term holiday has an uneven number of days, x shall spend the extra day in the care of the party he is in for the first half of the school holiday period.   if the school term holiday has an uneven number of days, x shall spend the extra day in the care of the party he is in for the first half of the school holiday period.
spend time arrangements during the long summer holidays  during the 2024/2025 long summer holiday on a seven night rotating basis commencing with ms martine, then mr hooper, then ms carmona, then ms martine and the balance with ms carmona, (b) during the 2025/2026 long summer holiday and each third year thereafter, with ms carmona for the first ten nights, ms martine for ten nights thereafter, and mr hooper for ten nights thereafter or such lesser period of time so that x is returned to ms carmona's care at 12.00 noon the day preceding the first day of the school year, (c) during the 2026/2027 long summer holiday and each third year thereafter with mr hooper for the first ten nights, ms carmona for ten nights thereafter, and ms martine for ten nights thereafter or such lesser period of time so that x is returned to ms carmona's care at 12.00 noon the day prior to the commencement of the school year, (d) during the 2027/2028 long summer holiday and each third year thereafter with ms martine for the first ten nights, mr hooper for ten nights thereafter and ms carmona for the balance, and (e) at such further and other times and dates as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.   during the 2025/2026 long summer holiday and each third year thereafter, with ms carmona for the first ten nights, ms martine for ten nights thereafter, and mr hooper for ten nights thereafter or such lesser period of time so that x is returned to ms carmona's care at 12.00 noon the day preceding the first day of the school year, (c) during the 2026/2027 long summer holiday and each third year thereafter with mr hooper for the first ten nights, ms carmona for ten nights thereafter, and ms martine for ten nights thereafter or such lesser period of time so that x is returned to ms carmona's care at 12.00 noon the day prior to the commencement of the school year, (d) during the 2027/2028 long summer holiday and each third year thereafter with ms martine for the first ten nights, mr hooper for ten nights thereafter and ms carmona for the balance, and (e) at such further and other times and dates as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.   during the 2026/2027 long summer holiday and each third year thereafter with mr hooper for the first ten nights, ms carmona for ten nights thereafter, and ms martine for ten nights thereafter or such lesser period of time so that x is returned to ms carmona's care at 12.00 noon the day prior to the commencement of the school year, (d) during the 2027/2028 long summer holiday and each third year thereafter with ms martine for the first ten nights, mr hooper for ten nights thereafter and ms carmona for the balance, and (e) at such further and other times and dates as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.   during the 2027/2028 long summer holiday and each third year thereafter with ms martine for the first ten nights, mr hooper for ten nights thereafter and ms carmona for the balance, and (e) at such further and other times and dates as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.   at such further and other times and dates as may be agreed between the party who seeks the change, the party requested to change and any other party who may be affected by the change.   the long summer holidays are deemed to commence at 12.00 noon on boxing day and conclude at 12.00 noon on the day preceding the start of the new school year, and (b) changeovers shall occur at 12.00 noon.   changeovers shall occur at 12.00 noon.
arrangements on special occasions  from 12.00 noon christmas eve until 12.00 noon boxing day with ms carmona in 2024 and each third year thereafter, (b) from 12.00 noon christmas eve until 12.00 noon boxing day with mr hooper in 2025 and each third year thereafter, and (c) from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon boxing day with ms martine in 2026 and each third year thereafter.   from 12.00 noon christmas eve until 12.00 noon boxing day with mr hooper in 2025 and each third year thereafter, and (c) from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon boxing day with ms martine in 2026 and each third year thereafter.   from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon boxing day with ms martine in 2026 and each third year thereafter.   with mr hooper from the conclusion of school (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) on the friday preceding father's day until 5:00 pm sunday, (b) with ms carmona in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter from the conclusion of school (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) on the friday preceding mother's day until 5:00 pm sunday, and (c) with ms martine in 2026 and each alternate year thereafter from the conclusion of school (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) on the friday preceding mother's day until 5:00 pm sunday.   with ms carmona in 2025 and each alternate year thereafter from the conclusion of school (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) on the friday preceding mother's day until 5:00 pm sunday, and (c) with ms martine in 2026 and each alternate year thereafter from the conclusion of school (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) on the friday preceding mother's day until 5:00 pm sunday.   with ms martine in 2026 and each alternate year thereafter from the conclusion of school (or 4.00 pm if a non-school day) on the friday preceding mother's day until 5:00 pm sunday.
changeovers  between ms carmona and ms martine at woolworths suburb c in city d unless otherwise agreed in writing between them, (b) between ms martine and mr hooper at suburb e unless otherwise agreed in writing between them, and (c) between ms carmona and mr hooper at ms carmona's home unless otherwise agreed in writing between them.   between ms martine and mr hooper at suburb e unless otherwise agreed in writing between them, and (c) between ms carmona and mr hooper at ms carmona's home unless otherwise agreed in writing between them.   between ms carmona and mr hooper at ms carmona's home unless otherwise agreed in writing between them.
communication  with ms martine each thursday between 6.30 pm and 7.00 pm, (b) with mr hooper each tuesday between 6.30 pm and 7.00 pm, (c) with ms carmona when he is not in her care each wednesday between 6.30 pm and 7.00 pm, (d) with each party at x's request with the party he is in the care of to facilitate x initiating the communication, and (e) at such further and other times as may be agreed in writing.   with mr hooper each tuesday between 6.30 pm and 7.00 pm, (c) with ms carmona when he is not in her care each wednesday between 6.30 pm and 7.00 pm, (d) with each party at x's request with the party he is in the care of to facilitate x initiating the communication, and (e) at such further and other times as may be agreed in writing.   with ms carmona when he is not in her care each wednesday between 6.30 pm and 7.00 pm, (d) with each party at x's request with the party he is in the care of to facilitate x initiating the communication, and (e) at such further and other times as may be agreed in writing.   with each party at x's request with the party he is in the care of to facilitate x initiating the communication, and (e) at such further and other times as may be agreed in writing.   at such further and other times as may be agreed in writing.   the party communicating with x pursuant to order 17 herein shall initiate the call except for communications pursuant to order 17(d), (b) the communication may be by video or telephone, and (c) the call shall be initiated to x's ipad/tablet or such other electronic device as may be agreed between the party initiating the call and the party in whose care x is at the time of the call.   the communication may be by video or telephone, and (c) the call shall be initiated to x's ipad/tablet or such other electronic device as may be agreed between the party initiating the call and the party in whose care x is at the time of the call.   the call shall be initiated to x's ipad/tablet or such other electronic device as may be agreed between the party initiating the call and the party in whose care x is at the time of the call.
contact details
schooling and extra-curricular activities  receive copies of x's school newsletters, reports and photographs or the like at their own expense and be at liberty to receive all notices, reports and correspondence from any club or extra-curricular activity in which x is engaged, (b) liaise directly with x's school, after school care and extra-curricular provider to obtain any necessary information, (c) attend all events at x's school, after school and extra-curricular activity to which parents are ordinarily invited, and (d) attend parent teacher interviews provided they attend separate interviews unless otherwise agreed in writing.   liaise directly with x's school, after school care and extra-curricular provider to obtain any necessary information, (c) attend all events at x's school, after school and extra-curricular activity to which parents are ordinarily invited, and (d) attend parent teacher interviews provided they attend separate interviews unless otherwise agreed in writing.   attend all events at x's school, after school and extra-curricular activity to which parents are ordinarily invited, and (d) attend parent teacher interviews provided they attend separate interviews unless otherwise agreed in writing.   attend parent teacher interviews provided they attend separate interviews unless otherwise agreed in writing.
medical  is at liberty to communicate with x's medical practitioners and allied health practitioners in relation to x at their own expense, and this order provides the authority for same, (b) shall comply with all reasonable directions of x's medical practitioners and allied health practitioners, and (c) shall administer all medication prescribed for x in strict accordance with the directions for administration.   shall comply with all reasonable directions of x's medical practitioners and allied health practitioners, and (c) shall administer all medication prescribed for x in strict accordance with the directions for administration.   shall administer all medication prescribed for x in strict accordance with the directions for administration.   any significant illness, accident or injury suffered by x whilst in their care, (b) any significant medical or dental treatment provided to x whilst in their care, and (c) any medication x is to take whilst he is in the care of another party, including the dosage, and such medication is to be provided to the party into whose care x is entering at changeover.   any significant medical or dental treatment provided to x whilst in their care, and (c) any medication x is to take whilst he is in the care of another party, including the dosage, and such medication is to be provided to the party into whose care x is entering at changeover.   any medication x is to take whilst he is in the care of another party, including the dosage, and such medication is to be provided to the party into whose care x is entering at changeover.
restraints  denigrating the other parties, and/or the other parties' family members or partner while x is in their presence or hearing, and/or allowing x to remain in the presence or hearing of any third party who is denigrating the other parties or the other parties’ family or partner, and (b) physically disciplining x or allowing any other person to do so.   physically disciplining x or allowing any other person to do so.
travel  the country/ies to which x is travelling is a signatory to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international children abduction, (b) the country/ies to which x is travelling is not listed as a "do not travel" on the smart traveller website, (c) the travelling party provides the other parties with a copy of the travel itinerary including evidence of return flights, accommodation details including the address of such accommodation and contact details for the duration of the travel, no less than eight (8) weeks prior to the intended travel date, (d) the travelling party provides to the other parties not less than two (2) weeks prior to departure, copies of certificates of travel insurance which include medical cover for x and the travelling party, which cover x and the travelling party for each relevant destination and duration of travel, (e) if there are any changes to the itinerary then the travelling party provide that information to the parties forthwith, and (f) the non-travelling parties be at liberty to communicate with x via telephone and/or videocall during the travel and the travelling party shall facilitate any reasonable request by x for such communication.   the country/ies to which x is travelling is not listed as a "do not travel" on the smart traveller website, (c) the travelling party provides the other parties with a copy of the travel itinerary including evidence of return flights, accommodation details including the address of such accommodation and contact details for the duration of the travel, no less than eight (8) weeks prior to the intended travel date, (d) the travelling party provides to the other parties not less than two (2) weeks prior to departure, copies of certificates of travel insurance which include medical cover for x and the travelling party, which cover x and the travelling party for each relevant destination and duration of travel, (e) if there are any changes to the itinerary then the travelling party provide that information to the parties forthwith, and (f) the non-travelling parties be at liberty to communicate with x via telephone and/or videocall during the travel and the travelling party shall facilitate any reasonable request by x for such communication.   the travelling party provides the other parties with a copy of the travel itinerary including evidence of return flights, accommodation details including the address of such accommodation and contact details for the duration of the travel, no less than eight (8) weeks prior to the intended travel date, (d) the travelling party provides to the other parties not less than two (2) weeks prior to departure, copies of certificates of travel insurance which include medical cover for x and the travelling party, which cover x and the travelling party for each relevant destination and duration of travel, (e) if there are any changes to the itinerary then the travelling party provide that information to the parties forthwith, and (f) the non-travelling parties be at liberty to communicate with x via telephone and/or videocall during the travel and the travelling party shall facilitate any reasonable request by x for such communication.   the travelling party provides to the other parties not less than two (2) weeks prior to departure, copies of certificates of travel insurance which include medical cover for x and the travelling party, which cover x and the travelling party for each relevant destination and duration of travel, (e) if there are any changes to the itinerary then the travelling party provide that information to the parties forthwith, and (f) the non-travelling parties be at liberty to communicate with x via telephone and/or videocall during the travel and the travelling party shall facilitate any reasonable request by x for such communication.   if there are any changes to the itinerary then the travelling party provide that information to the parties forthwith, and (f) the non-travelling parties be at liberty to communicate with x via telephone and/or videocall during the travel and the travelling party shall facilitate any reasonable request by x for such communication.   the non-travelling parties be at liberty to communicate with x via telephone and/or videocall during the travel and the travelling party shall facilitate any reasonable request by x for such communication.
miscellaneous
reasons for judgment
judge boymal   ms martine and ms carmona have equal shared parental responsibility for x, (b) x live in an equal shared care arrangement during the school week between ms martine and ms carmona in the pattern of monday to wednesday with ms martine, and from wednesday to friday with ms carmona, (c) x spend time with ms martine, ms carmona, and mr hooper during school terms on weekends in a three-week cycle and during school holidays, and (d) x remain enrolled in h school, which is now known by a different name.   x live in an equal shared care arrangement during the school week between ms martine and ms carmona in the pattern of monday to wednesday with ms martine, and from wednesday to friday with ms carmona, (c) x spend time with ms martine, ms carmona, and mr hooper during school terms on weekends in a three-week cycle and during school holidays, and (d) x remain enrolled in h school, which is now known by a different name.   x spend time with ms martine, ms carmona, and mr hooper during school terms on weekends in a three-week cycle and during school holidays, and (d) x remain enrolled in h school, which is now known by a different name.   x remain enrolled in h school, which is now known by a different name.   x live with ms carmona, (b) x spend time with ms martine each alternate weekend, (c) x spend time with mr hooper as agreed with ms carmona, and (d) x continue attending b school.   x spend time with ms martine each alternate weekend, (c) x spend time with mr hooper as agreed with ms carmona, and (d) x continue attending b school.   x spend time with mr hooper as agreed with ms carmona, and (d) x continue attending b school.   x continue attending b school.   ms carmona and mr hooper have equal shared parental responsibility for x, (b) x live with ms carmona, (c) x spend time with ms martine, (d) x spend time with mr hooper, and (e) x continue attending b school.   x live with ms carmona, (c) x spend time with ms martine, (d) x spend time with mr hooper, and (e) x continue attending b school.   x spend time with ms martine, (d) x spend time with mr hooper, and (e) x continue attending b school.   x spend time with mr hooper, and (e) x continue attending b school.   x continue attending b school.
the proposals   ms martine seeks that she have sole parental responsibility, (b) ms carmona seeks that she and mr hooper have equal shared parental responsibility, (c) mr hooper, whilst initially seeking that he have sole parental responsibility, takes no objection to sharing parental responsibility with ms carmona, and (d) the independent children’s lawyer’s (icl) primary position is for ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper to share parental responsibility. his alternative position is for mr hooper to have sole parental responsibility. he takes no objection to ms carmona and mr hooper sharing parental responsibility.   ms carmona seeks that she and mr hooper have equal shared parental responsibility, (c) mr hooper, whilst initially seeking that he have sole parental responsibility, takes no objection to sharing parental responsibility with ms carmona, and (d) the independent children’s lawyer’s (icl) primary position is for ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper to share parental responsibility. his alternative position is for mr hooper to have sole parental responsibility. he takes no objection to ms carmona and mr hooper sharing parental responsibility.   mr hooper, whilst initially seeking that he have sole parental responsibility, takes no objection to sharing parental responsibility with ms carmona, and (d) the independent children’s lawyer’s (icl) primary position is for ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper to share parental responsibility. his alternative position is for mr hooper to have sole parental responsibility. he takes no objection to ms carmona and mr hooper sharing parental responsibility.   the independent children’s lawyer’s (icl) primary position is for ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper to share parental responsibility. his alternative position is for mr hooper to have sole parental responsibility. he takes no objection to ms carmona and mr hooper sharing parental responsibility.   ms martine seeks that x live with her, (b) ms carmona seeks that x live with her, (c) mr hooper seeks that x live with ms carmona, and (d) the icl seeks that x live with ms carmona.   ms carmona seeks that x live with her, (c) mr hooper seeks that x live with ms carmona, and (d) the icl seeks that x live with ms carmona.   mr hooper seeks that x live with ms carmona, and (d) the icl seeks that x live with ms carmona.   the icl seeks that x live with ms carmona.   all parties seek that x spend time with each parent during school terms on one weekend in a three-week cycle from the conclusion of school on friday. ms martine seeks that time concludes at the commencement of school on monday. the other parties seek that time concludes at 5.00 pm on sunday, (b) all parties seek that x spend time with the parents during school holiday periods. it is the configuration of time that is in dispute, and (c) ms martine seeks that on special occasions x have a video call with the parents with whom he is not in the care pursuant to the live with and spend time orders on those occasions. the other parties seek specified face to face time on special occasions.   all parties seek that x spend time with the parents during school holiday periods. it is the configuration of time that is in dispute, and (c) ms martine seeks that on special occasions x have a video call with the parents with whom he is not in the care pursuant to the live with and spend time orders on those occasions. the other parties seek specified face to face time on special occasions.   ms martine seeks that on special occasions x have a video call with the parents with whom he is not in the care pursuant to the live with and spend time orders on those occasions. the other parties seek specified face to face time on special occasions.   ms martine seeks that x attend h school, and (b) all other parties seek that x continue to attend b school.   all other parties seek that x continue to attend b school.
the hearing  child inclusive conference memorandum by family consultant ms k dated 30 june 2020, (b) family report by ms l dated 6 august 2021, (c) summary of therapeutic family therapy sessions by ms n undated (late december 2022), (d) child impact report by ms m dated 27 april 2023, (e) section 67z report dated 6 march 2023, and (f) family report by dr o dated 21 september 2023.   family report by ms l dated 6 august 2021, (c) summary of therapeutic family therapy sessions by ms n undated (late december 2022), (d) child impact report by ms m dated 27 april 2023, (e) section 67z report dated 6 march 2023, and (f) family report by dr o dated 21 september 2023.   summary of therapeutic family therapy sessions by ms n undated (late december 2022), (d) child impact report by ms m dated 27 april 2023, (e) section 67z report dated 6 march 2023, and (f) family report by dr o dated 21 september 2023.   child impact report by ms m dated 27 april 2023, (e) section 67z report dated 6 march 2023, and (f) family report by dr o dated 21 september 2023.   section 67z report dated 6 march 2023, and (f) family report by dr o dated 21 september 2023.   family report by dr o dated 21 september 2023.
the parents
the evidence
prior to physical separation
...she quit her job in 2014, she did not have a full-time job until [mid] 2020... she was away in august 2015 for two weeks but [ms carmona] and [x] went with her, in december 2015 she was away maybe two or three nights, from january 2015 to march 2015 she was in melbourne a handful of nights, in december 2016 she was away for two weeks, that through 2016 she was away a couple of days here and there, in august 2017 to the end of april 2018 she was [interstate] and came home on alternate weekends and did all the washing and cleaning of the house. [in] january 2019 [ms carmona] took off with [x] for three or four days, in february 2019 [ms martine] said that she was away for a week and again in march.[7]
the circumstances of the physical separation
on [...] an unspecified date the afm and resp were having a verbal argument in regards to their sons immunisations as the afm wanted to take their son out of the house but the resp wanted him inoculated before he got sick. this lead (sic) to the resp making indirect threats towards the afm by saying “i want his injections done before we lose him, or he will die and i will kill you.
commencement of proceedings  ms martine and ms carmona have equal shared parental responsibility for x, (b) x live in an equal shared care arrangement between ms martine and ms carmona on a week-about basis, and that he spend time with the mother with whom he was not residing on two afternoons each week, and (c) ms martine and ms carmona do all things necessary to facilitate x attending h school.   x live in an equal shared care arrangement between ms martine and ms carmona on a week-about basis, and that he spend time with the mother with whom he was not residing on two afternoons each week, and (c) ms martine and ms carmona do all things necessary to facilitate x attending h school.   ms martine and ms carmona do all things necessary to facilitate x attending h school.
the child inclusive conference memorandum dated 30 june 2020  opined that “from some of his comments, the writer questions as to whether he may have been influenced in some of his responding by [ms carmona]”, and (b) suggested that until further information is gathered and whilst longer-term decisions are being considered, it would benefit x to live with ms martine, spend substantial and significant time with ms carmona including alternate weekends and half of school holidays, and for x to remain enrolled in h school pending longer term decisions as to his living and spend time arrangements.   suggested that until further information is gathered and whilst longer-term decisions are being considered, it would benefit x to live with ms martine, spend substantial and significant time with ms carmona including alternate weekends and half of school holidays, and for x to remain enrolled in h school pending longer term decisions as to his living and spend time arrangements.
amended application and response  she have sole parental responsibility for x, (b) x live with her, (c) x spend alternate weekends with ms carmona during school terms from friday until monday, and (d) x continue his schooling at h school.   x live with her, (c) x spend alternate weekends with ms carmona during school terms from friday until monday, and (d) x continue his schooling at h school.   x spend alternate weekends with ms carmona during school terms from friday until monday, and (d) x continue his schooling at h school.   x continue his schooling at h school.   he be added to the proceedings as second respondent, (b) ms carmona have sole parental responsibility for x, (c) x live with ms carmona, and (d) x spend time with ms martine each alternate weekend.   ms carmona have sole parental responsibility for x, (c) x live with ms carmona, and (d) x spend time with ms martine each alternate weekend.   x live with ms carmona, and (d) x spend time with ms martine each alternate weekend.   x spend time with ms martine each alternate weekend.   the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x, (b) x live with her, (c) x spend time with ms martine from the conclusion of school wednesday until the commencement of school friday each week and additionally every third weekend, and (d) x spend time with mr hooper every third weekend.   x live with her, (c) x spend time with ms martine from the conclusion of school wednesday until the commencement of school friday each week and additionally every third weekend, and (d) x spend time with mr hooper every third weekend.   x spend time with ms martine from the conclusion of school wednesday until the commencement of school friday each week and additionally every third weekend, and (d) x spend time with mr hooper every third weekend.   x spend time with mr hooper every third weekend.
16 july 2020 orders  x live week-about between ms martine and ms carmona, (b) x spend time and communicate with mr hooper during the times x spends with ms carmona as agreed between them, (c) x continue attending h school, and (d) the parties attend upon dr s for the purpose of the preparation of a report.   x spend time and communicate with mr hooper during the times x spends with ms carmona as agreed between them, (c) x continue attending h school, and (d) the parties attend upon dr s for the purpose of the preparation of a report.   x continue attending h school, and (d) the parties attend upon dr s for the purpose of the preparation of a report.   the parties attend upon dr s for the purpose of the preparation of a report.
dr s’s report
ms l’s family report dated 6 august 2021  a very high level of conflict between ms martine and ms carmona as well as between ms martine and mr hooper, (b) a very limited to poor communication between ms martine and ms carmona as well as between ms martine and mr hooper, and (c) whether ms martine facilitates x having a relationship with mr hooper.   a very limited to poor communication between ms martine and ms carmona as well as between ms martine and mr hooper, and (c) whether ms martine facilitates x having a relationship with mr hooper.   whether ms martine facilitates x having a relationship with mr hooper.
it is my view that [ms martine] seemed to be meeting the intellectual needs, social needs, health needs and day to day emotional needs of [x] but [ms martine] is also lacking insight into [x’s] emotional well-being by not acknowledging how [mr hooper] is a significant person in [x’s] life which needs to continue for [x’s] overall emotional well-being. [ms carmona] appeared to be lacking insight into [x’s] overall emotional needs, but appeared to meet his day to day emotional needs, his intellectual needs, social needs and health needs. [x’s] overall emotional needs remain in jeopardy given the conflict between [ms martine] and [ms carmona] as well as between [ms martine] and [mr hooper].[10]
counsel for [ms martine]: how much time did you really want [x] to spend with [ms martine]? [ms carmona]: i wanted it to be like it had always been. [ms martine] periodically would pop in and spend time with [x] and then disappear for however long and [x] would just stay living with me like he always did and see his father. counsel for [ms martine]: when you say “pop in”, are you talking about once a week, once a fortnight, once a month, once a year? [ms carmona]: sometimes not for six weeks, sometimes wouldn’t see her for two months. she is just off working. counsel for [ms martine]: so, your view was – what you wanted was minimal time? [ms carmona]: no. i wanted [ms martine] to have as much time with [x] as she could muster up. counsel for [ms martine]: then over the page you wanted her to have one out of three weekends from after school or 3.30 friday until 9 am monday one out of three weekends? so you were giving her one out of three weekends? [ms carmona]: yes. counsel for [ms martine]: yes. but you didn’t really want that, did you? [ms carmona]: i agreed to it because we had to come to an agreement but i still again stand to my word. i wanted to be able to cater for [ms martine’s] needs, how she could however see [x].
counsel for [ms martine]: the reality is, i put it to you, you didn’t put school holiday time in there because you really didn’t want [x] to have school holiday time with [ms martine]? [ms carmona]: no, i have always encouraged [ms martine] and [x’s] relationship since birth because [ms martine] was only periodically in his life and i always made sure he was available for when she was at home and wanted to spend time with him. counsel for [ms martine]: okay? [ms carmona]: but then she would spend 10 minutes with him and i would say that’s not much, and she goes it’s not the amount of time you spend with the child, it’s the quality time and i go he’s not even two, so we go from there. counsel for [ms martine]: my client disagrees with your version of the care arrangements prior to 2019. do you accept she disagrees with it? [ms carmona]: she would disagree but if she provided her work diaries you would see she wasn’t there. she didn’t live with us.
11 august 2021 interim consent orders  the parties attend a family dispute resolution conference on 1 december 2021, (b) x live with ms martine and ms carmona on a week about basis, (c) the interim live with and spend time orders made on 16 july 2020 remain in full force and effect, (d) order 25(a): each party be at liberty to attend upon the general practitioner at t medical centre for the purposes of x’s day to day health care, (e) order 25(b)(iii): each party must advise the other of any appointment that they have attended with x within 24 hours of the appointment occurring, (f) order 25(d): each of the parties will administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time that x is in their care, and (g) order 27: ms martine and ms carmona do all acts and things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u.   x live with ms martine and ms carmona on a week about basis, (c) the interim live with and spend time orders made on 16 july 2020 remain in full force and effect, (d) order 25(a): each party be at liberty to attend upon the general practitioner at t medical centre for the purposes of x’s day to day health care, (e) order 25(b)(iii): each party must advise the other of any appointment that they have attended with x within 24 hours of the appointment occurring, (f) order 25(d): each of the parties will administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time that x is in their care, and (g) order 27: ms martine and ms carmona do all acts and things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u.   the interim live with and spend time orders made on 16 july 2020 remain in full force and effect, (d) order 25(a): each party be at liberty to attend upon the general practitioner at t medical centre for the purposes of x’s day to day health care, (e) order 25(b)(iii): each party must advise the other of any appointment that they have attended with x within 24 hours of the appointment occurring, (f) order 25(d): each of the parties will administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time that x is in their care, and (g) order 27: ms martine and ms carmona do all acts and things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u.   order 25(a): each party be at liberty to attend upon the general practitioner at t medical centre for the purposes of x’s day to day health care, (e) order 25(b)(iii): each party must advise the other of any appointment that they have attended with x within 24 hours of the appointment occurring, (f) order 25(d): each of the parties will administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time that x is in their care, and (g) order 27: ms martine and ms carmona do all acts and things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u.   order 25(b)(iii): each party must advise the other of any appointment that they have attended with x within 24 hours of the appointment occurring, (f) order 25(d): each of the parties will administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time that x is in their care, and (g) order 27: ms martine and ms carmona do all acts and things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u.   order 25(d): each of the parties will administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time that x is in their care, and (g) order 27: ms martine and ms carmona do all acts and things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u.   order 27: ms martine and ms carmona do all acts and things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u.
1 december 2021 final consent orders  ms martine and ms carmona have equal shared parental responsibility for x, (b) x live with ms martine and ms carmona on a shared care basis and spend time with mr hooper, (c) order 6: x receive all immunisations/vaccinations that are mandated for his age by state legislation, consented to by all parties, or ordered by the court, (d) order 7.1: for the purpose of any medical treatment of x each party be at liberty to attend upon a general practitioner at t medical centre for the purposes of the day to day health care of x (the same as order 25(a) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (e) order 7.2(iii): each party advise the other parties of any medical appointment they have attended with x within 24 hours of the appointment occurring and any medication x is prescribed or medically advised to take whilst he is in the other’s care including the dosage (the same as order 25(b)(iii) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (f) order 7.4: each party administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time x is in their care (the same as order 25(d) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (g) order 8: ms martine and ms carmona do all things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u, and ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper may attend upon any appointments for this purpose and must do all things necessary, including completing any documents and assessment paperwork, necessary for such assessment (a more comprehensive order than order 27 of the 11 august 2021 orders), (h) order 9: x remain enrolled in h school unless agreed otherwise by ms martine and ms carmona, and (i) order 10: ms martine and ms carmona engage and facilitate x’s attendance upon a family therapist/counsellor, with the counsellor being ms n or such other therapist nominated by the icl if they are unable to agree on a suitable person within 21 days. the costs of such therapy be borne equally by the mothers with both facilitating mental health care plans to defray the cost.   x live with ms martine and ms carmona on a shared care basis and spend time with mr hooper, (c) order 6: x receive all immunisations/vaccinations that are mandated for his age by state legislation, consented to by all parties, or ordered by the court, (d) order 7.1: for the purpose of any medical treatment of x each party be at liberty to attend upon a general practitioner at t medical centre for the purposes of the day to day health care of x (the same as order 25(a) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (e) order 7.2(iii): each party advise the other parties of any medical appointment they have attended with x within 24 hours of the appointment occurring and any medication x is prescribed or medically advised to take whilst he is in the other’s care including the dosage (the same as order 25(b)(iii) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (f) order 7.4: each party administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time x is in their care (the same as order 25(d) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (g) order 8: ms martine and ms carmona do all things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u, and ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper may attend upon any appointments for this purpose and must do all things necessary, including completing any documents and assessment paperwork, necessary for such assessment (a more comprehensive order than order 27 of the 11 august 2021 orders), (h) order 9: x remain enrolled in h school unless agreed otherwise by ms martine and ms carmona, and (i) order 10: ms martine and ms carmona engage and facilitate x’s attendance upon a family therapist/counsellor, with the counsellor being ms n or such other therapist nominated by the icl if they are unable to agree on a suitable person within 21 days. the costs of such therapy be borne equally by the mothers with both facilitating mental health care plans to defray the cost.   order 6: x receive all immunisations/vaccinations that are mandated for his age by state legislation, consented to by all parties, or ordered by the court, (d) order 7.1: for the purpose of any medical treatment of x each party be at liberty to attend upon a general practitioner at t medical centre for the purposes of the day to day health care of x (the same as order 25(a) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (e) order 7.2(iii): each party advise the other parties of any medical appointment they have attended with x within 24 hours of the appointment occurring and any medication x is prescribed or medically advised to take whilst he is in the other’s care including the dosage (the same as order 25(b)(iii) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (f) order 7.4: each party administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time x is in their care (the same as order 25(d) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (g) order 8: ms martine and ms carmona do all things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u, and ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper may attend upon any appointments for this purpose and must do all things necessary, including completing any documents and assessment paperwork, necessary for such assessment (a more comprehensive order than order 27 of the 11 august 2021 orders), (h) order 9: x remain enrolled in h school unless agreed otherwise by ms martine and ms carmona, and (i) order 10: ms martine and ms carmona engage and facilitate x’s attendance upon a family therapist/counsellor, with the counsellor being ms n or such other therapist nominated by the icl if they are unable to agree on a suitable person within 21 days. the costs of such therapy be borne equally by the mothers with both facilitating mental health care plans to defray the cost.   order 7.1: for the purpose of any medical treatment of x each party be at liberty to attend upon a general practitioner at t medical centre for the purposes of the day to day health care of x (the same as order 25(a) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (e) order 7.2(iii): each party advise the other parties of any medical appointment they have attended with x within 24 hours of the appointment occurring and any medication x is prescribed or medically advised to take whilst he is in the other’s care including the dosage (the same as order 25(b)(iii) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (f) order 7.4: each party administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time x is in their care (the same as order 25(d) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (g) order 8: ms martine and ms carmona do all things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u, and ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper may attend upon any appointments for this purpose and must do all things necessary, including completing any documents and assessment paperwork, necessary for such assessment (a more comprehensive order than order 27 of the 11 august 2021 orders), (h) order 9: x remain enrolled in h school unless agreed otherwise by ms martine and ms carmona, and (i) order 10: ms martine and ms carmona engage and facilitate x’s attendance upon a family therapist/counsellor, with the counsellor being ms n or such other therapist nominated by the icl if they are unable to agree on a suitable person within 21 days. the costs of such therapy be borne equally by the mothers with both facilitating mental health care plans to defray the cost.   order 7.2(iii): each party advise the other parties of any medical appointment they have attended with x within 24 hours of the appointment occurring and any medication x is prescribed or medically advised to take whilst he is in the other’s care including the dosage (the same as order 25(b)(iii) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (f) order 7.4: each party administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time x is in their care (the same as order 25(d) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (g) order 8: ms martine and ms carmona do all things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u, and ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper may attend upon any appointments for this purpose and must do all things necessary, including completing any documents and assessment paperwork, necessary for such assessment (a more comprehensive order than order 27 of the 11 august 2021 orders), (h) order 9: x remain enrolled in h school unless agreed otherwise by ms martine and ms carmona, and (i) order 10: ms martine and ms carmona engage and facilitate x’s attendance upon a family therapist/counsellor, with the counsellor being ms n or such other therapist nominated by the icl if they are unable to agree on a suitable person within 21 days. the costs of such therapy be borne equally by the mothers with both facilitating mental health care plans to defray the cost.   order 7.4: each party administer any prescribed medication or continue any advised medical treatment for x during the time x is in their care (the same as order 25(d) in the 11 august 2021 orders), (g) order 8: ms martine and ms carmona do all things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u, and ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper may attend upon any appointments for this purpose and must do all things necessary, including completing any documents and assessment paperwork, necessary for such assessment (a more comprehensive order than order 27 of the 11 august 2021 orders), (h) order 9: x remain enrolled in h school unless agreed otherwise by ms martine and ms carmona, and (i) order 10: ms martine and ms carmona engage and facilitate x’s attendance upon a family therapist/counsellor, with the counsellor being ms n or such other therapist nominated by the icl if they are unable to agree on a suitable person within 21 days. the costs of such therapy be borne equally by the mothers with both facilitating mental health care plans to defray the cost.   order 8: ms martine and ms carmona do all things necessary for x to undergo a full paediatric assessment by dr u, and ms martine, ms carmona and mr hooper may attend upon any appointments for this purpose and must do all things necessary, including completing any documents and assessment paperwork, necessary for such assessment (a more comprehensive order than order 27 of the 11 august 2021 orders), (h) order 9: x remain enrolled in h school unless agreed otherwise by ms martine and ms carmona, and (i) order 10: ms martine and ms carmona engage and facilitate x’s attendance upon a family therapist/counsellor, with the counsellor being ms n or such other therapist nominated by the icl if they are unable to agree on a suitable person within 21 days. the costs of such therapy be borne equally by the mothers with both facilitating mental health care plans to defray the cost.   order 9: x remain enrolled in h school unless agreed otherwise by ms martine and ms carmona, and (i) order 10: ms martine and ms carmona engage and facilitate x’s attendance upon a family therapist/counsellor, with the counsellor being ms n or such other therapist nominated by the icl if they are unable to agree on a suitable person within 21 days. the costs of such therapy be borne equally by the mothers with both facilitating mental health care plans to defray the cost.   order 10: ms martine and ms carmona engage and facilitate x’s attendance upon a family therapist/counsellor, with the counsellor being ms n or such other therapist nominated by the icl if they are unable to agree on a suitable person within 21 days. the costs of such therapy be borne equally by the mothers with both facilitating mental health care plans to defray the cost.   ms martine has agreed to be responsible for the school fees of x’s attendance at h school, and (b) these orders have been agreed upon on the basis that each of ms martine and ms carmona intend to reside within 20km of town f following their re-housing following settlement of the property proceedings.   these orders have been agreed upon on the basis that each of ms martine and ms carmona intend to reside within 20km of town f following their re-housing following settlement of the property proceedings.
difficulties in relation to the covid vaccination for x
hi [ms carmona], i have concerns about this newly announced / first young children’s covid vaccine. at present i do not consent to a covid vaccination for [x] so please do not book him in nor have this particular vaccination administered. in the interim i will seek advice about this. thank you [ms martine].
hi i have been tested positive to covid 19 and isolating [...], double vax and still been hit by it [ms martine] can you offer some insight as to your reason to not get allow (sic) [x] to be vaccinated? rather than avoid another costly court appearance. it is my understanding that the family court has a pro vaccination stance, and we would all like to avoid any further proceedings.
all i can do is what i think is appropriate in this instance it is/was [as per message on 12 december], that i be given time to look into what is proposed for children [x’s] age before i make my decision. flowing on from that i’m happy to discuss aspects that have implications for [x].
in regards to [x], my understanding is you want more time to understand the impact of vaccination on younger children?
have you got a specific time frame to avoid any more court or conflict, perhaps [t medical centre] could offer some advice on the matter too.
from my perspective being double vax and having relatively milder symptoms (fatigue sweats and sore throat) i am very supportive of the vaccinations, i also understand the impacts on children are different, perhaps avoiding high risk areas with [x] in the meantime. (emphasis added)
there should be an informed decision as opposed to a rushed one, so yes i would like a chance to look into this further and no i don’t have a specific timeline as it is dependant on availability & location of the relevant information. i think it is important to understand aspects around immune response and infections as well as aspects relating to the vaccines as it relates to the younger age groups in particular, for both short-term and long-term.   on 19 january 2022, a letter from ms carmona’s lawyers to ms martine’s lawyers seeking confirmation as to whether ms martine consents to x being vaccinated against covid and advising failing consent they hold instructions to commence proceedings,[18] (b) on 3 february 2022, a letter from ms carmona’s lawyers to ms martine’s lawyers regarding parenting arrangements for x and requesting a response to the 19 january 2022 letter,[19] (c) on 11 february 2022, a letter from ms carmona’s lawyers to ms martine’s lawyers requesting a response to the 19 january letter,[20] and (d) finally, on 24 february 2022, a reply from ms martine’s lawyers to ms carmona’s lawyers confirming ms martine did not consider it necessary or desirable for x to be vaccinated against covid. this letter further speculated that following infection the risk of reinfection is reduced for six months and therefore “it would be reasonable to defer consideration of a vaccination for up to six months”. ultimately, ms martine sought a roundtable to exchange views before ms carmona instituted proceedings.[21]   on 3 february 2022, a letter from ms carmona’s lawyers to ms martine’s lawyers regarding parenting arrangements for x and requesting a response to the 19 january 2022 letter,[19] (c) on 11 february 2022, a letter from ms carmona’s lawyers to ms martine’s lawyers requesting a response to the 19 january letter,[20] and (d) finally, on 24 february 2022, a reply from ms martine’s lawyers to ms carmona’s lawyers confirming ms martine did not consider it necessary or desirable for x to be vaccinated against covid. this letter further speculated that following infection the risk of reinfection is reduced for six months and therefore “it would be reasonable to defer consideration of a vaccination for up to six months”. ultimately, ms martine sought a roundtable to exchange views before ms carmona instituted proceedings.[21]   on 11 february 2022, a letter from ms carmona’s lawyers to ms martine’s lawyers requesting a response to the 19 january letter,[20] and (d) finally, on 24 february 2022, a reply from ms martine’s lawyers to ms carmona’s lawyers confirming ms martine did not consider it necessary or desirable for x to be vaccinated against covid. this letter further speculated that following infection the risk of reinfection is reduced for six months and therefore “it would be reasonable to defer consideration of a vaccination for up to six months”. ultimately, ms martine sought a roundtable to exchange views before ms carmona instituted proceedings.[21]   finally, on 24 february 2022, a reply from ms martine’s lawyers to ms carmona’s lawyers confirming ms martine did not consider it necessary or desirable for x to be vaccinated against covid. this letter further speculated that following infection the risk of reinfection is reduced for six months and therefore “it would be reasonable to defer consideration of a vaccination for up to six months”. ultimately, ms martine sought a roundtable to exchange views before ms carmona instituted proceedings.[21]   x receive all vaccinations against covid as recommended for his age in accordance with the recommendations of his treating doctor/s at t medical centre town g (having regard to the atagi recommendations), (b) for the purpose of the above order ms carmona is authorised to take x to his vaccination appointments and this order authorises the said vaccinations notwithstanding any other orders, and (c) for the purpose of these orders ms carmona is to advise ms martine of the date and time of x’s appointments and ms martine is authorised to speak to the doctor administering the vaccine prior to the appointments to advise she and ms carmona are in agreement x be administered the moderna vaccine.   for the purpose of the above order ms carmona is authorised to take x to his vaccination appointments and this order authorises the said vaccinations notwithstanding any other orders, and (c) for the purpose of these orders ms carmona is to advise ms martine of the date and time of x’s appointments and ms martine is authorised to speak to the doctor administering the vaccine prior to the appointments to advise she and ms carmona are in agreement x be administered the moderna vaccine.   for the purpose of these orders ms carmona is to advise ms martine of the date and time of x’s appointments and ms martine is authorised to speak to the doctor administering the vaccine prior to the appointments to advise she and ms carmona are in agreement x be administered the moderna vaccine.
i spoke to my lawyers. my lawyers dealt with it all because i wasn’t allowed talk to [ms martine]. so that’s why my lawyers’ bill cost me everything i had, because i went to them because i couldn’t deal with it.
difficulties engaging x in counselling
ms n’s report december 2022  from the outset of sessions x talked about wanting to live with ms carmona every second weekend, spend a little more on holidays with ms martine, and spend more time with mr hooper, (b) the gist of x’s conversations in relation to mr hooper was that he wanted to spend more time with “his daddy” and that whilst he was with him every third weekend, he was asking for more. he expressed clearly his choice to spend more time with mr hooper and his partner, (c) x listed the priority in which he wanted to go to the three houses, first with mr hooper, second with ms carmona and third with ms martine, and (d) x said “when i am 10 i can make my decision as to where to go and when”.[27]   the gist of x’s conversations in relation to mr hooper was that he wanted to spend more time with “his daddy” and that whilst he was with him every third weekend, he was asking for more. he expressed clearly his choice to spend more time with mr hooper and his partner, (c) x listed the priority in which he wanted to go to the three houses, first with mr hooper, second with ms carmona and third with ms martine, and (d) x said “when i am 10 i can make my decision as to where to go and when”.[27]   x listed the priority in which he wanted to go to the three houses, first with mr hooper, second with ms carmona and third with ms martine, and (d) x said “when i am 10 i can make my decision as to where to go and when”.[27]   x said “when i am 10 i can make my decision as to where to go and when”.[27]
difficulties engaging dr u
dr u’s reports  ms carmona wonders whether x has an underlying neurodevelopmental disorder such as autism spectrum disorder or attention deficit disorder, (b) ms martine does not believe x has an underlying neurodevelopmental disorder, and (c) the mothers disagree about having x vaccinated against covid. ms carmona wants x vaccinated and ms martine does not.   ms martine does not believe x has an underlying neurodevelopmental disorder, and (c) the mothers disagree about having x vaccinated against covid. ms carmona wants x vaccinated and ms martine does not.   the mothers disagree about having x vaccinated against covid. ms carmona wants x vaccinated and ms martine does not.   x does have evidence of autism spectrum disorder along with symptoms of mild adhd. these developmental disorders commonly overlap. these conditions are mild, and (b) x’s chronic medical condition is related to certain symptoms, and requires urgent medical treatment.   x’s chronic medical condition is related to certain symptoms, and requires urgent medical treatment.   ongoing treatment of x’s medical condition with medication – 1 dose at night for the next three months, and (b) scheduled treatments three times daily. these were to occur at breakfast, lunch, and after school.   scheduled treatments three times daily. these were to occur at breakfast, lunch, and after school.   ongoing involvement of a speech pathologist or a psychologist to help with conversational speech and social skills and to provide space for x to deal with the obvious ongoing conflict between his mothers, (b) audiology testing to make sure x’s hearing is absolutely normal, (c) strategies for the classroom teacher to help x’s concentration, and (d) consider but put on hold stimulant medication treatment for x’s concentration problems depending on how he progresses over the next six months.   audiology testing to make sure x’s hearing is absolutely normal, (c) strategies for the classroom teacher to help x’s concentration, and (d) consider but put on hold stimulant medication treatment for x’s concentration problems depending on how he progresses over the next six months.   strategies for the classroom teacher to help x’s concentration, and (d) consider but put on hold stimulant medication treatment for x’s concentration problems depending on how he progresses over the next six months.   consider but put on hold stimulant medication treatment for x’s concentration problems depending on how he progresses over the next six months.   x continues to have an episodic condition which needs to be medically treated with medication and daily scheduled treatments, (b) the medications recommended by him are not drugs but rather natural medications, (c) it is crucial that all parents administer the medication over the summer because missed days will result in re-accumulation and persistence of x’s medical episodes, and (d) the medical episodes are not the result of emotional factors, it is the result of a physical condition.   the medications recommended by him are not drugs but rather natural medications, (c) it is crucial that all parents administer the medication over the summer because missed days will result in re-accumulation and persistence of x’s medical episodes, and (d) the medical episodes are not the result of emotional factors, it is the result of a physical condition.   it is crucial that all parents administer the medication over the summer because missed days will result in re-accumulation and persistence of x’s medical episodes, and (d) the medical episodes are not the result of emotional factors, it is the result of a physical condition.   the medical episodes are not the result of emotional factors, it is the result of a physical condition.   reaffirmation of the diagnosis and required treatment. specifically, that it must be treated with medication and scheduled treatments, (b) that the treatment will not be successful unless x receives the medications from all of his parents and has four scheduled treatments per day, and (c) the medical condition is a condition that is easily treated and requires treatment over several months.   that the treatment will not be successful unless x receives the medications from all of his parents and has four scheduled treatments per day, and (c) the medical condition is a condition that is easily treated and requires treatment over several months.   the medical condition is a condition that is easily treated and requires treatment over several months.
compliance (or lack thereof) with dr u’s recommendations pre-february 2023
i informed the court that i had purchased the [medications] but had not administered them to [x] because i was of the view that he needed to attend upon a psychologist, as recommended by [dr u], as i believed that the pressures on his mental health was the reason why he was experiencing [the medical condition].   sincerely regrets what she said to the court on 17 february 2023, (b) acknowledges her view as communicated to the court was misguided, (c) has administered the medication to x from thereon in accordance with dr u’s advice, and (d) will continue to administer the medication to x until further medical advice is received.   acknowledges her view as communicated to the court was misguided, (c) has administered the medication to x from thereon in accordance with dr u’s advice, and (d) will continue to administer the medication to x until further medical advice is received.   has administered the medication to x from thereon in accordance with dr u’s advice, and (d) will continue to administer the medication to x until further medical advice is received.   will continue to administer the medication to x until further medical advice is received.
counsel for [ms carmona]: this letter is from july 2022. i’m suggesting to you that that means there had been at least six months since you had had a recommendation from [dr u] to give [x] [medication] daily, and you still hadn’t done it. that’s correct, isn’t it? [ms martine]: that is correct. i had asked for information from him and that wasn’t forthcoming. i had asked for information from [ms carmona]. that wasn’t forthcoming either. ... counsel for [ms carmona]: what would have been wrong with simply observing that recommendation starting in july 2022? what was wrong with just giving [x] [medication] one [dose] at night? [ms martine]: without understanding what it was, i wanted to be sure that i understood what the directions were and wanted to do the best that i could for [x]. and i was working through it. counsel for [ms carmona]: you wanted to be sure you understood what the directions were? is that what you said? [ms martine]: yes. i was not at the appointment with [ms carmona]. there’s this letter here which is fine. but i had questions... i sought information and it wasn’t given to me. counsel for [ms carmona]: the letter says: i recommend (1) ongoing treatment of his [medical condition] with [medication] one [dose] at night for the next three months [...]. what aspect of that recommendation did you need more information about? [ms martine]: this was a [type of medication]. my understanding of [this type of medication] is that it’s for [a medical symptom]. [x] didn’t have [that symptom], so there was that. and then there were other aspects around questions that i had asked in writing to both [dr u] and [ms carmona] that were not responded to. counsel for [ms carmona]: well, that’s in there though. let me read it to you again: ongoing treatment of his [medical condition] with [medication] one [dose] at night – and so on. the recommendation clearly says [the medication] is a recommended treatment for [the medical condition] from [x’s] paediatrician. why didn’t you just follow that recommendation?[31]
in 2022 from when he first mentioned it i was trying to seek information from him, i was trying to seek information from [ms carmona]. it wasn’t forthcoming.
well, my friend couldn’t upload a data sheet because it’s on the box. and the picture was sent of the box. what else can i give you. i’m sorry. it’s written there as black and white. easy. simple as. what to do. [dr u’s] report says what to do. and what else can i do. it’s common sense. the boy [has a medical condition]. he needs help.
overholding by ms carmona in january 2023
the move to town j and b school
i didn't say i was going to remove him now i said if he keeps getting hurt i will [x] only has one close friend i will get judge bender to make decision for [x’s] future with schooling as your not paying the school fees trying to get me to pay them which im not going to plus the school could say one day [x] can't attend until all outstanding fees are paid and up to date the invoice you put in here your over 1 year behind with school fees so if you don't pay them i have the right to ask judge bender to remove [x] from [h school] he is only going there because you agreed to pay all fees your not doing this i will wait till this term is over then i will decide what i think is best for [x’s] future your future you can do what ever you want but [x’s] future l will do what is needed for him even if you don't agree that's why we have judge bender ty.
17 february 2023 orders  x live with ms carmona, (b) x spend time with ms martine from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday, (c) x be enrolled in b school, (d) all parties comply with all reasonable directions made by dr u and other medical practitioners, and (e) all parties ensure that x takes the prescribed medication as directed by dr u.   x spend time with ms martine from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday, (c) x be enrolled in b school, (d) all parties comply with all reasonable directions made by dr u and other medical practitioners, and (e) all parties ensure that x takes the prescribed medication as directed by dr u.   x be enrolled in b school, (d) all parties comply with all reasonable directions made by dr u and other medical practitioners, and (e) all parties ensure that x takes the prescribed medication as directed by dr u.   all parties comply with all reasonable directions made by dr u and other medical practitioners, and (e) all parties ensure that x takes the prescribed medication as directed by dr u.   all parties ensure that x takes the prescribed medication as directed by dr u.
compliance (or lack thereof) with dr u’s recommendations post 17 february 2023
counsel for [ms carmona]: and then senior judicial registrar [...] made orders that all three of you parents in this matter must comply with [dr u’s] recommendations and give [x] his [...] medicine. correct? [ms martine]: yes. counsel for [ms carmona]: and did you comply with that order once it was made? [ms martine]: yes, i have. counsel for [ms carmona]: so you had [x] with you in march. did you give him his [...] medicine that weekend? [ms martine]: there were three weekends in march. yes, i did.   martine] reported that she holds an alternative view and disagrees with the diagnoses for [x] in particular, in relation to his [medical condition] and acknowledged that she was not administering the advised treatment when he was in her care but rather doing “other things” however, it remains unclear what this entailed. she claimed that she held the view that [x’s medical] issues were emotional and in response to the highly stressful circumstances post her separation with [ms carmona].
x’s refusal to transition into ms martine’s care in april 2023
ms m’s child impact report
there appears to be an agenda of vengeance and retribution by both with a focus on being right, who is being truthful, what evidence can be obtained in order to obtain the ultimate prize being [x]. it is most concerning that both [ms martine] and [ms carmona] have not been able to separate themselves from the dispute in order to reflect on the impact on [x] and that their actions since 2019 appear not to have achieved what they appear to be pursuing and likely will not. (emphasis added)
8 may 2023 orders  the orders made on 17 february 2023 remain in full force and effect, and (b) x continue attending upon ms n.   x continue attending upon ms n.
further court proceedings
14 july 2023 orders
29 august 2023 orders   x remain enrolled at b school, (b) each party be restrained from discussing any potential change of school with x, (c) each party be permitted to liaise with x’s school in writing by email only ensuring each other party is copied into that correspondence, (d) unless otherwise agreed in writing x continue to attend upon the following medical and allied health practitioners. six named practitioners were listed including those supplied through b school, (e) if any parent takes x to one of the six named practitioners, they notify the other parties within 24 hours of the attendance including the details of the practitioner and the reason for the visit, (f) in the event that x’s school recommends he requires psychological or emotional support then he be permitted to attend the school counsellor for as long as recommended by the school counsellor, and (g) the parties follow all reasonable recommendations of x’s treating health practitioners.   each party be restrained from discussing any potential change of school with x, (c) each party be permitted to liaise with x’s school in writing by email only ensuring each other party is copied into that correspondence, (d) unless otherwise agreed in writing x continue to attend upon the following medical and allied health practitioners. six named practitioners were listed including those supplied through b school, (e) if any parent takes x to one of the six named practitioners, they notify the other parties within 24 hours of the attendance including the details of the practitioner and the reason for the visit, (f) in the event that x’s school recommends he requires psychological or emotional support then he be permitted to attend the school counsellor for as long as recommended by the school counsellor, and (g) the parties follow all reasonable recommendations of x’s treating health practitioners.   each party be permitted to liaise with x’s school in writing by email only ensuring each other party is copied into that correspondence, (d) unless otherwise agreed in writing x continue to attend upon the following medical and allied health practitioners. six named practitioners were listed including those supplied through b school, (e) if any parent takes x to one of the six named practitioners, they notify the other parties within 24 hours of the attendance including the details of the practitioner and the reason for the visit, (f) in the event that x’s school recommends he requires psychological or emotional support then he be permitted to attend the school counsellor for as long as recommended by the school counsellor, and (g) the parties follow all reasonable recommendations of x’s treating health practitioners.   unless otherwise agreed in writing x continue to attend upon the following medical and allied health practitioners. six named practitioners were listed including those supplied through b school, (e) if any parent takes x to one of the six named practitioners, they notify the other parties within 24 hours of the attendance including the details of the practitioner and the reason for the visit, (f) in the event that x’s school recommends he requires psychological or emotional support then he be permitted to attend the school counsellor for as long as recommended by the school counsellor, and (g) the parties follow all reasonable recommendations of x’s treating health practitioners.   if any parent takes x to one of the six named practitioners, they notify the other parties within 24 hours of the attendance including the details of the practitioner and the reason for the visit, (f) in the event that x’s school recommends he requires psychological or emotional support then he be permitted to attend the school counsellor for as long as recommended by the school counsellor, and (g) the parties follow all reasonable recommendations of x’s treating health practitioners.   in the event that x’s school recommends he requires psychological or emotional support then he be permitted to attend the school counsellor for as long as recommended by the school counsellor, and (g) the parties follow all reasonable recommendations of x’s treating health practitioners.   the parties follow all reasonable recommendations of x’s treating health practitioners.
dr o  just like dr u, dr o is of the view there is similarity and crossover between adhd and asd, (b) the criticism counsel for ms martine makes of dr o’s comments in relation to attendances at mediation and counselling cannot be sustained as ms martine’s initial proposal sought that the parents attend upon a parenting coordinator, and (c) dr o’s commentary in relation to a moratorium of time between x and one mother was not recommended by him in his report, nor did he change his recommendation to such an outcome. dr o explained the rationale behind such a moratorium.   the criticism counsel for ms martine makes of dr o’s comments in relation to attendances at mediation and counselling cannot be sustained as ms martine’s initial proposal sought that the parents attend upon a parenting coordinator, and (c) dr o’s commentary in relation to a moratorium of time between x and one mother was not recommended by him in his report, nor did he change his recommendation to such an outcome. dr o explained the rationale behind such a moratorium.   dr o’s commentary in relation to a moratorium of time between x and one mother was not recommended by him in his report, nor did he change his recommendation to such an outcome. dr o explained the rationale behind such a moratorium.
she also displayed a certain acute anxiety if not degrees of paranoia as she several times talked about [ms carmona] and [mr hooper] increasingly beginning to collude against her regarding the child, even to the point of saying she believed they might be trying to completely take the child away from her. to exemplify, she strongly asserted that the latter had deliberately misrepresented her views about the child’s medical and health issues in such way to the court that this had been the principal reason that she had lost shared care of him. (emphasis added)   carmona] was always calm, reflective, and seemed to speak in a balanced and measured manner about the dispute. she began commenting that she did not wish to keep going over the past and freely admitted that now away from [ms martine], in retrospect she could fully recognise how much she and [ms martine] had behaved inappropriately and had both used different means to get at each other, including the court and other agencies, when their relationship had turned sour, and at times their ridiculous attempts to pay back each other had undoubtedly been to the child’s detriment.
...over time, despite constantly seeing the increased acrimony and distrust between the two women after their separation, he still had tried to remain independent and not side unduly with either of them on any of the innumerable petty incidents between them, but eventually due to his ever-growing awareness of [ms martine’s] weird, erratic, extreme, and often very fixated behaviours which were all about only her, and totally devoid of any concern about the child, he had had no choice but to start siding with [ms carmona] on most matters, and especially those about the child’s every day welfare and what he wanted, and also so much of what the child had disclosed to him about [ms martine] had indicated to him that he often had things imposed upon him without him having any say in such.   martine] wants it all her way and she’ll stop at nothing to get it unless the court rules otherwise, it worries me so much that she is so fixated that she can only see her version, and she either doesn’t seem to see or care in what she is doing how it might affect [x] ... he’s a really caring and sensitive kid and he picks up on so much of his two mother’s behaviours and gets so upset with what they do, but more recently he’s only been upset with what [ms martine] does when he’s with her.
having done this report thus far, the writer has read copious amounts of ‘she says/she says’, and a lot less ‘he says’, and has read nothing to clearly clarify which woman bears greater or lesser culpability for the ongoing conflict and continued impasse in this matter, so what appears most important going forward is what appears to be the best and most viable parenting arrangements for the child between the three parties, especially bearing in mind the child’s stated attitudes to each of the parties.
legal principles
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.
the primary considerations
the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with ms martine, ms carmona, and mr hooper – section 60cc(2)(a)
the need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence – section 60cc(2)(b)
the additional considerations
issues relating to x including his views, level of maturity, culture, and relationships – sections 60cc(3)(a), (b), (g) and (h)
education  commented that when he had first stopped going to his old school he was quite upset because everything at his new school and [town j] was so different and he felt quite anxious for a while, but it hadn’t taken very long before he had met his twin friend, the teachers were all really nice and looked after him, and now he really liked the way the school worked compared to his old school where very often you could whatever you wanted and not really do subject learning like he was doing now, and he liked this more than what he had done at [h school]. the writer then said to him “it seems to me that you might like more rules and classrooms where you are there all the time?” and he responded smiling and nodding in the affirmative.[67]
i was not surprised when he went from the free world of [h school] – [...] from that world to a more structured world, he thrived because adhd and asperger kids need structure. they need boundaries. they need physical boundaries. they need rooms. they’re safer. so that didn’t surprise me.
counsel for [ms carmona]: [x] moved from [h school] into [b school] at the beginning of last year. so, now we are all of last year and a full term and a bit into this year at [b school]. do you have any comment on the impact on [x] of changing schools again at this time in his life? [dr o]: well, i think it would be completely counterproductive to him to go from what he has now established back to what used to be. i don’t perceive there’s anything to be gained from righting a wrong if it is a wrong in the first instance. what to me is important as he grows, gains greater maturity, greater independent cognitive processing, more self‑assurance, all those things, that he feels he has a consistent and predictable world. now, i don’t think that boy has got at the moment a consistent predictable world. so, i would be supporting any process that maintains the consistency and predictability and safety of his world. so, therefore, i would be saying wherever he ends up, that will be his principal place of residence, principal place where he does his activities, and on that basis as i said to you before and i believe this quite strongly, i’ve worked with kids that have been placed in wrong situations in terms of school, because that’s what the parents think it should be, what they want, not necessarily taking into account what the children want or need. i believe [x] is a better fit at [b school] in terms of his schooling and his overall development than it is at a school like [h school]. simply because i don’t think asperger/adhd kids have the capacity to manage those schools in the way that they can manage the structures, the routines and the constrictions to some degree that more traditional schools such as [b school] would provide.[69]
whenever he was at [h school], he was in a shared care regime. there is no evidence about how he will go if he is returned to that school in the primary care of my client. nobody can say definitively what any change would be in terms of his academic success or otherwise..., but in my submission, it’s the undermining, the undue influence, and the continued conflict between the parents in this case.[70]   the conflict will continue for some time yet irrespective with which mother x lives, (b) i have determined that the risk of undermining if x lives with ms carmona is less, if any, than the risk to x in relation to his physical and emotional welfare if he lives with ms martine, and (c) i am of the view that it is not in x’s best interests for the court to take a chance that x’s return to h school may be successful in the circumstance that he is thriving at b school.   i have determined that the risk of undermining if x lives with ms carmona is less, if any, than the risk to x in relation to his physical and emotional welfare if he lives with ms martine, and (c) i am of the view that it is not in x’s best interests for the court to take a chance that x’s return to h school may be successful in the circumstance that he is thriving at b school.   i am of the view that it is not in x’s best interests for the court to take a chance that x’s return to h school may be successful in the circumstance that he is thriving at b school.
x’s views
there are many factors that may go to the weight that should be given to the wishes of children... ultimately it is a process of intuitive synthesis on the part of any trial judge weighing up all the evidence relevant to the wishes of the children and applying it in a common sense way as one of the factors in the overall assessment of the children's best interests.149f[74]
issues relating to the parents – including decision making, time spent with x, fulfilled obligations, attitude, capacity and exercise of responsibility – sections 60cc(3)(c), (ca), (f) and (i)
“she is as good as she can be for the person she is... [ms martine] has different views in life to the rest of us, like, with the [medication]. she wants to know more about stuff and so on... so, she looks at things quite differently to the way we do and it comes out oddly, so she does the best she can ... [76] ...... and i didn’t want to bag [ms martine]. that’s the thing. she is [x’s] mum. at the end of the day she’s [x’s] mummy, why bag her? these things have happened. i can’t change what has happened.[77]
the likely effect if x’s circumstances are changed – section 60cc(3)(d)  his relationship with mr hooper will not be fostered, (b) a change of school from one that is best suited to his needs to one that is not, (c) his stability and predictability will be disrupted, (d) he will not live primarily in a location where he is thriving, (e) his support providers such as his counsellor and his speech and occupational therapists will have to change as they are now an integral part of b school, and (f) as counsel for the icl submitted, “he would be moving back to the applicant, the very person who resisted complying with the urgent medical treatment recommended by [dr u] in that letter of 27 july. and it raises the question, could the applicant be relied on to follow urgent medical treatment in relation to future medical issues for [x]? and i would suggest, your honour, that’s a very serious situation”. i add to that all other occasions that ms martine has stymied x’s health and welfare needs.   a change of school from one that is best suited to his needs to one that is not, (c) his stability and predictability will be disrupted, (d) he will not live primarily in a location where he is thriving, (e) his support providers such as his counsellor and his speech and occupational therapists will have to change as they are now an integral part of b school, and (f) as counsel for the icl submitted, “he would be moving back to the applicant, the very person who resisted complying with the urgent medical treatment recommended by [dr u] in that letter of 27 july. and it raises the question, could the applicant be relied on to follow urgent medical treatment in relation to future medical issues for [x]? and i would suggest, your honour, that’s a very serious situation”. i add to that all other occasions that ms martine has stymied x’s health and welfare needs.   his stability and predictability will be disrupted, (d) he will not live primarily in a location where he is thriving, (e) his support providers such as his counsellor and his speech and occupational therapists will have to change as they are now an integral part of b school, and (f) as counsel for the icl submitted, “he would be moving back to the applicant, the very person who resisted complying with the urgent medical treatment recommended by [dr u] in that letter of 27 july. and it raises the question, could the applicant be relied on to follow urgent medical treatment in relation to future medical issues for [x]? and i would suggest, your honour, that’s a very serious situation”. i add to that all other occasions that ms martine has stymied x’s health and welfare needs.   he will not live primarily in a location where he is thriving, (e) his support providers such as his counsellor and his speech and occupational therapists will have to change as they are now an integral part of b school, and (f) as counsel for the icl submitted, “he would be moving back to the applicant, the very person who resisted complying with the urgent medical treatment recommended by [dr u] in that letter of 27 july. and it raises the question, could the applicant be relied on to follow urgent medical treatment in relation to future medical issues for [x]? and i would suggest, your honour, that’s a very serious situation”. i add to that all other occasions that ms martine has stymied x’s health and welfare needs.   his support providers such as his counsellor and his speech and occupational therapists will have to change as they are now an integral part of b school, and (f) as counsel for the icl submitted, “he would be moving back to the applicant, the very person who resisted complying with the urgent medical treatment recommended by [dr u] in that letter of 27 july. and it raises the question, could the applicant be relied on to follow urgent medical treatment in relation to future medical issues for [x]? and i would suggest, your honour, that’s a very serious situation”. i add to that all other occasions that ms martine has stymied x’s health and welfare needs.   as counsel for the icl submitted, “he would be moving back to the applicant, the very person who resisted complying with the urgent medical treatment recommended by [dr u] in that letter of 27 july. and it raises the question, could the applicant be relied on to follow urgent medical treatment in relation to future medical issues for [x]? and i would suggest, your honour, that’s a very serious situation”. i add to that all other occasions that ms martine has stymied x’s health and welfare needs.
practical difficulty and expense of x spending time and communication with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect x’s rights to maintain contact with the parents on a regular basis – section 60cc(3)(e)
issues of family violence – sections 60cc(3)(j) and (k)
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child – section 60cc(3)(l)
any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant – section 60cc(3)(m)
conclusions
parental responsibility
live with   will have his relationship with mr hooper supported. there will be flexibility in relation to the time they spend together including further time not specified in the orders, (b) will continue attending b school which is a school best suited to his needs, (c) will have stability and predictability in his living arrangements, (d) will remain living in circumstances where he is thriving, (e) will have consistency with his speech therapist, occupational therapist, counsellor and other medical and allied health providers, and (f) will live in the primary care of a parent who tends to his medical and allied health needs as her priority. he will be assured to receive appropriate medical attention and supports for his welfare on a day to day and long term basis.   will continue attending b school which is a school best suited to his needs, (c) will have stability and predictability in his living arrangements, (d) will remain living in circumstances where he is thriving, (e) will have consistency with his speech therapist, occupational therapist, counsellor and other medical and allied health providers, and (f) will live in the primary care of a parent who tends to his medical and allied health needs as her priority. he will be assured to receive appropriate medical attention and supports for his welfare on a day to day and long term basis.   will have stability and predictability in his living arrangements, (d) will remain living in circumstances where he is thriving, (e) will have consistency with his speech therapist, occupational therapist, counsellor and other medical and allied health providers, and (f) will live in the primary care of a parent who tends to his medical and allied health needs as her priority. he will be assured to receive appropriate medical attention and supports for his welfare on a day to day and long term basis.   will remain living in circumstances where he is thriving, (e) will have consistency with his speech therapist, occupational therapist, counsellor and other medical and allied health providers, and (f) will live in the primary care of a parent who tends to his medical and allied health needs as her priority. he will be assured to receive appropriate medical attention and supports for his welfare on a day to day and long term basis.   will have consistency with his speech therapist, occupational therapist, counsellor and other medical and allied health providers, and (f) will live in the primary care of a parent who tends to his medical and allied health needs as her priority. he will be assured to receive appropriate medical attention and supports for his welfare on a day to day and long term basis.   will live in the primary care of a parent who tends to his medical and allied health needs as her priority. he will be assured to receive appropriate medical attention and supports for his welfare on a day to day and long term basis.
spend time arrangements
school terms
school holidays
special occasions
ancillary and consequential orders
contact details
extra-curricular activities
passport
associate: dated: 27 june 2024
dated: 27 june 2024
[1] transcript dated 10 may 2024, pg.122 – 123.[2] transcript dated 10 may 2024, pg.157. [3] carlson & fluvium [2012] famca 32 cited with approval in adamson & adamson [2014] famcafc 232 at [90].[4] fox v percy (2003) 214 clr 118 at [31].[5] adamson & adamson [2014] famcafc 232 at [90][6] first respondent’s affidavit filed 24 january 2024 at [36].[7] family report of ms l dated 6 august 2021 at [36].[8] transcript dated 29 january 2024, pg.37.[9] first respondent’s affidavit filed 24 january 2024 at [116].[10] family report of ms l dated 6 august 2021 at [114].[11] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.184 – 185.[12] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.186.[13] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.194.[14] second respondent’s affidavit filed 21 october 2024 at [59].[15] exhibit mc-21.[16] applicant mother’s affidavit filed 18 january 2024 at [108].[17] exhibit mc-22.[18] exhibit mc-23.[19] exhibit mc-24.[20] exhibit mc-25.[21] exhibit mc-26.[22] transcript dated 1 february 2024, pg.309.[23] transcript dated 1 february 2024, p.287.[24] transcript dated 30 january 2024, pg.74.[25] applicant’s affidavit filed 18 january 2024 at [37].[26] transcript dated 30 january 2024, pg.65.[27] exhibit icl1.[28] first respondent’s affidavit filed 24 january 2024 at [141].[29] applicant’s affidavit filed 18 january 2024 at [96].[30] applicant’s affidavit filed 18 january 2024 at [96] – [100].[31] transcript dated 30 january 2024, pg.82 – 84.[32] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.157.[33] transcript dated 1 february 2024, pg.315.[34] second respondent’s affidavit filed 21 january 2024 at [28].[35] transcript dated 2 february 2024, pg.365.[36] applicant’s affidavit filed 18 january 2024 at [96].[37] transcript dated 2 february 2024, pg.361.[38] transcript dated 9 may 2024, pg.39.[39] transcript dated 2 february 2024, pg.332.[40] transcript dated 2 february 2024, pg.341.[41] transcript dated 2 february 2024, pg.343.[42] transcript dated 2 february 2024, pg.337.[43] applicant’s affidavit filed 18 january 2024 at annexure mm-16.[44] exhibit r-2-4[45] exhibit r-2-4[46] transcript dated 29 january 2024, pg.36.[47] first respondent’s affidavit filed 24 january 2024 at [167].[48] transcript dated 1 february 2024, pg.244.[49] second respondent’s affidavit filed 21 january 2024 at [34].[50] hg v r [1999] hca 2 at [41].[51] hall & hall [1979] famca 73.[52] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.173.[53] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.198.[54] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.218.[55] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.218.[56] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(1). [57] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca. [58] aldridge & keaton (2009) famcafc 229.[59] aldridge & keaton (2009) famcafc 229.[60] transcript dated 10 may 2024, pg.160.[61] transcript dated 10 may 2024, pg.27.[62] transcript dated 9 may 2024, pg.82.[63] transcript dated 30 january 2024, pg.112.[64] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97 at [70].[65] first respondent’s affidavit filed 24 january 2024 at [175].[66] second respondent’s affidavit filed 21 january 2024 at [64].[67] family report of dr o dated 21 september 2023 at [49].[68] transcript dated 10 may 2024, pg.123.[69] transcript dated 9 may 2024. pg.92.[70] transcript dated 10 may, pg.164.[71] transcript dated 30 january 2024, pg.67. [72] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.212.[73] transcript dated 10 may 2024, pg.138.[74] r and r (children’s wishes) [2000] famca 43 at [54].[75] first respondent’s affidavit filed 24 january 2024 at [35].[76] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.189.[77] transcript dated 31 january 2024, pg.213.[78] family report of dr o dated 21 september 2023 at [34].[79] transcript dated 10 may 2024, pg.168.[80] transcript dated 10 may 2024, pg.164.