last updated: 31 march 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
west & west [2021] fedcfamc2f 684
orders
the court orders that:
by consent:
1. the husband and wife do all acts and things and execute all documents necessary to cause $20,000.00 to be released to each of the husband and wife from the funds held in trust for them by the husband's solicitors as part property settlement as soon as possible.
by the court:
2. the husband pay the wife's costs directly to her solicitor fixed in the sum of $3,300.00 (including gst) to be deducted from the husband's share of the part property settlement provided in order 1 herein and such payment take place as soon as possible.
and the court notes that:
ex temporereasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
1 these are the settled reasons of a judgement delivered ex tempore on 21 december 2021. the applicant wife is ms west (‘the wife’) and the respondent husband is mr west (‘the husband’).
2 i am going to order costs payable in the sum of $3000 and that those costs be paid by the husband, as soon as possible, and deducted from the $20,000 part property settlement ordered in these proceedings and paid forthwith to the wife's solicitor.
3 my reasons for ordering the costs are these. i take into account section 117(1) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (‘the act’), which is the starting position that each party shall bear their own costs, but that is subject to section 117(2a).
4 the financial circumstances of the parties are such that the husband says he has not worked for 18 months. the wife is not working, and is in receipt of social security only, and has to pay rent for her premises. neither party is legally aided.
5 i must take into account the conduct of the proceedings, which includes, in this case, the request for emergency funds made on 3 december 2021, where the wife's immediate circumstances were described as impecunious at best, and that appears to be or is an accurate description of her immediate financial circumstances, notwithstanding that sooner or later she will have a property settlement of some significant amount. there was no response to that request.
6 on 10 december 2021, there was another request for funds, and there was no response to that. on 13 december 2021, there was another request. notwithstanding that it was 10 days after the initial “respond in three days” request, a further 24 hours was provided. there was no response to that request. on 15 december 2021 the wife's solicitor issued these proceedings, and arranged for them to become before the court urgently.
7 mr henwood, for the husband, has argued with some skill that i should not make the costs order because, at the same time as those proposals were being made and not responded to, there was ongoing communications to attempt settlement overall, and that the matter was, in substance, settled or almost settled save for what was regarded as a small matter by mr henwood.
8 however, i cannot and will not refer to the 'without prejudice' negotiations. i do not yet know the extent to which it is reasonable or unreasonable not to settle those proceedings on the state of negotiations. i note that the application issued on 15 december 2021 provided for both parties to receive $20,000 as part property settlement. there is a long marriage, and there is no argument that both parties will receive at least $20,000 in whatever the property settlement is. the funds available in trust are something in the order of $700,000.
9 the parties married in 1988, and separated 32 years later, in january 2020. the application was entirely successful, and there was no indication that it would be agreed to until after the matter was stood down this morning, where, of my own motion, i determined to stand the matter down to give the parties an opportunity to settle the matter overall. i take into account, under 117(2a)(g), that, on the husband’s case, he is not working, and he has no money in the bank, and he, too, would need some money to get him through until trial.
10 implicit in my order for costs is a finding that the husband should have agreed to this request regardless of how finely balanced the property settlement negotiations were. though tempted by mr henwood's submissions, i ultimately do not accept them. i add in settling these reasons the substance of my discussion in the running as to the quantum of costs sought. the costs sought are less than scale and are reasonable in the circumstances.
associate: dated: 1 february 2022