last updated: 24 february 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
minh & dieu [2021] fedcfamc2f 649
orders
the court orders that:
1. within 21 days of the date of this order, the sum of controlled monies in the amount of $16,754.00 (together with any interest accrued thereon), held by blanchfield nicholls lawyers, be paid to the applicant,
2. the respondent within one-hundred and twenty days (120) days of the date of this order pay to the applicant the sum of $108,582.25 (‘the sum’),
3. in the event that the respondent defaults on the payment to the applicant pursuant to paragraph 2 above the following will occur: (a) the respondent will immediately do all acts and things necessary to sell the property situated and known as b street, suburb c in new south wales (‘the b street, suburb c property’) and to that end will: (i) list the property with a real estate agent for a price not less than $650,000.00, and (ii) will follow the reasonable advice of the real estate agent as to the method of sale and advertising of the property, and (b) upon the finalisation of the sale of the b street, suburb c property, the respondent will pay to the applicant a cash amount equivalent to 16.70% of the gross sale price,  the respondent will immediately do all acts and things necessary to sell the property situated and known as b street, suburb c in new south wales (‘the b street, suburb c property’) and to that end will: (i) list the property with a real estate agent for a price not less than $650,000.00, and (ii) will follow the reasonable advice of the real estate agent as to the method of sale and advertising of the property, and (b) upon the finalisation of the sale of the b street, suburb c property, the respondent will pay to the applicant a cash amount equivalent to 16.70% of the gross sale price,  list the property with a real estate agent for a price not less than $650,000.00, and (ii) will follow the reasonable advice of the real estate agent as to the method of sale and advertising of the property, and
4. upon the sum being paid by the respondent to the applicant pursuant to paragraph 2 of this order, the applicant will transfer to the respondent all and any right, title and interest he holds in the b street, suburb c property and will withdraw (at his cost) any caveat that he has lodged against the title to the b street, suburb c property,
5. the court allocate, pursuant to s 90xt(4) of the family law act 1975 (cth), a base amount of $25,162.50 from ms dieu’s superannuation to mr minh out of ms dieu’s interest in the d super fund (‘the fund’),
6. pursuant to s 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975, whenever the trustee of ms dieu’s superannuation fund makes a splittable payment out of ms dieu’s interest in the fund, the trustee shall pay to mr minh, or his legal personal representative, the entitlement calculated in accordance with pt 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 (cth) using the base amount allocated in paragraph 5 above and there be a corresponding reduction to the entitlement ms dieu would have had in the fund but for this order,
7. paragraph 6 above has effect from the operative time, being four (4) business days from the date of service of the sealed order on the trustee of d super,
8. this order binds the trustee of d super to observe the trustee obligations set out under the family law act 1975 and the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001,
9. subject to other terms of this order, the parties otherwise retain all property, real estate, motor vehicles, chattels, shares, debentures, insurances, pensions, bank accounts, financial resources and liabilities in their names and/or possession, and for this purpose bank accounts are deemed to be in the possession of the party whose name appears on the bank’s record thereof, insurance policies are deemed to be in the possession of the beneficiary thereof, superannuation entitlements are deemed to be in the possession of the person who is named as the worker therein and service pensions are deemed to be the property of the person in receipt of the same,
10. the parties indemnify each other as to any outstanding liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to this order and in relation to any outstanding debts otherwise owed by them as at the date of this order,
11. the parties undertake all things, do all acts and sign all relevant documentation to give effect to the terms of this order,
12. if either party refuses or neglects to sign or execute any documents, instruments or writing or comply with any part of this order after seven (7) days of being requested to do so by the other party in writing, then the registrar of the court be empowered pursuant to s 106a of the family law act 1975 to sign and execute such documents, instruments or writings on behalf of either party as may be necessary to give full force and effect to the order,
13. this order is binding upon the parties’ heirs, executors and beneficiaries, and
14. all extant property orders, save for the order of his honour judge dunkley dated 30 july 2021, be discharged and all extant proceedings be dismissed.
reasons for judgment
judge turnbull
introduction
1 mr minh (‘the applicant’) was born in 1980 in vietnam, and is currently 41 years of age. he migrated to australia with his parents in 1991, qualified as a tradesman in 2002, and currently works in construction.
2 ms dieu (‘the respondent’) was born in 1982 in country e, and is currently 39 years of age. she migrated to australia with her family in 1991, completed a bachelor of healthcare in 2005, and later obtained further postgraduate qualifications. she currently works as a health care worker.
3 the parties currently live in the greater sydney area.
4 there is one child of the parties’ relationship — x (‘x’) born in 2011.[1]
5 the applicant initiated parenting and property proceedings against the respondent on 27 september 2017.
6 the respondent has two other children — f (‘f’) born in 2004, and g (‘g’) born in 2018. though the applicant was involved in f’s life by virtue of his relationship with the respondent, x forms the primary focus of the parenting and property proceedings.
7 on 18 february 2021 the parties substantially settled their parenting applications with consent orders. those orders confirm that x lives with the respondent and spends alternate weekends, half of his holidays and special days with the applicant.
8 on 26 august 2021 the parties engaged in a final hearing to finalise the outstanding contentions in their parenting dispute. his honour judge dunkley made further orders regarding special days, international travel and some specific issues.
9 pursuant to his honour judge dunkley’s order of 30 july 2021, i heard the matter in relation to the remaining property dispute via microsoft teams on 11 august 2021 from hobart.
facts
10 before the applicant met the respondent he had, in 2004, registered h pty ltd. that company was deregistered in 2006.
11 also in 2004, the respondent gave birth to her first child f. she had care of f when she met the applicant.
12 the applicant and the respondent met in 2007. they commenced a relationship in early 2008 and commenced cohabitation a few months later. the applicant says cohabitation commenced in march 2008,[2] but the respondent says that this occurred in june 2008.[3]
13 i note here, before commencing the chronology of relevant facts, that issues concerning the applicant’s income and employment throughout the relationship were deeply explored during cross-examination. of course, the topic is highly relevant to the issue of contributions. the applicant’s answers during cross-examination were to potentially incriminate him, and as such i issued a certificate under s 128 of the evidence act 1995 (cth).
14 mr hanrahan, counsel for the respondent, suggested to the applicant that his annual income throughout the relationship was less than $6,000.00. the applicant did not agree, saying that in reality he earned ‘a bit more’ than the income declared on his tax returns for the last three years of the relationship. the amount of income declared on those tax returns was less than $18,000.00. the applicant did not produce tax returns for the majority of the years of the relationship.
15 the degree to which the applicant financially contributed to the relationship, both throughout it and at specific points, forms a key issue towards this court’s ultimate determination.
16 to commence the chronology, the parties first lived in a rental property at suburb j (‘the suburb j rental property’) for a period of six months. the respondent had been living at that property with f since january 2008. the applicant did not pay rent at the suburb j rental property, though the respondent says that he gave her $2,000.00 when he first moved in. the applicant further agreed during cross-examination that his name did not appear on the lease.
17 neither party had any significant assets at the beginning of their relationship, though they both held modest superannuation interests.
18 while the parties lived at the suburb j rental property, the respondent purchased a motor vehicle 1 for which she took out a loan of $60,000.00. the applicant was asked about the motor vehicle 1 during cross-examination, and agreed that the respondent took out that loan to purchase the vehicle. he further accepted that, while the loan was in the respondent’s name, he also drove that vehicle.
19 the motor vehicle 1 was written off upon being stolen and burned. he said that he had no idea who stole and damaged the car, or how those events might have happened. he agreed that the respondent continued to repay the loan after the vehicle was written off.
20 the applicant left for vietnam in october 2008. he did so with the ambition to start a business there, with business partners mr k and another person named mr l. to support this venture, the applicant drew an amount from his self-managed superannuation fund. the sum of that amount is contested by the parties. mr hanrahan asked the applicant during cross-examination whether he agreed to that amount being $90,000.00. the applicant denied this, instead estimating that the amount was $30,000.00. notwithstanding their disagreement about the sum itself, the parties agree that the monies for this purpose were sourced in full from the applicant’s self-managed superannuation fund. the funds dedicated to the applicant’s business aspirations in vietnam were lost in their entirety.
21 in march 2009, while the applicant was in vietnam, the respondent purchased a house at b street, suburb c (‘the b street, suburb c property’). the purchase price was $317,000.00, of which the respondent borrowed $50,000.00 from her parents. a sum of $20,000 of the loaned amount from the respondent’s parents was repaid during the relationship. the rest of the purchase price was financed by a mortgage to westpac bank. the b street, suburb c property was registered solely in the respondent’s name.
22 the applicant’s business venture ultimately being unsuccessful, he returned to australia in may 2009. he says that upon his return he continued to work as a self-employed tradesman.[4] the respondent, on the other hand, says that the applicant did not work for six months after he returned from vietnam.[5]
23 while the b street, suburb c property settled in april 2009, the parties did not take up residence there until december of the same year. in the meantime, the parties lived with the respondent’s parents. the b street, suburb c property required renovations before they could move into it — the parties disagree as to the extent of their contributions in this respect. the applicant details in his affidavit the work undertaken by him on the b street, suburb c property, comprising a number of substantial tasks.[6] the respondent conceded during cross-examination that, for the most part, the applicant’s account of his work was correct. she did not, however, agree that he built wardrobes nor did she agree that he undertook garden work to the extent he claims. the applicant agreed during cross-examination that the respondent met the costs of tradespeople and materials for the renovations, and further agreed that the respondent’s family helped renovate the b street, suburb c property.
24 the applicant denied during cross-examination that, around the time the respondent purchased the b street, suburb c property, his income was only approximately $300.00 per week. he said that he received cash as income, and further denied that these monies so received were spent only on himself. according to the applicant, he worked six-day weeks at this time and contributed his income in this respect to rent and household expenses.
25 in december 2009, upon completing the renovations, the parties took up residence in the b street, suburb c. the renovation and demolition work on the b street, suburb c property was completed prior to x’s birth.
26 x was born in 2011. the respondent took some time off work while she was pregnant, and took further time as maternity leave after x was born. the applicant was working odd jobs at this time for which he did not submit a tax return.
27 in november 2011, the parties refinanced the b street, suburb c property with a loan from anz bank.
28 in june 2012, the applicant began receiving wages from m pty ltd. the company was wholly owned by the applicant’s mother, ms n (‘ms n’), and was deregistered in 2018. the applicant agreed during cross-examination that he continued to receive income from ms n, as the owner of the company, until 2015. he further agreed that during this time he only declared earnings of $380.00 per week on his income tax return.
29 the applicant also received and had use of the m pty ltd company car, which he says has since been sold. he also had access to the company’s credit card, and agreed that his use of the credit card effectively supplemented his income.
30 the parties agree that, since at least mid-2012, the respondent held a second job. they disagree about the respondent’s motivation for doing so. the applicant says that the respondent did not take up a second job for extra income. instead, he says that she did so to acquire skills working for a health practitioner for the purpose of aiding her entry into the beauty industry. the respondent says that she commenced working two jobs in 2012 to ‘help ease the financial burden’.[7]
31 in 2014, the parties purchased a property in suburb o (‘the suburb o property’). the property was purchased solely in the respondent’s name, and the applicant agreed during cross-examination that he was not named on title as a registered proprietor. he says, however, that this was not sinister. instead, he said that it was easier for the respondent to obtain a loan if the property was in her name only.
32 the purchase price of the suburb o property was $390,000.00, with $360,000.00 finance from a mortgage to the anz bank. the suburb o property remained tenanted, and produced approximately $400.00 per week in rental income (with some periods vacant) until it was sold in october 2018.
33 the respondent agreed during cross-examination that, prior to its sale, the suburb o property was rented to an acquaintance. she further agreed that she received rent for that property until it was sold. the parties disagree, however, as to amounts purportedly retained by the applicant after collecting rent on the respondent’s behalf.
34 also in 2014, the applicant opened a bank account in his own name for the first time. he explained that is english is “not great” and that he is not good with computers, so he finds it easier to manage cash.
35 the respondent, in august 2015, applied to the anz bank for a redraw of $179,974.60, which she received.[8] the redraw was secured against the b street, suburb c and suburb o properties, and was to be utilised to purchase a property at suburb p (‘the suburb p property’). the monies were drawn down in october 2015.
36 the applicant agreed during cross-examination that he met the mortgage broker with the respondent and that he did not object to the respondent borrowing sufficient funds to purchase the suburb p property. the parties attended the auction for the property in december 2015, but ultimately did not purchase it.
37 a key issue in this matter is the respondent’s use of the redraw monies after this point in time.
38 the applicant said during cross-examination that he did not know what became of those funds, and could not confirm the respondent’s claim that they were used for household expenses. he did, importantly, concede that he did not show much interest in the parties’ financial affairs because he effectively trusted the respondent to properly manage and expend their finances.
39 on the respondent’s own admission, the redraw was spent largely post-separation. in the respondent’s view, those funds were hers to use as she desired without reference to the applicant. the difficulty created by her position is that the redraw monies were paid back to anz bank from the suburb o property sale proceeds, a property purchased during the relationship.
40 ms druitt, counsel for the applicant, suggested to the respondent that the applicant was not aware that she kept the redraw monies in her own account. the respondent conceded, saying that the applicant knew about the redraw for the purposes of purchasing the suburb p property but did not know that she kept it for her own use.
41 the use of the redraw funds raised evidentiary and substantive issues at trial, of which an important aspect was her payment of legal fees. the respondent conceded during cross-examination that she spent between $30,000.00 and $40,000.00 of the redrawn monies on her legal fees. as of the date of final hearing, the respondent had spent all of the redraw monies. the applicant maintains that he had no knowledge about respondent’s use of these funds.
42 in late 2015, the respondent holidayed in the country q for three weeks. she returned in november, and asserts that around this time she and the applicant were separated under one roof.
43 the parties agree that separation occurred no later than march 2016, ending an eight-year cohabitation period.
44 the applicant moved into his parents’ home in suburb r. the respondent continued living in the b street, suburb c property with f and x.
45 following separation, the applicant’s employment was initially with s pty ltd as a construction manager. he held this position for 18 months, and confirmed during cross-examination that while working with this firm he earned over $2,000.00 per week. in september 2017 the applicant was made redundant from that position. he explained that his redundancy resulted from industry downturn and the completion of the project for which he was hired as a construction manager. the applicant confirmed that he now works in construction, and earns approximately $55,000.00 per annum.
46 the respondent received child support from the applicant (at times with the assistance of ms n) of approximately $2,000.00 per month from april 2016 to february 2017.
47 the respondent commenced a relationship with mr t (‘mr t’) in late 2018, and gave birth to her third child g. she said during cross-examination that mr t did not contribute greatly to household expenses during their cohabitation and instead spent his own money on himself. i note that this contradicts her affidavit in which she said mr t did contribute to household expenses.[9] mr t moved out of the respondent’s home in late 2020 after two years’ cohabitation. the respondent said that mr t took g with him, and that she is currently being denied any time with g. she does not pay child support for g.
48 in late 2018, the suburb o property was sold. the respondent said during cross-examination that it ultimately sold for $445,000.00, being reduced from a sale price of $550,000.00 due to asbestos issues. she said that the loan for the suburb o property and the $179,974.60 redraw was repaid to the bank from the sale proceeds. the bank retained approximately $391,000.00, with the balance being deposited with her solicitors and put towards outstanding loans. just over $16,000 remains.
49 the applicant confirmed that he had to take out a loan with anz bank to pay his legal fees, and that he had to increase his borrowings to $42,000.00 again to meet his legal costs. the outstanding balance on that loan currently amounts to $29,000.00. he also confirmed that his parents have loaned him money to pay his legal fees and associated expenses.
50 also following separation, the applicant sent money to a friend known only as mr u. the applicant agreed that he did so. he further said that he introduced the respondent to mr u, and that the respondent purchased eyelash extensions from mr u to on-sell for a profit. the respondent said this venture took place many years ago, while the parties still lived together, and that she still holds the stock as it was never on-sold or used. further, she said that the company behind the cosmetics business was registered in 2011 and deregistered in 2017, and that her accountant controlled the deregistration process and the relevant documentation. with respect to payments to mr u which were not consideration for cosmetic stock, the respondent says that she transferred money out of naïve belief that the applicant and mr u were not romantically involved and that mr u was experiencing ‘hardship’.[10]
51 the applicant claims he currently pays $72.00 per month in child support — a claim supported by the respondent’s financial statement.[11] during cross-examination, the applicant expressed uncertainty as to whether this was actually the amount required of him. he said that the figure had been recalculated over time, and that the recalculations resulted in his monthly payments being reduced from $2,140.00 to $72.00. the respondent’s affidavit annexes child support assessments for 2020/21, which instead show his monthly rate as $36.92.[12] no evidence was produced to show that the figure has changed. the issue of child support is addressed under the issue of adjustments to be made under s 90sm(4)(d)-(g) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (‘the act’). crucially, the applicant denied that he was not interested in financially supporting x.
52 as for the parties’ current living arrangements, the applicant says that he lives with his parents but that his continued residence with them is not guaranteed. the respondent remains resident in the b street, suburb c property with f and x.
53 the respondent agreed during cross-examination that she receives $300.00 per week from her parents as financial support. those funds are advanced by her parents for the purpose of the respondent purchasing groceries and other items. the respondent further agreed that she has also drawn down $10,000.00 from her superannuation interest to meet necessary expenses. she maintains that, even with the suburb o property sold and her associated mortgage liability absolved, her credit card debt remains high due to necessary expenses.
orders sought
54 the applicant seeks the following orders in his case outline:
1. that the respondent within thirty-five (35) days from the date of order pay to the applicant the sum of $150,000.00 and in default of payment that the applicant be appointed trustee for sale of the said property and pay to the applicant from any sale proceed the sum of $150,000.00 or 23% of the gross sale price whichever is the greater. 2. that the sum held by blanchfield nicholls partners solicitors be paid to the applicant. 3. upon payment of the sum referred to in order 1, the respondent is declared the sole owner of b street, suburb c and the motor vehicle 2 registration number .... 4. 4.1 that the court allocate, as required by section 90xt(4) of the family law act 1975, a base amount of $50,000.00 from ms dieu’s superannuation to mr minh out of ms dieu’s interest in the d super “the fund”. 4.2 that pursuant to section 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975, whenever the trustee of ms dieu’s superannuation fund makes a splittable payment out of ms dieu’s interest in the superannuation fund, the trustee shall pay to mr minh, or his legal personal representative, the entitlement calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 using the base amount allocated in the proceeding [sic] order and there be a corresponding reduction to the entitlement ms dieu would have had in the fund but for this order. 4.3 that the above order has effect from the operative time, being four (4) business days from the date of service of the sealed orders on the trustee of d super. 4.4 that these orders bind the trustee of d super to observe the trustee obligations set out under the family law act 1975 and the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001. 5. unless specifically referred to herein that the applicant and respondent be declared to have the sole right title and interest in, - 5.1 any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property which are at the date hereof in their respective possession, and 5.2 any monies, shares, bank accounts, debentures, insurances, or superannuation entitlements which stand in their respective sole names as at the date hereof. 6. that if either party refuses or neglects to sign or execute any documents, instruments or writing or comply with any order contained herein after seven (7) days of being requested to do so by the other party in writing, then the registrar of the court be empowered pursuant to section 106a of the family law act to sign and execute such documents, instruments or writings on behalf of either party as may be necessary to give full force and effect to the orders herein. 7. that the respondent pay the applicant’s costs of the property proceedings.
55 the respondent seeks the following orders in her case outline:
1. alteration of property rights pursuant to s79 [sic] of the act (a) that the respondent retain all right, title and interest in the property at b street, suburb c, known as lot ... in dp ... (b) that within 3 months from the date of this order the respondent pay the applicant a lump sum payment of $50,000. (c) that the respondent retain all right, title and interest in the motor vehicle 2 reg ... and all furniture and other personal effects in the possession of the respondent. (d) that the respondent retain all her right, title and interest in the superannuation fund with super fund v.  that the respondent retain all right, title and interest in the property at b street, suburb c, known as lot ... in dp ... (b) that within 3 months from the date of this order the respondent pay the applicant a lump sum payment of $50,000. (c) that the respondent retain all right, title and interest in the motor vehicle 2 reg ... and all furniture and other personal effects in the possession of the respondent. (d) that the respondent retain all her right, title and interest in the superannuation fund with super fund v.
documents relied upon
56 the applicant relies upon the following documents: further amended initiating application filed 16 august 2019, affidavit of mr minh filed 16 august 2019, financial statement of mr minh filed 11 february 2021, tender bundle 6, titled ‘documents for tender of submission’ tendered 12 august 2021 and labelled exhibit ‘a1’, and applicant’s case outline tendered on 12 august 2021 and labelled exhibit ‘a2’.
57 the respondent relies upon the following documents: amended response to initiating application filed 31 may 2018, affidavit of ms dieu filed 4 june 2020, financial statement of ms dieu filed 16 february 2021, further amended tender bundle 2 titled ‘other documents’ and including documents to which the affidavit filed 4 june 2020 refers, ‘list of references on the respondent’s submissions to documents’ and all the documents referred to therein, tendered 12 august 2021 and labelled exhibit ‘r1’, and ‘summary – extract from respondents [sic] westpac ac #... re addbacks’, tendered 12 august 2021 and labelled exhibit ‘r2’.
58 both parties also rely upon the following documents: affidavit of mr w, single expert witness, filed 28 may 2020, updated valuation filed 7 july 2021, and joint balance sheet amended by consent and tendered 12 august 2021 and labelled exhibit ‘c’.
issues in dispute
59 before considering the parties’ contentions as to the adjustment of property interests under s 90sm, i must determine the following preliminary issues: (1) the respondent’s use of the $179,974.60 redraw from the mortgage secured against the suburb o property, and whether it justifies an addback of those monies (either in full or in part), and (2) whether the applicant’s expenditure of his superannuation early in the relationship amounted to waste, and whether this expenditure justifies an addback of those monies.  the respondent’s use of the $179,974.60 redraw from the mortgage secured against the suburb o property, and whether it justifies an addback of those monies (either in full or in part), and (2) whether the applicant’s expenditure of his superannuation early in the relationship amounted to waste, and whether this expenditure justifies an addback of those monies.
60 with respect to the substantive application pursuant to s 90sm of the act, .the following issues require final determination: (1) the nature and extent of the applicant’s financial contributions both during and post the relationship, (2) the nature and extent of the applicant’s non-financial contributions, particularly to the renovations on the b street, suburb c and suburb o properties, (3) the nature and extent of the applicant’s homemaking contributions, particularly in relation to his care of x, (4) the extent of any adjustment to the respondent (if any) for s 90sf(2) factors, (5) whether there should be an alteration of the parties’ superannuation interests and, if an alteration should be made, the appropriate division of those assets, and (6) whether it is just and equitable to meet a proportion of the applicant’s non-superannuation entitlement with a superannuation split, the aim being to ensure the applicant retains the home at b street, suburb c.  the nature and extent of the applicant’s financial contributions both during and post the relationship, (2) the nature and extent of the applicant’s non-financial contributions, particularly to the renovations on the b street, suburb c and suburb o properties, (3) the nature and extent of the applicant’s homemaking contributions, particularly in relation to his care of x, (4) the extent of any adjustment to the respondent (if any) for s 90sf(2) factors, (5) whether there should be an alteration of the parties’ superannuation interests and, if an alteration should be made, the appropriate division of those assets, and (6) whether it is just and equitable to meet a proportion of the applicant’s non-superannuation entitlement with a superannuation split, the aim being to ensure the applicant retains the home at b street, suburb c.
evidence
61 i note at the outset that both parties allege that the other has not made full and frank disclosure. with respect to the primary issues focussed upon in cross-examination, i also have concerns about aspects of evidence from both parties.
the applicant’s evidence
62 the applicant confirmed as true and correct the contents of his affidavit and financial statement. he further confirmed that he currently lives with his parents at their home in suburb r. he was then cross-examined by mr hanrahan.
63 mr hanrahan devoted considerable attention during cross-examination to the applicant’s income and employment as it concerned his financial contributions both during and after the relationship. as stated, the applicant was issued a certificate under s 128 of the evidence act 1995 for this purpose.
64 the respondent alleges that the applicant has not cast sufficient light on his financial circumstances in general, and in particular on his income prior to and following separation.
65 the applicant did not agree with the respondent’s position that she worked more than him and received a greater income during the relationship. he maintained this position notwithstanding his low income as declared for the years in which he filed tax returns. as stated earlier, he agreed that he received cash but did not agree that his cash income was solely spent on himself. instead, he said that he contributed those funds to the relationship by way of rent or other household expenses. it was later put to him that he made little financial or non-financial contributions to the relationship, to which the applicant did not agree.
66 with respect to m pty ltd, the true nature of the applicant’s income and benefits from that company may have been clearer if ms n gave evidence.
67 the applicant’s evidence in relation to his financial contributions, income, and earning capacity was evasive and undetailed. further, his memory appeared to be sparse in relation to the redraw of funds. as such, i accept that the majority of the parties’ joint financial decisions were left to the respondent — most likely because she earned a greater income.
68 i am also suspicious of the applicant’s evidence in relation to his financial contributions because of the issues surrounding child support and payments to mr u. his current level of child support (assessed at $36.92 notwithstanding his current income) is concerning, particularly because of his concession that he sends money to mr u. further, the fact that he was concerned about self-incrimination due to false representations made to the australian taxation office as to his income does not aid his credibility in this respect.
69 the balance of the applicant’s evidence was largely uncontroversial. in relation to homemaking contributions he mostly conceded that the housekeeping responsibilities were left to the respondent. his non-financial contributions, asserted by him as renovating the parties’ properties and the respondent’s parents’ home, were largely conceded by the respondent in her oral evidence.
70 the applicant otherwise gave evidence in accordance with his affidavit.
the respondent’s evidence
71 the respondent confirmed as true and correct the contents of her affidavit and financial statement. she was then cross-examined by ms druitt.
72 ms druitt questioned the respondent in detail about the redraw funds, pointing her to several items of expenditure in her bank statements which showed her use of those monies. the bank statements evidenced that, from time to time, the respondent withdrew large sums of money.
73 during cross-examination, the respondent gave the following evidence in response to ms druitt’s questions about the contents of the bank statements: on 23 september 2020 the respondent withdrew approximately $50,000.00 to purchase a motor vehicle, which was ultimately not purchased with the respondent believing those monies to have been largely returned to the account over time, in march 2016 the respondent withdrew and then advanced to a friend named ms y a sum of $50,000.00, and believes to have been repaid in full a few weeks later (though she conceded that the loan was undocumented), in july 2016 the respondent withdrew and then advanced to other friends sums of $10,000.00 and $15,000.00, not remembering at trial the specific purpose of these loans, which were again undocumented and with no proof of repayment, in august 2016 the respondent again withdrew and then advanced to friends sums of $5,000.00 and $10,000.00, again undocumented and with no proof of repayment, in september 2015 the respondent withdrew sums of $45,000.00, $1,000.00 and $25,000.00, and though she could not remember the purpose of each withdrawal she noted that this was prior to separation and that she did not keep track of who paid for what during the relationship, with respect to a series of deposits as shown on the bank statements, some of which occurred in february 2016, the respondent could not say by whom the payments were made or for what purpose the sums were initially withdrawn, and despite initially denying that she used the redraw funds to pay her credit card debts post-separation, the respondent said that she paid some of the commonwealth bank account after being shown a part of her affidavit proving the same.
74 a particularly noteworthy concern is the respondent’s evidence that she lent proportions of the redraw monies to mostly unnamed ‘friends’ who were not called upon to corroborate her evidence. the respondent was confident that her debtors had repaid the loans, despite being unable to recollect the amounts loaned or clearly establish that the monies lent were repaid.
75 the respondent further agreed that, at the time she was utilising the redraw monies for herself and lending portions of it to ‘friends’, she was receiving income. as such it was not clear as to whether she needed to use the redraw monies to meet necessary expenses for herself and/or her children. the respondent was also receiving $2,000.00 per month in child support.
76 the respondent said that she used the redraw funds to make mortgage repayments. she also denied that she was working anything other than part time during this period, saying that there were times that she was not paid at all due to the impact of covid-19 upon her employment.
77 the respondent agreed that she paid significant legal fees post separation, amounting to approximately $85,000.00. only about $30,000.00 to 40,000.00 of that amount, however, was sourced from the redraw. she said that the balance of her legal fees was paid through loans from her family.
78 the respondent’s evidence regarding her use of the redraw monies was vague. as stated, she conceded that she did not regard the applicant as having any interest in the redraw monies nor in the b street, suburb c property. in essence, she felt unrestricted in her ability to use the redraw funds.
79 the respondent’s evidence as to her financial and non-financial contributions were generally unchallenged or unaffected by cross-examination. she said that she did not have access to the applicant’s money, but that he paid her in cash from time to time. further, she agreed that she received rental income from the suburb o property, but said that at times the applicant withheld rent collected by him on her behalf. despite not receiving amounts owing to her, she said she continued to meet the mortgage and living expenses. as stated, the respondent also largely conceded the applicant’s non-financial contributions in renovating their properties.
80 the applicant alleges that the respondent has not fully and frankly accounted for her expenditure of the redraw monies. i found her evidence of the same to be vague, despite this plainly being a significant issue for trial about which the respondent was on notice. further, the evidence in her bank statements fell short of providing a full and detailed account of her expenditure of the redraw monies. the respondent needed to explain how exactly these funds were spent, and did not adequately undertake this task. this leads me to significantly doubt, to some extent, upon what those funds were spent and whether her expenditure was wise. in particular, i refer here to the respondent’s evidence that she lent many amounts to ‘friends’. she did not call any of her ‘friends’ as witnesses. the respondent effectively conceded that the applicant did not obtain any direct benefit from the redraw, and did not consent to her spending those funds as she did.
81 the court may have been assisted if the respondent, in her affidavit or via an aide memoire, had provided a table evidencing her use of the redraw, with reference to her bank statements. that did not occur.
82 otherwise, the respondent gave evidence in accordance with her affidavit.
submissions
the applicant’s submissions
83 the applicant’s position with respect to the ultimate determination under s 90sm was that he should receive no less than 45% of the non-superannuation assets, with 55% of the same being given to the respondent. ms druitt appeared to premise her submission in this regard upon this court adding back some, but not all, of the redraw monies spent by the respondent. if i am to add back the redraw monies in accordance with the applicant’s case outline, he would receive approximately 33% of the parties’ net non-superannuation assets as agreed in exhibit c.
84 ms druitt submitted that, regardless of the percentage outcome, the applicant should receive $150,000.00 in cash. alternatively, if the b street, suburb c property must be sold, the applicant’s position is that he should receive 23% of the net proceeds of sale. further, ms druitt submitted that he should also receive the remaining sale proceeds from the suburb o property — the sum of $16,754.00 currently held as controlled monies by blanchfield nicholls lawyers.
85 with respect to superannuation, ms druitt submitted that the applicant should receive a splittable payment of $50,000.00 from the respondent’s superannuation fund. that amount would be split to his superannuation fund, in which he currently has $6,271.00. this, it was submitted, amounts to approximately 40% of the current superannuation holdings of the parties.
86 ms druitt also addressed the redraw monies, submitting that the respondent did fully and adequately disclose her use of those monies. subsequently, ms druitt submitted that i should be cautious to accept the respondent’s position that the money was spent maintaining herself and her children post-separation.
87 ms druitt further submitted that the sum of $40,000.00, being legal fees paid by the respondent from the redraw monies, should be added back to the property pool.
88 as to the balance of the redraw, i was asked to not only consider the vague manner in which the respondent gave evidence about the expenditure of the redraw, but also the large withdrawals from the account without real explanation. in this regard i was referred to exhibit a1, which includes an anz statement for the loan account for the period commencing 11 january 2016 and ending 11 april 2016. the statement evidences a number of large withdrawals. ms druitt submitted that she herself had not traced exactly what monies were deposited and withdrawn from the account because the process was too difficult — the redraw monies had been merged with other monies as deposited to the account by the respondent and others following separation.
89 ultimately, the applicant’s primary position in relation to the redraw monies is that the entire redraw of almost $180,000.00 should be added back to the property pool. this is because, in the applicant’s submission, the redraw monies constitute a premature distribution of a matrimonial asset to the respondent.
90 ms druitt submitted that if i do not add back the balance of the redraw monies spent, those funds should in the alternative be taken into account as a direct financial contribution made by the applicant post-separation. this is consistent with the decision of greir & malphas [2016] famcafc 84.[13]
91 on the issue of contributions ms druitt submitted that, whatever its actual amount, the applicant contributed his income to the relationship. further, the parties had the benefit of using ms n’s company credit card. the applicant also addressed in submissions that he undertook significant renovations to the b street, suburb c and suburb o properties.
92 in relation to factors under s 90sm(4)(d)-(g), ms druitt submitted that i should: regard the parties as having a similar income, but noted that the respondent has the ability to earn more, take into account, pursuant to robb & robb [1994] famca 136 (‘robb’),[14] the applicant’s care of and contributions to f during the relationship, take into account that the respondent has primary care of x and f, and potentially of g, and that the applicant also spends time with x and pays child support, and take into account that the respondent has had sole use and occupation of the b street, suburb c property for the five and a half years following the parties’ separation without significantly reducing the mortgage, and that the respondent had the benefit of rental income from the suburb o property until it sold in 2018.
93 the applicant’s position at trial was that, regardless of the property pool’s composition, a just and equitable outcome results in him receiving a total sum of $166,754.00 plus $56,271.00 in superannuation. this, ms druitt argued, is justified according to his significant contributions and the factors under s 90sm(4)(d)-(g), including the relevant s 90sf(3) factors.
94 with respect to superannuation, i was asked to reject any submission that the respondent should be allowed to pay the amount she owes the applicant from her superannuation. ms druitt submitted that the respondent adduced no evidence to justify such a proposal, having not substantiated her claim that she could not borrow more than $50,000.00 to pay the applicant.
the respondent’s submissions
95 the respondent’s position with respect to the ultimate determination under s 90sm was that she should retain the b street, suburb c property and the mortgage thereupon, and that the applicant receive the $16,754.00 in controlled monies and a further $50,000.00. this would result in a total payment to the applicant of $66,754.00.
96 mr hanrahan submitted that this outcome would be just and equitable, considering that the respondent may not be able to retain the home if she has to pay the applicant a greater amount. if any further amount became owing to the applicant it should, in mr hanrahan’s submission, be received from the respondent’s superannuation fund so as to prevent the b street, suburb c property from being sold.
97 consistently with the respondent’s evidence during cross-examination, mr hanrahan conceded that the sum of $40,000.00 in legal fees as paid from the redraw should be added back to the property pool.
98 with respect to the balance of the redraw monies, mr hanrahan submitted that the respondent’s expenditure was for her own and the children’s sustenance and should not constitute an addback. further, any monies lent to the respondent’s friends was returned to the account. mr hanrahan referred to exhibit r2, being an extract of the anz loan account statement for the period commencing 23 march 2016 and ending 18 august 2017, to support his submission in this regard.
99 the respondent’s argument as to her use of the redraw monies was that, after april 2017, she was not receiving a great deal of financial assistance from the applicant but remained responsible for mortgage and credit card payments.
100 mr hanrahan submitted that, if this court finds the respondent’s expenditure to be unexplained, the redraw monies may alternatively be considered as a direct financial contribution in part by the applicant (as in grier & malphas) or addressed under s 90sf(3)(r).
101 it was further submitted that i should regard as ‘bordering on waste’ the applicant’s use of his superannuation towards his failed vietnam business venture and the loss of the motor vehicle 1. mr hanrahan emphasised the term ‘bordering on’, effectively conceding that the expenditure did not amount to waste in the sense discussed in kowaliw & kowaliw [1981] famca 70, (1981) flc 91-092 (‘kowaliw’).[15] i questioned mr hanrahan as to why those matters could not simply be regarded as vicissitudes of life, instead of waste. i was not pointed to evidence that would establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the applicant engaged in reckless or wanton behaviour such that the accepted loss can be categorised as waste.
102 with respect contributions, mr hanrahan submitted that the respondent made the overwhelming financial contributions both during and after the relationship. i was asked to reject any contention that the applicant had contributed a significant income, in cash or otherwise, to the relationship. the applicant’s evidence, in mr hanrahan’s submission, was vague at best in relation to his income contributions.
103 as foreshadowed earlier the respondent argues that since separation, and particularly since april 2017, she has supported herself and x largely without meaningful financial support from the applicant.
104 in essence mr hanrahan submitted that the applicant’s pre and post-separation financial contributions, even taking into account any arguable contribution by him through the redraw, were far inferior to that of the respondent. mr hanrahan asked that i be cautious to accept the applicant’s unreliable evidence as to his income and financial contributions generally both during the relationship and after separation.
105 mr hanrahan conceded on the respondent’s behalf that the applicant contributed his labour and skills to renovations. the respondent maintained, however, that her family also contributed to the b street, suburb c property by way of their labour and skills.
106 it was further submitted that the respondent made the overwhelming contributions as a homemaker and parent both during the relationship and after separation. addressing the applicant’s purported care of f during the relationship, it was submitted that i should prefer the respondent’s evidence. the respondent’s account of the applicant’s parenting contributions with f were that he provided little assistance to her, and that she was primarily responsible for homemaking and parenting duties in any event. mr hanrahan pointed out that the applicant has no current relationship with f.
107 in relation to any further adjustments pursuant to s 90sm(4)(d)-(g), including adjustments under s 90sf(3), the respondent argued that there are no factors which point to an adjustment to the applicant. if there is to be any adjustment under those factors, mr hanrahan submitted, it would be to the respondent since she has primary care of x and f, and potentially g in the future.
108 overall, the respondent’s position is that the applicant should be assessed as holding a 15-25% interest in the non-superannuation property pool. the respondent’s view is that, whatever the percentage outcome, the just and equitable result is a payment of $66,754.00 to the applicant, including the controlled monies account.
109 finally, mr hanrahan submitted that there should be no split of superannuation to the applicant. it was, however, submitted that if more than $66,754.00 became payable to the applicant any further amount should be split from the respondent’s superannuation to the applicant’s superannuation.
property settlement in de facto cases
preliminary matters
110 the parties were in a de facto relationship as characterised by the act.[16] their relationship lasted approximately eight years,[17] and produced one child of that relationship.[18]
111 the evidence plainly establishes that, at the time of the application and for at least the last third their de facto relationship, both parties ordinarily resided in australia. i am therefore satisfied that the parties meet the geographical requirements which empower the court to make an order with respect to their property interests.[19]
legal principles
112 in altering the property interests of former de facto partners pursuant to s 90sm(1) of the act, this court is bound by the principles extracted in lotta & lotta [2017] famca 50:
“281. the approach to the determination of an application under s 79 of the act is set out in stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52 and further considered by the full court in bevan & bevan [2014] famcafc 19, chapman & chapman [2014] famcafc 91 and scott & danton [2014] famcafc 203. 282. the court must identify the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property, the liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the time of the hearing and then whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order. 283. such a consideration should not be guided by an assumption that the parties’ rights to or interests in property are or should be different from those that then exist. the question is whether those rights and interests should be altered. 284. there is no presumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them or a right to an interest in marital property that is fixed by reference to the various matters in s 79(4). the court needs to conclude that it would be unjust or unfair to leave property rights intact under s 79(2) of the act. 285. in many cases this requirement is readily satisfied where the parties are no longer in a marital or defacto relationship and, thus, for example, the common ownership or use of property by applicant and respondent will no longer be possible or the express or implicit assumptions that underpinned existing property arrangements such as the accumulation of assets or financial resources by one for the benefit of both have been brought to an end with the relationship. 286. in particular, such a circumstance arises where both parties seek property adjustment orders but are unable to agree as to same. here the respondent seeks an order for adjustment of property and the applicant contends that there should be no such adjustment. 287. it is thus important to ascertain the present property and resources of the parties so as to facilitate a consideration of the s 79(2) question. 288. in some circumstances it is not possible to determine whether it is just and equitable to make adjustment orders as to the parties present property rights without a consideration of s 79 (4) matters. 289. section 79(4) requires a consideration of the contributions made by the parties as defined in s 79(4)(a) to (c). the court must then consider s 79(4)(d) to (g) in particular the subjective considerations as to the parties by having regard to the provisions of s 75(2) in so far as they are relevant (s 79(4)(e)). 290. the court can then consider the “justice and equity” of the actual orders to be made: russell & russell [1999] famca 1875, (1999) flc 92-877, teal & teal [2010] famcafc 120, in the context of the court’s obligation to make “appropriate orders” as provided for in s 79(1) of the act.”[20]
113 subsections 90sm(1), 90sm(3) and 90sm(4) are, like their respective equivalents in ss 79(1), 79(2) and 79(4), subject to the high court’s approach and interpretation in stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52, 247 clr 108 (‘stanford’).[21]
114 the full court in fitzmaurice & woolridge [2020] famcafc 64 condensed the three key steps which must be embarked upon under s 90sm, which are of course subject to s 90sm(3):
“20. the short point however is, whether a staged or another approach is adopted by a judge engaged in determining the parties’ entitlement to property settlement orders, the fundamental responsibility imposed by s 90sm is to: identify the assets and liabilities of the parties available for consideration, consider and assess the parties’ contributions under s 90sm(4)(a)-(c), and consider and assess the matters relevant in s 90sm(4)(d)-(g), including referral to matters in s 90sf(3).”[22]
115 sections 90sm(1), (3), and (4) and 90sf(3) are extracted below:
90sm alteration of property interests (1) in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them—altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or (b) in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship—altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property, including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring: (i) either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or (ii) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any), to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines. ... (3) the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property, whether or not that last‑mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property, whether or not that last‑mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship. 90sf matters to be taken into consideration in relation to maintenance ... (3) the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia, and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and (o) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under this part in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (p) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (ii) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.  in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them—altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or (b) in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship—altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,  an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and  the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or  the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or  the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.  the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to: ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and (o) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under this part in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (p) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to: ) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.
the parties’ existing legal and equitable property interests
116 the process of ‘identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property’ is foundational to the entire inquiry under s 90sm.[23]
117 the table below extracts the contents of exhibit c, including amendments made by consent at trial. it has been reformatted for the purposes of these published reasons.
118 counsel for both parties agreed that a two-pool approach is appropriate in this matter. as such, i will address the parties’ non-superannuation assets and liabilities in one pool and their superannuation assets in another pool.
119 in relation to the non-superannuation assets, all of the relevant assets and liabilities and their respective values were agreed save for items 4, 5, 6, 7. these items are all monies sought to be added back to the asset pool for division.
120 item 4 is the redraw monies as spent by the respondent, save for that spent on legal fees.
121 items 5 and 6 are the legal fees paid by the respondent by the time of the trial.
122 item 7 are the legal fees as paid by the applicant as at the time of the trial.
123 as in the summary of ms druitt’s submissions, the applicant argues that the respondent spent all the redraw funds for her own benefit and without his consent. as such the redraw funds should be added back.
124 the respondent conceded that the applicant consented to their expenditure on purchasing the suburb p property, without knowledge of her otherwise spending the redraw funds. the respondent also concedes that her paid legal fees should be added back at $40,000.00. the balance should not, in the respondent’s view, be added back. she asserts that, save for her legal fees, the redraw was reasonably spent.
125 also with respect to legal fees, the respondent argues that the applicant has not explained the source from which he met his legal fees. as such, in her view, his legal costs should be added back to the property pool. the applicant says that he met his legal fees using monies borrowed from a third party.
126 also in contention is the applicant’s superannuation interest in 2008-2009 and the written-off motor vehicle 1 for which the respondent continued to make payments, purportedly ‘bordering on waste’. as noted in the summary of mr hanrahan’s submissions, he appeared to concede that these amounts cannot amount to ‘waste’ as the evidence does not show reckless or wanton expenditure.
addbacks — key principles
127 before addressing the submissions and making my determination with respect to addbacks, i will briefly summarise the legal principles. i will do so with specific reference to how the law views legal fees in the context of addbacks.
128 a marriage or de facto relationship is, in countless ways, a shared endeavour. married or de facto couples ordinarily work together to strengthen their economic position, and endure side by side the financial highs and lows of domestic life. in kowaliw baker j summarised the court’s view:
“marriage is for most couples an economic partnership. married couples live together and work together with the ultimate object of purchasing a home, paying it off, acquiring other assets with the overall object of attaining a higher standard of living. the reported decisions in respect of applications for settlement of property under sec. 79 of the act are unanimous hat both parties should share the economic fruits of a marriage, having regard to the provisions of sec. 79(4) and sec. 75(2), although not necessarily equally.”[24]
129 the inverse is also true — parties should generally share the financial losses incurred in the course of their relationship.[25] this statement of general principle is, of course, guided by the overarching requirement of justice and equity in property adjustment orders.
130 where one party has ‘prematurely and inappropriately obtained the benefit of property of the relationship prior to it being considered by the court at final hearing’,[26] it is often inappropriate for the loss caused by that party’s expenditure to be shared by both parties. a common example, as given in mayne & mayne [2011] famcafc 192 (‘mayne’), is a party withdrawing and using joint funds for their own purposes post-separation.[27]
131 a court faced with an application under ss 79 or 90sm may address any such injustice or inequity in three ways — taking it into account under ss 75(2)(o) / 90sf(30(r), notionally adding back the expenditure, or taking the expenditure into account as a contribution according to grier & malphas.
132 the first option that i will discuss is to take the conduct and loss into account under s 75(2)(o) or s 90sf(3)(r). baker j said further in kowaliw:
“it does seem to me, however, that if a party has either by deliberate act or by economic recklessness reduced the value of assets available for distribution then the economic consequences which flow therefrom including the resultant burden to the other party are directly relevant to a consideration of the respective contributions of the parties contemplated by sec. 79(4). if, on the other hand, the decision of the full court in antmann and antmann (supra) is to be interpreted both literally and restrictively as precluding the court from a consideration of negative contribution in relation to para. (a) or (b) of sec. 79(4) then i am nevertheless of the opinion that evidence of wantonness or recklessness having economic consequences is clearly a matter which the court may take into account pursuant to the provisions of sec. 75(2)(o).”[28]
133 the full court in dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, as restated by later authorities, refuted the idea that contributions should be assessed according to their ultimate economic result.[29] notwithstanding that ‘negative contributions’ cannot be taken into account, kowaliw is correct in that s 75(2)(o) (and therefore s 90sf(3)(r)) remains applicable to adjust any proposed division in the following circumstances:
“(a) where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.”[30]
134 the second option is to notionally ‘add back’ the property of which a party has disposed. the item is added back ‘notionally’ by including its value in the pool, since the exact property item no longer exists as property of one or both of the parties. in simply adding back the value of the item, the absence of that item in the property pool is perhaps most tangibly addressed.
135 the circumstances in which it may be inappropriate to share a loss are as extracted in omacini & omacini, sub nom ajo & gro [2005] famca 195 (‘omacini’) below. their honours in that case discussed addbacks, but the categories extracted may also be addressed through other means at the court’s discretion.[31]
“30. to date, three clear categories of cases have emerged where the court has determined that it is appropriate to notionally add back to the pool of assets, that is, assets that no longer exist. they are: where the parties have expended money on legal fees. in djm and jlm [1998] famca 97, (1998) flc 92-816 the full court said at 85,262:
11. 6 for reasons set out in farnell, s 117 provides that each party to proceedings under the family law act shall bear their own costs unless the court otherwise orders. failing to add back monies expended by parties on costs frequently has the effect of defeating the policy of s 117 by permitting the pool of available assets for distribution between the parties to be diminished by any monies that either of the parties have managed to spend on their costs up to the date of trial. we are of the view that the normal approach ought be to add costs already paid back into the pool. whilst there may be cases where that approach is inappropriate, the reasons why it is not taken ought normally be spelt out. where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets. in townsend and townsend [1994] famca 144, (1995) flc 92-569 nicholson cj as he then was with whom fogarty and g jj agreed, said at 81,654:
in my view, what occurred in this case, as i said during the course of argument was, in fact, a premature distribution of a proportion of the matrimonial assets. what the husband did was to distribute to himself an asset in which the wife had a legitimate interest. in such circumstances i consider that it would be unjust in the extreme to simply treat such conduct by the husband as a matter to which regard should be had under section 75(2). it seems to me that the husband has had the benefit of that money. had he retained, for example, the taxi licence instead of selling it, that would have been brought into account as an item of property which would have been dealt with in the same way as the remaining items of property in this case. accordingly, i am of the view that the correct way in which to deal with the husband’s receipt of those moneys is to bring them into the pool of assets on a notional basis and make a distribution accordingly. in the circumstances outlined by baker j in kowaliw and kowaliw [1981] famca 70, (1981) flc 91-092 at 76,644:
as a statement of general principle, i am firmly of the view that financial losses incurred by parties or either of them in the course of a marriage whether such losses result from a joint or several liability, should be shared by them (although not necessarily equally) except in the following circumstances: (a) where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.”[32]
136 the full court in mayne also said the following in relation to addbacks and their utility in pursuance of justice and equity:
“78. it seems that human experience (and common sense) shows that while parties are together, each might, from time to time and with the consent of the other, either express or implied, apply or appropriate assets or funds to his or her own purposes. when the relationship is good, no-one is likely to care — let alone keep records. individual amounts may stand out, as is the case here, but many small transactions in combination may exceed, in total value, one large transaction. 79. it is not the court's function to conduct an audit of the marriage or of the relationship finances. the parties' remedies for resolving disputes about expenditure while they are together are centred on them and them alone. choosing one transaction from many prior to separation for different treatments, specifically "to be added-back" or notionally included in the pool of property may make doing justice and equity between the parties difficult.”[33]
137 the full court in vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51 clarified that neither stanford nor bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116 had the effect of making addbacks unavailable to first instance judges where they are an appropriate solution.[34] it is, however, ‘beyond doubt’ that notional addbacks are exceptional,[35] and that the full court’s remarks in c & c [1998] famca 143 remain authoritative:
“46. whilst not seeking to place a fetter upon the exercise of a trial judge in individual cases, it seems to us that the concept of adding monies reasonably disposed of back into the pool ought to be the exception rather than the rule. the parties are entitled to reasonably conduct their affairs post-separation in a manner that is consistent with properly getting on with their lives. providing modest support for their adult children or taking not inappropriate holidays for themselves seems to fit comfortably within that description.”[36]
138 gill j in koch & kest [2021] famca 408, in explaining addbacks in the context of legal fees, extracts and cites with approval nhc & rhc [2004] famca 633 (‘chorn & hopkins’) as authority that outstanding legal fees in themselves are not generally added back as a liability.[37] the full court in chorn & hopkins also stated the following with respect to legal fees:
“56. in summary, we consider that the above mentioned decisions of the full court establish that, while the treatment of funds used to pay legal costs remains ultimately a matter for the discretion of the trial judge, in determining how to exercise that discretion, regard should be had to the source of the funds. 57. if the funds used existed at separation, and are such that both parties can be seen as having an interest in them (on account, for example, of contributions), then such funds should be added back as a notional asset of the party, who has had the benefit of them. 58. if funds used to pay legal fees have been generated by a party post-separation from his or her own endeavours or received in his or her own right (for example, by way of gift or inheritance), they would generally not be added back as a notional asset, nor would any borrowing undertaken by a party post- separation to pay legal fees be taken into account as a liability in the calculation of the net property of the parties. funds generated from assets or businesses to which the other party had made a significant contribution or has an actual legal entitlement may need to be looked at differently from other post-separation income or acquisitions.”[38]
139 the third option is to, where appropriate, treat the expenditure as a contribution of the other party as discussed by their honours in grier & malphas.[39] bryant cj remarked:
“57. in my view there is merit in ground 4(b). i would not necessarily wish to be seen as endorsing the effect of receipt of these funds as “add backs” to the balance sheet, something which her honour eschewed. however the receipt of these funds by the husband requires expression in some form, either as a matter to be taken into account under s 75(2)(o), or, as the wife later argues, in relation to contributions. but however expressed, failure to properly account for it leads to the conclusion that the result reached by her honour was “plainly wrong” (see norbis & norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513 per brennan j at 539).”
140 murphy and kent jj remarked further that:
“141. when the parties to a relationship earn income and derive capital through corporate/trust structures established primarily to lawfully minimise taxation, the indirect contribution of a party who is not involved in the day-to-day operation of those structures is sometimes overlooked. yet, the “non-active” party can, in truth, be a significant contributor. this court said more than 30 years ago in lee steere and lee steere, “it cannot be denied that the splitting of income tax is a direct and immediate financial benefit to the husband and to that extent a direct financial contribution on the part of the wife”. so, too, “the issue of the wife’s personal liability as a director of the companies ... is a matter of increasing relevance in recent times ... the ‘days of the sleeping, or passive, director are well and truly over ’”
141 while a loss purposefully or recklessly incurred may not be properly treated as a negative contribution, it may nonetheless be treated as a contribution of the party who has not experienced the benefit of that expenditure.
142 the case of grier & malphas also concerned the unexplained use of significant funds by the husband post-separation, and considered how the same is to be taken into account if not treated as an addback. the first instance decision avoided adding back these amounts, but without taking them into account under s 75(2)(o) or as a contribution of the wife. bryant cj stated that the husband’s receipt of the funds ‘require[d] expression in some form’, noting that the wife’s submission to take it into account as a contribution was unclear at trial.[40] in their honours’ reasons, murphy and kent jj remark that the power under s 79 (and s 90sm) is discretionary. while ‘authority eschews “overly pernickety analysis” and s 90sm demands neither an audit nor an exercise in accounting’, the trial judge must in their discretion take it into account in the appropriate manner.[41]
143 the main contention before me with respect to addbacks concerns the redraw monies. if the redraw funds are to be added back, should this court add back the total amount or only a proportion thereof? if the total redraw is not added back, should the balance instead be taken into account as a contribution, in some other way, or not at all?
should this court add back the parties’ legal fees?
144 consistent with the respondent’s concession during cross-examination, her legal fees as paid from the redraw monies should be added back to the asset pool. she estimated that she used between $30,000.00 and $40,000.00 of the redraw monies to meet her legal costs.
145 i will add back $40,000.00 for the respondent’s legal fees. i rely upon the respondent’s upper estimate because, considering poor recollection of her use of the redraw monies generally, it is likely to be more accurate.
146 with respect to the applicant’s legal fees, the respondent did not produce evidence establishing that the applicant had met his legal costs using joint funds. indeed, the applicant said that he obtained loans from the anz bank and his parents to pay his legal costs. the respondent did not provide evidence to counter this position.
147 having regard to the source of the funds by which the applicant met his legal costs, consistently with chorn & hopkins above, i will add back neither the applicant’s legal fees nor the loans obtained to meet them.
should this court add back the balance of the redraw monies and, if so, in what amount?
148 as stated in grier & malphas, i must consider the respondent’s use of the redraw monies carefully and give it some form of expression towards a just and equitable outcome.[42] in my discretion i must consider whether the respondent’s use of the redraw (in whole or in part) should be regarded as an addback, under s 90sf(3)(r), or as an indirect financial contribution of the applicant.
149 ms druitt submitted that the entire balance of the redraw monies should be treated as an addback. this way, the pool captures the respondent’s expenditure on things other than legal fees. exhibit c, extracted at paragraph 117 of these reasons, refers to an addback value of $156,000.00. the applicant did not produce evidence to corroborate this figure.
150 the entire redraw amount is $179,974.60. having already determined an addback of $40,000.00 for the respondent’s legal fees, the balance of the redraw monies equals $139,974.60.
151 the respondent’s oral evidence as to her use of the redraw monies was confusing, and the documents relied upon do little to elucidate the matter. as outlined earlier, she vaguely described loans to friends but was confident that they had repaid the amounts purportedly loaned.
152 the respondent referred to exhibit r2, being extracts from loan account statements between 23 march 2016 and 18 september 2017, in an attempt to explain the use of the redraw monies. the document shows that, during the statement period, a total of $210,000.00 was withdrawn and a total of $184,300.00 deposited. exhibit r2 does not, however, show or account for the respondent’s expenditure of all the redraw monies.
153 the applicant claims that the respondent lent to her brother, daniel, large sums from the redraw.[43] the respondent denies the same.[44] neither party greatly explored the matter during cross-examination, nor did i receive submissions on this contention.
154 the respondent did not call or otherwise provide evidence from daniel to corroborate her position. further, she did not call or otherwise provide evidence from any of the ‘friends’ to whom she purportedly loaned sums from the redraw monies. in both respects, calling witnesses to corroborate her position would have aided this court in determining the true use of those monies.
155 in these circumstances, this court may infer that the evidence from daniel and her ‘friends’ would not have assisted her case. in the words of lord mansfield in blatch v archer [1774] engr 2, (1774) 98 er 969:
“all evidence is to be weighed according to the poof which it was in the power of one side to have produced, and in the power of the other side to have contradicted.”[45]
156 jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8, 101 clr 298 is a ‘particular application’ of the rule in blatch v archer,[46] stating in relation to the trial judge’s directions that:
“what should have been added, and not being added was in the circumstances as good as denied, was that any inference favourable to the plaintiff for which there was ground in the evidence might be more confidently drawn when a person presumably able to put the true complexion on the facts relied on as the ground for the inference has not been called as a witness by the defendant and the evidence provides no sufficient explanation of his absence.”[47]
157 the rule in jones v dunkel appears to operate as a narrower application of the rule in blatch v archer. the former refers to potential inferences arising from a respondent’s failure to refute evidence presented by the party bearing the onus of proof, if that respondent would be able to call or give such evidence. the latter provides for potential inferences against either party — the core of the rule concerns evidence which is plainly available to a party to give or call which remains ungiven or uncalled, and for which there is no explanation beyond that it would not have assisted their case.[48]
158 by virtue of jones v dunkel, and in light of the respondent’s failure to call relevant witnesses which she had the power to call, this court:
“can be confident about drawing inferences against a party who has chosen not to give evidence [if] it was within the power of the party to produce evidence on that matter.”[49]
159 i infer that daniel and the respondent’s ‘friends’, had they given evidence, would not have assisted the respondent’s case. in particular, i infer that they would not have assisted her in relation to whether the amounts purportedly loaned were repaid.
160 the question remains — upon what did the respondent spend the redraw monies?
161 notwithstanding this inference being so drawn, it is nonetheless inappropriate in this matter to add back the balance of the redraw funds. this is because the applicant’s evidence does not discharge his onus of proof as to the use of these monies.
162 the applicant alleges that the respondent’s use of the funds justifies the same being added back. as such, he carries the onus of proof. the standard of proof is that i am convinced on the balance of probabilities, which means that in civil matters that ‘an allegation [must be] made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal’.[50]
163 his evidence does not show that the respondent acted purposefully to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of their shared assets, nor does it show that she acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with the same. further, his evidence does not show that the balance of the redraw (beyond the $40,000.00 in legal fees) constitutes an impermissible premature distribution of their assets to the respondent.
164 neither party provided me with a spreadsheet, nor with any analysis of the use of the entire balance of the redraw. i cannot, on the evidence presented, determine exactly how the respondent spent the almost $140,000.00 of remaining redraw funds. as stated in mayne, ‘it is not the court’s function to conduct an audit of the ... relationship finances’.[51]
165 the applicant did annex to his affidavit (through a bundle of documents treated as annexures) a copy of statements from the loan account from 9 october 2015 until 25 september 2017. the statements demonstrate how quickly the respondent spent the redraw monies.
166 as previously stated, these statements reveal a deposit of $179,974.60 on 19 october 2015. that amount constitutes the full redraw monies. at the time the redraw was deposited, the balance in the account was $180,354.20.
167 in march 2016 — the time at which the parties agree separation occurred — the loan account balance was $159,943.51.
168 by 19 october 2016 — one year after the redraw monies were deposited — the balance of the loan account was $23,255.57. i note also that the respondent’s salary was deposited into the loan account.
169 by 11 april 2017, the account balance was $9,783.47.
170 by 25 september 2017, the last entry, the account balance was $2,732.91.
171 it is indisputable that the respondent spent all of the redraw by september 2017. as stated earlier, she provided no evidence that monies loaned to friends were repaid after that date.
172 exhibit c, as extracted at paragraph 117 of these reasons, does not mention the redraw account. i infer that the account now holds negligible funds or that it has been closed.
173 at the time the redraw monies were being withdrawn, the respondent was working and receiving child support of $2,000.00 per month.[52] her employment income was deposited into the loan account, and other large deposits as evidenced by exhibit r2 were also made. yet, the redraw monies were largely spent within 12 months of them being deposited. the respondent said under cross-examination that, apart from legal fees, some of the monies went towards her credit card debt. she gave no further detail, and overall made no effort to explain her expenditure either in her affidavit or in cross-examination.
174 that said, the respondent during that period had primary care of at least x and f, and met mortgage payments and other outgoings. she may have applied for the redraw for personal purposes, or she may have done so to sustain herself and/or her children. it is to be remembered that the respondent has had up to three children in her care post-separation. further, after april 2017 she did not receive a meaningful level of child support from the applicant such that it would have met expenses for x. she had, however, spent nearly the entire redraw by october 2016.
175 the evidence being insufficient for me to find a deliberate or a reckless depletion of the balance of the redraw monies, the same cannot constitute an addback in these proceedings. the applicant’s evidence does not establish to the requisite standard the true position, and neither party undertook a forensic examination of the loan account. evidence from both parties, and in particular the respondent, was confusing and vague.
176 the applicant did not justify that the balance of the redraw should constitute an addback. there is no blatch v archer inference, as there does not appear to be any further witness which the applicant would have been in a position to call on this issue. the evidence just was not sufficient.[53]
177 the reality remains, however, that the respondent did use those funds. her use of the balance of the redraw cannot be ignored.
178 i will take into account the respondent’s largely unexplained expenditure of the redraw monies consistent with the approach as approved in grier & malphas.[54] ms druitt submitted that, if not added back, the applicant should be regarded as having contributed half of the spent redraw monies to the relationship. i intend to adopt this approach.
conclusion regarding non-superannuation pool
179 following my determinations as to the asset pool and any addbacks thereto, i find that the property for division in this matter is as contained in the table below.
non-superannuation property
section 90sm(3) — is it just and equitable to alter the parties’ non-superannuation property interests?
180 before embarking upon the assessments required under ss 90sm(4) i must consider whether it is just and equitable for any property adjustment order to be made. the opening words of s 90sm(4) make this clear, as confirmed in stanford.[55]
181 having determined the composition of the asset pool, i must be satisfied that it is just and equitable to interfere with the parties’ legal and equitable interests in the items of property included therein. in interfering with parties’ legal and equitable interests, the court must adhere to principled reason, including but not limited to ‘those principles which the act itself lays down’.[56] of course, justice and equity in the context of property settlement ‘does not admit of exhaustive definition’ and it is ‘not possible to chart its metes and bounds’.[57]
182 not only must a property alteration order be built upon the correct approach and ultimately be ‘just and equitable’, but it also must fulfil the court’s duty to end financial relations between the parties.[58]
183 the inquiry as to the justice and equity of adjusting property interests, and of the terms of any order requiring such adjustment, is continuing. this court shall not make an order under section 90sm “unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order”.[59]
184 the principles contained within the act also accommodate ‘stated or unstated assumptions and agreements about property interests during the continuance of the marriage’.[60] it is just and equitable, according to stanford, for a court to make a property settlement order if such agreements or assumptions with respect to marital property interests during the marriage have been brought to an end, which usually occurs with the end of the marriage.
185 the parties agree that it is just and equitable for their property interests to be adjusted by an order pursuant to s 90sm. any stated and unstated assumptions or agreements between them as to how they held property during the relationship came to an end upon their separation.
186 i am satisfied that it is just and equitable to make an order adjusting the parties’ existing property interests.
section 90sm(4)(a)-(c) — contributions
187 the approach to assessing contributions under s 90sm is often explained (and even more frequently embarked upon) by courts. yet, the undertaking remains complex and rich with possibilities of error. in jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78 (‘jabour’), the full court noted the ways in which the trial judge erred in weighing the contributions of the parties:
“73. as can be sees the primary judge weighed the myriad contributions made by the parties against the contribution made by the applicant in bringing in property a rather than treating property a as one of the myriad contributions made.”[61]
188 this approach had the effect of the contributions of the respondent in that case being overlooked,[62] including those contributions ‘made in the course of a long marriage during which both parties worked very hard and raised a family’.[63]
189 in fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57 the full court said:
“168. however, the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by s 79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.”[64]
190 the following sections assess the parties’ contributions under s 90sm (a) to (c), and then consider whether adjustment should be made pursuant to the factors under s 90sm (d) to (g).
section 90sm(4)(a) — direct and indirect financial contributions
191 the respondent has been employed since the relationship began, and worked throughout the relationship as a health care worker. she did take maternity leave for a period of approximately one year during the relationship. upon returning to the workforce she worked part-time, and has since at least 2012 undertaken a second job.
192 the applicant did not challenge the respondent’s evidence that she met the mortgage and outgoings for their family during the relationship. the properties and mortgages were all in the respondent’s sole name, as was the loan for the motor vehicle 1 for which she continued to make repayments after the vehicle was written off. the applicant agreed that the respondent paid for the b street, suburb c renovations. he did not challenge that she paid for the suburb o renovations. it was also not challenged that the respondent sent monies to mr u during the relationship.[65] the respondent now suspects that the applicant was in a relationship with mr u.
193 the respondent also claims that she did not receive all the rent for the suburb o property during the relationship, with the applicant at times collecting it on her behalf and allegedly withholding it. she did, however, receive that rent post separation.
194 the respondent has continued to work post separation, and has continued to meet the costs of raising x, without a great amount of financial support. she has also continued to pay the mortgages and other property debts and outgoings, including maintaining the b street, suburb c property.
195 at the commencement of the relationship, the parties received the benefit of monies provided to the respondent by her mother. the respondent says that these were provided to allow the respondent to pay the deposit on the b street, suburb c property. there was no evidence from either party contesting this point.
196 the law presumes that a donor intends to benefit the person to whom they gift, transfer, or otherwise advance money or property. contradictory evidence may rebut this presumption.
197 fogarty j in gosper & gosper [1987] famca 43, flc 91-818 remarked upon gifts to one or both parties to a relationship which are then applied to that relationship:
“67. where there has been a gift or advance by a relative to one or both of the parties to the marriage the first step is to determine the ownership of that benefaction (see rainbird, read). confusion often arises at this point because, particularly with gifts of money or in kind, the evidence about it is confused and imprecise and the actual intention of the donor (the critical issue) may have been ill- defined. however, where evidence enables the court to determine that it is a gift to one or the other or both of the parties, that is an important finding. normally where title to a property is transferred to one or both of the parties that would be the strongest indicator of the intention of the donor. ... 72. where a gift is made solely to the donor’s relative (for example a gift by parents to their married daughter) and that spouse applies that property to the marriage, that is a direct financial contribution solely by that party and will be assessed in the ordinary way alongside other contributions by each party to the marriage.”[66]
198 absent any evidence from the respondent’s mother as to her intentions, the funds advanced by her to the respondent are to be considered a contribution of the respondent to the relationship. the respondent’s evidence was that she was given those funds to pay the deposit on the b street, suburb c property. that property was ultimately placed, and remains, in her sole name. there is no evidence from the applicant that, despite the apparent facts and circumstances, the respondent’s mother intended to benefit both spouses and not her daughter alone. as such, the presumption remains.[67]
199 throughout the relationship, the respondent was primarily responsible for the parties’ finances and maintained the mortgages and other property-related expenses. she has received little financial support from the applicant post-separation after 2017, save for that which he contributed through the redraw monies.
200 based on his tax returns, the applicant did not receive a large income for the majority of the relationship. he claims, however, that he and the respondent received the benefit of his mother’s company credit card. the respondent did not deny using the card. the applicant said, under the protection of a s 128 certificate, that he contributed large amounts of income to the relationship in cash. he maintained during cross-examination that, notwithstanding his income declarations on his tax returns, he worked long hours for up to six days per week. he claims that as of the early stages of their relationship, he earned between $800.00 and $1,200.00 per week. further, he said that the respondent maintained strict control of the parties’ finances and that he gave her all of his earnings to manage.[68]
201 perhaps unsurprisingly, the applicant did not produce evidence to corroborate his claims. ms n, his mother, was not put on affidavit or called as a witness in relation to the applicant’s income. as the owner of m pty ltd pty ltd, she could have corroborated the true nature of his income from 2012 to 2015. applying blatch v archer, i infer that ms n’s evidence would not have assisted the applicant’s case in this regard.
202 as for the applicant’s cash income, the respondent agrees that the applicant earned some income in cash. she disputes, however, that she received much benefit from the cash income received by him. during cross-examination, she said that some monies received by her from the applicant came via an account he kept with his mother. the respondent said that, prior to obtaining income from m pty ltd, the applicant would send his mother ‘$1,000.00 every few months’. she maintained throughout her evidence that the applicant retained most of the monies received by him.
203 i accept that the applicant received cash income in addition to the small income declared on his tax returns. i do not, however, accept that he and the respondent contributed an equal amount of income to the relationship. as stated earlier, the applicant’s evidence about his income was unsatisfactory. in particular, he did not provide evidence as to how he spent the cash income which the respondent alleges was not contributed to family expenses.[69]
204 i accept the essence of the respondent’s evidence, namely that she was the more industrious of the pair and that she worked two jobs and managed the parties’ finances.[70] she met all the parties’ expenses and held all their loans and properties in her name. this is consistent with her earning a higher and more stable income than the applicant throughout the relationship. as stated above, the respondent says that she did not see the benefit of the applicant’s cash income. she did not refer to any other evidence to support this assertion, and the applicant did not provide evidence to counter her position.
205 in the decision of parshen & parshen [1996] famca 141, flc 92-720 (‘parshen’) the full court reasoned that:
“in our view, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it should be inferred in proceedings pursuant to s.79 that moneys howsoever received by a party during the course of the parties’ cohabitation, are used by that party for the benefit of the family unit. such moneys, in those circumstances, thus constitute a financial contribution by the party who received the moneys.”[71]
206 carter j in hutton & hutton [2007] famca 1701 explained as to the operation of the principle in parshen as follows:
“338. in parshen (1996) flc 92-720 at 83,665 the full court rejected contentions advanced on behalf of the respondent about the need for evidence to establish that moneys received during the course of a relationship were used for joint purposes. ... 339. these principles apply during the parties’ cohabitation and the court should not depart from them unless satisfied on the evidence that it is appropriate to do so. the respondent bears the evidentiary onus in this regard because she is the person who makes the allegation.”[72]
207 in rebutting the presumption expressed in parshen, it is not enough that one party ‘merely asserts that moneys have been retained by the other party for his/her “own purposes”’.[73] their honour’s reasoning is sound — the consequences upon the evaluation of contributions, once rebutted, is significant. abandoning the presumption therefore requires more than a mere assertion.
208 there is no evidence compelling enough to establish that the applicant’s monies (declared or otherwise) were not used for the benefit of the relationship. perversely, the family’s finances directly benefitted from the fact that the applicant under-declared his true income tax liability.
209 the respondent has benefitted from occupying the b street, suburb c property post-separation, which in some cases can be regarded as an indirect financial contribution of the party not occupying the property.[74] the respondent has not, in this case, occupied the b street, suburb c property effectively ‘rent free’. she has been paying the mortgage and meeting the outgoings, and as such the applicant has not made an indirect financial contribution in this way.
210 in summary i find that the respondent has made, and continues to make, greater financial contributions than the applicant to the relationship. the respondent’s financial contributions include not only her income, but also the funds from her mother for the b street, suburb c property deposit.
211 there was much contention as to the expenditure of the redraw by the respondent. as set out earlier in these reasons, i regard the applicant as having equally contributed to those funds spent by the respondent, however they were used.
212 notwithstanding the applicant’s financial contribution by way of the redraw monies, his financial contributions overall i find to be lesser than those of the respondent. while the applicant did contribute some cash income, his evidence as to his financial contributions overall was poor. his taxation returns, as discovered, evidenced a small income. further, he did not take the opportunity to corroborate his evidence with respect to his income from m pty ltd by calling ms n as a witness.
section 90sm(4)(b) — direct and indirect contributions other than financial contributions
213 the applicant said that during the relationship he was directly involved in undertaking significant demolition and renovations of the b street, suburb c property.
214 the respondent, during cross-examination, agreed that the applicant undertook work in line with paragraph 12 of his affidavit save for sub-paragraphs (g) and (l). paragraph 12 reads:
12. prior to occupying b street, suburb c, i completed substantial renovations on the b street, suburb c property including,
a. repaired the laundry water damage, b. knocked out walls, c. reconstructed new walls, d. stripped and rebuilt the main bathroom, e. removed the old toilet, rearranged the internal wall configuration, f. repainted and arranged for the retiling of the whole house, g. built three (3) built-in wardrobes, h. substantial further carpentry in completing shelving and cupboards, i. created gardens in the front and rear all with the help of friends and tradesmen i know, j. located, purchased and arranged delivery of all new materials, k. prepared, recycled building materials. l. co-ordinated and supervised electricians, gyprocker and plumber tradesmen.
215 those conceded renovations as set out at paragraph 12 were substantial.
216 as outlined in the facts of this matter, the parties agree that the respondent and her family assisted with the renovations on the b street, suburb c property and that the respondent paid for those renovations.
217 with respect to the suburb o property, the respondent said that she and her family undertook the renovations. the applicant did not give any evidence about the suburb o renovations.[75] in light of the respondent’s concessions during cross-examination, i find that she understated the applicant’s contribution to renovating the b street, suburb c property.[76] the applicant is a builder by trade, and has the requisite skills to undertake the work. further, the respondent did not challenge the applicant’s evidence that he also did some work on the respondent’s parents’ home.
218 the respondent said she assisted with the paperwork for m pty ltd, and that she maintained the applicant’s dogs. the applicant was silent about these matters.
219 in all the circumstances it is my view that the applicant made important contributions to the parties’ properties through renovating them. further, i am persuaded that the respondent has understated the applicant’s contributions in this respect.
220 i find that the applicant made a slightly greater contribution than the respondent under this heading.
section 90sm(4)(c) — contributions to the welfare of the family including as homemaker and parent
221 the applicant claims that he actively involved himself in all facets of x’s care during the relationship.[77] he says that after separation he was increasingly removed from x’s life.[78] he now spends time with x each fortnight and during holidays.
222 the applicant’s affidavit is silent as to his contribution to homemaking duties. he indicated during cross-examination that he did some work in this regard.
223 the respondent claims that the applicant did little housework, and that she was almost solely responsible for household chores and homemaking in general.[79] she also asserts that the applicant contributed little to x’s care, contrary to the applicant’s evidence. post-separation, the respondent has been primarily responsible for f and x. she also had her third son, g, with mr t in 2018. g has lived with mr t since the respondent and mr t separated.
224 the applicant has paid meagre child support of $37.00 per month — amounting to $8.54 per week — since 2017. the respondent agrees that the applicant and his mother paid $2,000.00 per month as child support for a period of 11 months immediately following separation. save for the first post-separation year, the respondent has financially supported x without meaningful help from the applicant. not only have the majority of x’s expenses fallen upon the respondent but she has also, post separation, met all the obligations relating to the b street, suburb c and suburb o properties, including their maintenance.
225 i accept the respondent’s evidence that she was primarily responsible for homemaking, including household chores and child rearing and care. the applicant’s evidence in this respect was not detailed. he agreed, as put by mr hanrahan, that it ‘was not as though he did [the housekeeping] all day’ at times when the respondent was at work and he was not. he did say that he did some internal and external work, but he did not expand upon this. he conceded that he was “a bit down” after his return from vietnam, and that it was hard to find work, but he disputed the respondent’s claim that he occupied himself at this time by watching television at her parents’ house.
226 the applicant further said in response to questions about homemaking that he did work on the respondent’s parents’ home and the b street, suburb c property. he was not pressed to specify his day-to-day housekeeping contributions, which made his evidence in this respect unclear. his evidence also seemed to reflect evidence already given and conceded as to his contributions to the renovations on the b street, suburb c property and the respondent’s parents’ home.
227 the respondent also contributed to the welfare of the family by being the person responsible for the administrative demands of their relationship. in saying this, i specifically refer to her responsibilities to manage finances, organise renovations and meet the outgoings. the applicant conceded that he was content to let the respondent manage the paperwork to do with the household.
228 during the relationship, the respondent also had primary responsibility for f. it follows that she was the primary carer for x, and her role in this regard continued post-separation. the caring arrangements post-separation also to some extent corroborate the respondent’s evidence as to the care arrangements during the relationship.
229 with respect to the welfare of the family, including homemaking and parenting, i find that the respondent made a greater contribution both pre and post-separation. in making this finding, i accept the applicant’s position that he (at least to some degree) had a relationship with and was involved in the care of f, the respondent’s first son. the respondent was and continued to be f’s primary caregiver and, as such, the applicant would have been a consistent figure in his life for the eight years of the relationship. i accept the respondent’s evidence that she did the lion’s share of housekeeping and child care. the applicant’s evidence with respect to his day-to-day contributions to cleaning or child care throughout the relationship was vague. importantly, the applicant conceded that he was content to place their shared administrative and financial responsibilities on the respondent. he agreed that he was not interested in taking up what he considered to be ‘her’ areas of responsibility. the applicant’s passivity in this respect, as well as his vague evidence, ground my finding that the respondent made greater contributions to the welfare of the family.
230 in so finding, i note that homemaking contributions should not be given token weight. in valuing a homemaker’s contribution courts must recognise that this may be given weight under s 90sm(4)(c) and s 90sm(4)(b). in dawes & dawes [1989] famca 71, the full court stated:
“73. although it is difficult, as it always is in such cases, to put one's finger squarely on what led his honour to so undervalue the respondent's contribution, we think that one significant matter which did so was that he failed to give any weight to the fact that the respondent's performance of her role as homemaker and parent during the 30 years of cohabitation was not just a contribution under s.79(4)(c) (which he subsequently recognized to some degree) but was also a significant contribution under s.79(4)(b). that point was made by the full court (nicholson, c.j., murray and buckley, jj.) in in the marriage of napthali (1988) 13 fam lr 146 at p 151, where their honours said:-
"turning now to the second ground of appeal, (which was that 'the court erred in law in failing to take into account contributions made by the respondent during the marriage as homemaker and parent') it is apparent that nowhere in her honour's judgment does she consider the contribution of the respondent to the business assets as a home-maker and parent. it is clear that the respondent did perform this role and nowhere in the evidence or in the submissions was any criticism directed at her capacities in this regard. it is to be noted that in mallet v. mallet [1984] hca 21, (1984) 9 fam lr 449, (1984) flc 91-507, the high court whilst rejecting the proposition of a presumption of equality, approved statements by this court that the purpose of s 79(4)(b) is to give recognition to the position of the house respondent who by her attention to the home and the children frees her applicant to earn income and acquire assets and also approved the proposition that the contribution made by the respondent as a home-maker and parent should be recognised not in a token way but in a substantial way: see gibbs c.j. at fam lr 451, flc 79,111, mason j. at fam lr 461-2, flc 119-20.”[80]
conclusion regarding the assessment of contributions pursuant to s 90sm(4)(a)-(c)
231 i assess the parties’ contributions under s 90sm(4)(a)-(c) as 57.5% to the respondent, and 42.5% to the applicant. in making this assessment, i am taking into account the respondent’s greater financial, homemaking, and parenting contributions pre and post separation. i am also taking into account the applicant’s financial and non-financial contributions, particularly his renovation work. further, i specifically take into account the applicant’s contribution to the redraw monies as spent by the respondent post-separation. that was a significant financial contribution of the applicant, which i will give it weight accordingly.
232 with the net non-superannuation assets totalling $385,650.00, the applicant is on my assessment entitled to property worth $163,901.25 and the respondent to property worth $221,748.75. this results in a differential of $57,847.50.
section 90sm(4)(d)-(g) — other factors, including relevant factors in s 90sf(3)
section 90sm(4)(d) — effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party
233 the full court in beck & beck [1983] famca 7, (1983) flc 91-318 defined ‘earning capacity’ for the purposes of s 75(2)(k), applicable the act generally, as:
“a capacity to obtain income which could be used to provide maintenance ... and not merely as current income from personal exertion or from the use of personal skills.”[81]
234 where a party holds assets capable of producing income, whether or not these assets in fact do so is irrelevant to assessing ‘earning capacity’. the owner’s earning capacity is the ‘capacity to earn the amount which those assets reasonably invested or utilised would produce’.[82]
235 there is no evidence that any order altering the parties’ property interests will affect their earning capacity.
section 90sm(4)(e) — the matters referred to in s 90sf(3) so far as they are relevantsection 90sf(3)(a) — the age and state of health of each of the parties
236 the applicant is 41 years of age, and the respondent is 39 years of age. both appear to be in good health.
section 90sf(3)(b) — the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment
237 neither party claims that they are unable to undertake gainful employment.
238 the respondent currently works part-time, as she has primary care of f and x. she is not currently g’s primary caregiver — this situation may or may not change. she earns approximately $80,756.00 dollars per annum from her employment, plus a small amount of child support.[83]
239 the applicant currently works full-time, earning approximately $55,000.00 per annum. he has previously earned in excess of $100,000 per annum.[84]
240 it was not suggested that either party are not currently working to their capacity, nor that either party’s health prevents them from engaging in gainful employment.
section 90sf(3)(c) — whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years
241 the respondent has care of f and x, aged 17 and 10 respectively. she has a third son, g, 3, with whom she is not currently spending time.
242 the applicant spends time with x each alternate weekend, and for one half of all school holidays.
section 90sf(3)(d) — commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support themselves and a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain
243 neither party claims that they cannot support themselves with their current income.
244 the applicant pays a meagre $37.00 per month in child support. this amount, no doubt, falls well short of meeting the applicant’s share of x’s necessary costs.
245 in clauson & clauson [1995] famca 10, flc 92-595 the full court reminded us that:
“in addition, it should not be forgotten that the payment of child support in no way compensates the custodial parent for the less of career opportunity, lack of employment mobility and the restriction on an independent lifestyle which the obligation to care for children usually entails ...”[85]
246 their honours’ remarks touch upon the respondent’s current reality, made even starker in light of the small amount of financial support from applicant.
section 90sf(3)(e) — the responsibilities of either party to support any other person
247 the respondent is primarily responsible for financially supporting f and x. she does not currently spend time with g, and it is unclear whether she currently pays child support to mr t.
248 x is in the applicant’s care each alternate weekend and during the holidays. he pays $37.00 per month in child support. he confirmed during cross-examination that he continues to send money to mr u, seemingly in preference to maintaining his own child. his financial statement does not evidence the frequency or amounts of the applicant’s payments to mr u.
section 90sf(3)(l) — the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent
249 the respondent is the primary carer of x and her eldest son f. she wants to maintain her role as x and f’s primary carer, and currently works to support herself and her children.
250 she hopes to retain the b street, suburb c property to ensure that she and her children have a home. mr hanrahan submitted that the respondent may need to sell the home if she is forced to pay the applicant more than the figure she proposes, though no evidence was adduced to corroborate her borrowing capacity. i will consider this issue more fully later in these reasons.
section 90sf(3)(n) — the terms of any proposed order under s 90sm in relation to the property of the parties
251 pursuant to my assessment of the parties’ contributions, the respondent is entitled to a 57.5% division of the net non-superannuation assets.
252 as stated above, this results in the applicant receiving property worth $163,901.25 and the respondent property worth $221,748.75. this makes for a differential of $57,847.50.
section 90sf(3)(r) — any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account
253 the applicant said that he cared for and financially supported f during the parties’ eight-year relationship. his affidavit describes in detail his care and support of f.[86] there was no evidence that the respondent was receiving child support for f when she was in a relationship with the applicant.
254 the applicant said that he was a father figure to f.[87] after the parties separated, the applicant agreed to spend time with and pay support for f post separation.[88] yet, his time with f ceased not long after separation.
255 the respondent appears to accept in her affidavit that the applicant did have a relationship with f. she does, however, discount his involvement in f’s life and effectively regards the applicant as a poor influence.[89]
256 robb contains the following remarks from the full court:
“64. in relation to ground 4, just as the husband's contribution to the welfare (including the financial support) of the wife's children of her former marriage, for the reasons given by his honour in the passage from his judgment last quoted (with which we agree), could not be taken into account as a contribution by him under s.79(4)(c), so too the wife's contribution to the welfare of those children could not be taken into account on that basis. however, as his honour did (in our view correctly) take the husband's contribution to those children into account under s.75(2)(o), the question arises whether he should have taken the wife's contribution to the welfare of those children into account also, under that paragraph of s.75(2). this raises the question whether the fact that a party to a marriage contributes during that marriage to the welfare of his or her own children of a prior marriage is a fact or circumstance which the justice of the case requires to be taken into account in that party's favour, at least, in circumstances where the other party's contribution to that welfare has been taken into account as a fact or circumstance in that party's favour. 65. in considering whether the justice of a case requires some act done by a party to be taken into account under s.75(2)(o), the court should, we think, have regard primarily to the existence or otherwise of any legal obligations, as between the parties, in relation to the doing of that act, and also, perhaps, to ordinary notions of justice and equity between the parties. 66. in this case, the wife had a legal duty to maintain the children of her prior marriage, which duty had primacy over the duty of any other person, other than the children's father, to so maintain them: ss.66a and 66b of the act. the husband, on the other hand, had no legal duty to maintain these children at any time during the marriage because, by s.66g, a step-parent has such a duty only if he or she is a guardian of the child, or has custody of the child by an order of a court, or a court having jurisdiction under part vii of the act by order determines that it is proper for the step-parent to have that duty. none of those pre-conditions existed in this case. 67. accordingly, in contributing to the support of these children the wife was merely honouring a legal obligation which she owed to the children, whilst the husband, in making his contribution, was acting essentially as a volunteer assisting the wife in the discharge of her legal obligations. upon that basis, whilst we consider the justice of the case clearly required the husband's contribution to be taken into account under s 75(2)(o), the same cannot be said of the wife's contribution. in making that contribution the wife was in no way discharging or assisting to discharge any legal obligation of the husband. 68. turning, then, to ordinary notions of justice and equity, we are of the view that such notions do not call for any allowance to be made in the wife's favour, in the property proceedings between the husband and wife, because she honoured her legal obligation to maintain her own children of a prior marriage. we believe that a failure to make such an allowance would not offend the ordinary reasonable man or woman's notions of justice.”[90]
257 i find that the applicant did contribute to maintaining and supporting f throughout the relationship. the respondent admits as much but, as with her evidence about the applicant’s care of x, i find that she understates his involvement.
section 90sm(4)(f) — any other order made under the act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship
258 the orders of 18 february 2021 and 26 august 2021 constitute the final parenting orders with respect to x. those orders confirm that x lives with the respondent, and that he spends time with the applicant each alternate weekend, half of all holidays and on special days.
section 90sm(4)(g) — any child support under the child support assessment act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship
259 as already outlined, the applicant’s current rate of child support (being $37.00 per month) does not cover the costs incurred by the respondent resulting from her being x’s primary caregiver.
260 following separation the applicant paid maintenance, termed child support in the amount of $2000 per month. those payments ceased in april 2017, since which time the applicant has continued to pay a meagre amount of child support. this is the case notwithstanding that his current income would enable him to pay a greater level of child support.
conclusion regarding s 90sm(4)(d)-(g) factors, including relevant factors under s 90sf(3)
261 taking into account the factors under s 90sm(4)(d)-(g), i assess that there should be a 10% adjustment to the respondent. in coming to this conclusion i particularly note the respondent’s slightly higher income, her ongoing primary carer role for x without an adequate level of child support, the applicant’s role in caring for f during the relationship, and the capital disparity between the parties.
conclusion in relation to non-superannuation property
262 with respect to the parties’ net non-superannuation property, i determine that it is just and equitable to divide the same on a 67.5 / 32.5 basis in favour of the respondent.
263 in dollar terms, a 67.5 / 32.5 division results in the respondent receiving non-superannuation property worth $260,313.75 and the applicant receiving non-superannuation property worth $125,336.25.
264 this leaves a differential of $134,977.50 — its significance in a non-superannuation pool of $385,650.00 does not escape me. my assessment (and the resulting differential) does, however, properly reflect the nature of the parties’ contributions and the other relevant factors, including their incomes.
265 both parties propose that the respondent retain all the assets and liabilities in the non-superannuation pool (save for the controlled monies held by blanchfield nicholls lawyers) and provide the applicant with a cash sum.
266 the total sum owing to the applicant, therefore, is $125,336.25. this consists of the $16,754.00 in controlled monies, and a further $108,582.25 to make up his non-superannuation property entitlement of 32.5%.
267 the respondent’s position at trial was that an amount of the sum owing to the applicant should be paid from her superannuation fund. i consider that question starting at paragraph 327 of these reasons.
268 standing back, and having reference to the percentage division and its actual effect, i consider the outcome to be just and equitable.
superannuation property
269 the approach to determining property cases involving superannuation interests was considered in semperton & semperton [2012] famcafc 132. in that case, the full court adopted and clarified the approach taken in coghlan & coghlan [2005] famca 429 (‘coghlan’):
“78. after the introduction of the relevant amendments to the superannuation regulations in 2001, the first significant case before the full court was coghlan (above). the primary issue for determination in that appeal was whether the trial judge had erred by not including the parties’ superannuation interests in the property pool for division between the parties. the trial judge had assessed and divided the net property of the parties, excluding the superannuation from the pool, and did not make any s 75(2) factor adjustments for superannuation considerations. 79. the majority (bryant cj, finn and coleman jj) considered the content, intent and effect of part viiib of the superannuation regulations.
the relevant provisions of part viiib ... 28. the object of part viiib is expressed in the first s (s 90ma) of that part to be: ... to allow certain payments (splittable payments) in respect of a superannuation interest to be allocated between the parties to a marriage either by agreement or court order. 29. although the explanatory memorandum (notes on clauses, para 32) considered this object section to be “self-explanatory”, for present purposes it needs to be said that the section makes it clear that the sole purpose or object of part viiib is to permit agreements or court orders to be made which would provide for certain payments in respect of superannuation interests to be allocated between spouses. there is no other purpose or object stated. ... conclusion in relation to the operation of s 90mc and s 90ms 52. the interpretation of s 90mc and s 90ms which we have suggested above would therefore appear to be consistent with the intended interpretation as expressed in the explanatory memorandum. that is, that s 90mc does no more than confer jurisdiction on the relevant courts to make orders in relation to superannuation interests in proceedings with respect to the property of parties to a marriage (or indeed in proceedings between such parties where the only asset of any significance is a superannuation interest) and that s 90ms does no more than provide that superannuation interests are but another species of asset (in addition to property as defined in s 4(1)) in relation to which orders can be made in proceedings between parties to a marriage.
80. in their consideration of the legislative provisions, the majority also contemplated circumstances where no splitting order is sought under part viiib:
the position where no order is sought under part viiib 54. it has to be recognised in light of what we have said so far, that the requirement to apply the provisions of s 79 (particularly s 79(4)(a) to (g)) to superannuation interests would, strictly speaking, only arise under s 90ms in circumstances where an order is actually sought under part viiib. it also has to be recognised that the legislation appears to be otherwise silent as to what are the obligations on, and the powers of, the court where the parties have superannuation interests but no order is sought under part viiib. this in our view is a significant omission in the legislation. 55. the reasoning in hickey would seem to overcome this legislative omission in that if the words in para (ca) of the definition of “matrimonial cause” in s 4(1) are read not, as we hold, as merely enlivening the jurisdiction to make orders concerning superannuation interests, but rather as meaning that in all proceedings under s 79 (irrespective of whether or not a splitting order is sought), superannuation interests are to be treated as property. 56. it may well be that it was the intention of the legislature that where no order is sought under part viiib, then the superannuation interests of the parties are to be treated in the same way as such interests were treated prior to the introduction of part viiib. the difficulty, however, with that argument is that the court has an obligation in property settlement proceedings to make an order which is just and equitable. in the circumstances now prevailing since the introduction of part viiib, in which a valuation which provides an indication of the true worth of a superannuation interest can be made available and in which the court has the capacity to make a splitting order in relation to payments made in respect of a superannuation interest, a court may well only be able to satisfy itself that any order it makes will be just and equitable, if it applies to its consideration of the superannuation interests, the criteria for determining a just and equitable order — those criteria being in effect the matters contained in s 79(4) of the act. 57. we recognise, in connection with the approach just suggested, that paras 79(4)(a) and (b) refer to the contributions to “property” and that the expression “property” as used in those paragraphs must be taken to mean property as defined in s 4(1). accordingly, it might be argued that there is no requirement for the court to consider the parties' contributions to their respective superannuation interests in a case where no splitting order is sought. but if this view is correct the contributions to superannuation interests would still remain to be considered under s 75(2)(j). (see in this regard the observations of the full court in wunderwald and wunderwald [1992] famca 1, (1992) flc 92-315 at 79,361–2, which we consider have general application despite the nature of the particular superannuation fund under consideration in that case. see also the discussion in b and b (no 2) (2000) flc 93- 031, paras 59 to 70). 58. thus, we consider that because of the obligation under s 79(2) to make a just and equitable order, then in order to ensure such a result the court should wherever there is a superannuation interest apply the provisions of s 79(4)(a) to (g) (which will include the matters contained in s 75(2)) to that superannuation interest whether or not a splitting order is sought. 59. it may well be that if a superannuation interest is considered having regard to the matters in s 79(4) in a case where a splitting order has not been sought by either party, it will become clear to the court on such consideration that the only just and equitable order which can be made in the particular case is a splitting order. the court can then afford the parties an opportunity to be heard in relation to such an order with the requisite notice being given to any trustees of the superannuation fund and a formal valuation according to the regulations, if necessary, obtained. (original emphasis in bold)
81. their honours then commented on the effect of the legislation in practice, finding that there was a discretion as to the way in which superannuation interests may be treated in a particular case, subject to certain steps required to be taken where splitting orders are sought, and prudent to be taken where no splitting order is sought:
practical implications 61. nothing we have said in this judgment would prevent a court in the exercise of its discretion from including a superannuation interest as an item of property in the list of property which is drawn as “the first step” in the determination of proceedings under s 79, whether or not a splitting order is sought in those proceedings. this approach could be adopted where the parties agree that it should be adopted, or where the court is satisfied that the superannuation interest is indeed property within the meaning of the definition of property contained in s 4(1), or if the interest is not within that definition, but is of relatively small value in the context of the value of the other assets in the case, or there are features about the interest which leads the court to conclude that this would be an appropriate approach. 62. the parties' contributions to all items on that list (including the superannuation interest) would then be assessed on either a global or an asset by asset basis. it might then be necessary in the s 75(2) context to have regard to the parties' future superannuation entitlements (having regard of course to any division proposed on the basis of their contributions), with consideration then being given to the overall justice and equity of any proposed award or o (including any proposed splitting order). indeed, this is the approach which the full court has used on its re-exercise of the trial judge's discretion in ilett and ilett [2005] famca 432, (2005) flc 93-221 (which will be delivered contemporaneously with the decision in this case). ... 65. in summary, then, the trial judge has a discretion as to how superannuation interests will be treated in a particular case. if superannuation is not included in the list of property but rather made the subject of a separate pool, it will be necessary where a splitting order is sought, or extremely prudent where no such splitting order is sought (in order to ensure that justice and equity is achieved) to: value the superannuation interest (according to the regulations if an order under part viiib is sought or according to the regulations or otherwise if no order is sought), (b) consider and make findings about the types of contributions referred to in s 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) which have been made by the parties to the superannuation interests on either a global approach or an asset by asset approach depending on the circumstances, (c) consider the other factors in s 79(4) being the matters in s 79(4)(d), (e), (f) and (g), and (d) ensure that pursuant to s 79(2) the orders in relation to the parties' property, and any order under part viiib in relation to superannuation interests are just and equitable.
66. in the context of a consideration of the matters referred to in subparas (b) and (c) of the last paragraph, the following matters may well be relevant: the relationship between years of fund membership and cohabitation, actual contributions made by the fund member at the commencement of the cohabitation (if applicable), at separation and at the date of hearing, preserved and non-preserved resignation entitlements at those times, and any factors peculiar to the fund or to the spouse's present and/or future entitlements under the fund.
82. the majority emphasised that in circumstances where superannuation interests are dealt with separately from other property, then their “real nature”, as explained by their honours, can be taken into account at both the adjustment stage and at the just and equitable orders consideration stage.
67. if this approach is adopted, whereby superannuation interests are dealt with separately from property as defined in s 4(1), but are subject to the considerations in s 79(4), then not only will any contributions, both direct and indirect, by either party to such superannuation interests be more likely to be given proper recognition, but the real nature of the superannuation interests in question can also be taken into account, both in consideration of the s 75(2) matters and in the final assessment of whether the ultimate order is just and equitable. 68. when we refer to “the real nature” of the relevant superannuation interest, we are referring to the fact that notwithstanding that its value according to the regulations may well be calculated to be a very significant amount, that superannuation interest may be no more than a present or future periodic sum, or perhaps a future lump sum, the value of which at date of receipt is unknown. (emphasis added)” [91]
270 further analysis is found in the decision of m & m [2006] famca 913, where the full court of the family court said:
“123. in our view it is clear from those comments that the majority in coghlan (supra) was concerned with a consideration of actual contributions where they were ascertainable. the relationship between years of fund membership and cohabitation might be relevant in a defined benefits scheme whereas actual contributions made by the fund member at the commencement of the cohabitation might be relevant to an accumulation fund where in both cases the marriage was of short duration. however, in our view there is nothing said by the majority in coghlan (supra) that would give any support for the application of some kind of a formula or that contributions to superannuation whatever the nature of the fund, should be treated in a different way from contributions to other property under s 79(4). this is so in our view whether the superannuation is considered as part of one pool of assets or in a separate pool.”[92]
271 as outlined earlier, both parties submitted that the superannuation assets should be dealt with separately to the non-superannuation assets.
272 the applicant seeks a payment of $50,000.00 be split from the respondent’s superannuation fund to his superannuation fund.
273 the respondent did not, per se, concede that there should be any splittable payment made from her superannuation fund to the applicant’s superannuation fund. it was, however, the respondent’s alternative position that if she owed the applicant more than $66,754.00 any further amount should be split from the respondent’s superannuation. that way, the respondent argues, she will be able to retain her home.
274 having already determined that the applicant should receive a total of $125,336.25, the respondent’s alternative submission has well and truly been enlivened.
275 ms druitt submitted that if the applicant receives $50,000.00 as a split payment, he will hold 40.7% of the parties’ total superannuation holdings. the applicant conceded that the respondent brought $50,000.00 in superannuation into the relationship. he submitted, however, that his own superannuation holdings at the start of the relationship were lost in his failed business venture in vietnam.
276 mr hanrahan submitted on behalf of the respondent that the applicant held $90,000.00 in superannuation at the commencement of the relationship, which was all lost to the failed business within the first year. it was argued that the applicant’s superannuation monies were lost due to his reckless and wanton behaviour in spending them. i reject that submission. there was insufficient evidence to make that finding.
277 at the commencement of the relationship, the respondent held $15,024.55 in superannuation. at the point of separation, she held $65,816.14. post separation, the respondent has accumulated $76,183.86 in superannuation to which the applicant has made no contribution,[93] noting that she withdrew $10,000.00 post-separation to meet necessary expenses.
278 the respondent did not submit on superannuation in great detail. i can infer from the general tenor of mr hanrahan’s submissions that, in the respondent’s view, it is unjust and inequitable to adjust the parties’ superannuation where the applicant has not made any contribution to her superannuation. further, the applicant holds a small amount of superannuation to which he could have added post-separation — he has not done so.
the superannuation property pool
279 the parties agree that their total superannuation holdings amount to $138,271.00. this includes the applicant’s interests valued at a total of $6,271.00 and the respondent’s interest at $132,000.00.
280 while these figures are agreed as shown in exhibit c, i do not accept that the applicant’s superannuation is valued only at $6,271.00. for the reasons contained under the sub-heading for s 90sm(4)(a) below, i determine at paragraph 298 that the applicant’s superannuation holding should be included at a value of $10,450.00. this results in a total superannuation property pool of $142,450.00.
section 90sm(3) — is it just and equitable to adjust the parties’ superannuation property interests?
281 it is plain that an order should be made altering the parties’ superannuation interests. this is largely for the same reasons as my finding that it is just and equitable to alter the parties’ non-superannuation interests.
282 both parties entered the relationship with superannuation. the applicant disputes that he had $90,000.00 in superannuation at this time, instead estimating that he held $30,000.00. he did not corroborate his estimate. he agreed that, whatever the amount, he lost it all in the vietnam business venture. as stated at paragraph 101 of these reasons, i cannot find that the applicant spent his superannuation recklessly or wantonly insofar as it could amount to ‘waste’.
283 consistently with my findings as to the parties’ contributions above, they both made financial and non-financial contributions throughout the relationship. they also have a child together, with whom the applicant spends time.
284 the applicant has far less superannuation than the respondent.
285 the parties’ implicit assumptions that underpinned their existing superannuation property arrangements, such as the accumulation and use of those assets by one for their collective benefit, have ended alongside the breakdown of the relationship in which those assumptions existed.
286 in all of the circumstances i find that it is just an equitable for there to be an alteration of parties’ superannuation interests.
287 the applicant estimated his superannuation at the commencement of cohabitation to be $30,000.00. i accept this figure, as the respondent raised no evidence to counter it.
288 in any event, mr hanrahan’s cross-examination presumed that the applicant held more superannuation than the respondent at the start of the relationship. the respondent’s superannuation holding at that time was $15,024.55, making this presumption correct on either contended figure. ultimately, the applicant’s superannuation was lost.
289 the respondent added $50,000.00 to her superannuation during the relationship, during which time the applicant contributed little to his superannuation. this reflects his small income and that the respondent earned more than the applicant during the relationship.
290 the applicant has continued to refrain from making any great superannuation contributions post-separation. the respondent, on the other hand, has continued to make contributions to her own. neither party made any direct or indirect financial contributions to the other’s superannuation post-separation.
291 while the issue was not explored at trial, it is curious that the applicant was seemingly unable to increase his superannuation holdings. this is particularly questionable given his income from m pty ltd and more recently from company cc.
292 the applicant’s current employers are legally obliged to contribute to his superannuation, yet he holds only $6,271.00 in superannuation. he currently earns $55,000 per annum.[94] his affidavit shows, at annexure f, his employment contract that states at paragraph 8:
8. superannuation: (a) in addition to your salary entitlement company cc will make superannuation contributions on your behalf in accordance with the superannuation guarantee charge act this amount is 9.5% of you gross earnings. superannuation-is paid on base salary which includes ordinary time earnings that is inclusive of holiday pay and sick leave, excluding commission, bonuses and fringe benefits. (b) these contributions will be paid into a superannuation plan of your choice or the company's superannuation plan. details of this fund and your options will be provided to you.
293 the contract is dated 19 august 2019, meaning he has worked there in excess of two years on a $55,000.00 annual salary. his annual superannuation at 9.5% of his gross salary equals $5,225.00. having worked for company cc for at least two years, his superannuation holding must amount to at least $10,450.00.
294 the applicant also worked for m pty ltd from 2012 until 2015. he did not explain what happened to the superannuation he must have accumulated during this period. his small superannuation holding, though agreed, is difficult to understand.
295 this being the case, i do not accept that the parties’ agreed figure of $6,271.00 accurately represents the true value of the applicant’s superannuation holding. making the best of the evidence i will include the applicant’s superannuation holding at a value of $10,450.00.
296 i note here that the applicant has holdings with two superannuation funds. there is, however, no evidence that the agreed figures in those accounts relates to employment other than that with company cc.
297 i hold considerable concern that the true value of the applicant’s superannuation holding has been understated. further, it cannot be reliably ascertained on the evidence before this court. the issue was not explored, with the sums for the parties’ superannuation ultimately being agreed between them.
298 in light of clause 8 of the applicant’s employment contract (and notwithstanding the parties’ agreement upon a lower figure) i am satisfied that his superannuation has a value of at least $10,450.00.
299 the total superannuation pool is therefore valued at $142,450.00.
300 i find that the respondent made the overwhelming financial contributions to the parties’ superannuation interests both pre and post-separation. in so finding i take into account the applicant’s slightly higher superannuation holding at the commencement of cohabitation, which i do not find to have been wasted.
301 there is no evidence indicating that either party made greater indirect non-financial contributions to the other party’s superannuation interest or interests.
302 i repeat my findings in these reasons starting at paragraph 221 being, in summary, that the respondent made greater homemaking and parenting contributions than the applicant.
conclusion regarding the assessment of contributions pursuant to s 90sm (4)(a)-(c)
303 i conclude that the parties’ contributions to the superannuation pool should be assessed on a 75 / 25 basis in favour of the respondent.
304 i repeat my findings starting at paragraph 233 of these reasons.
305 i repeat my previous findings as to the parties’ ages and states of health. in this context, i consider both parties to be capable of contributing to their superannuation holdings through their employment.
306 i repeat my findings starting at paragraph 237 of these reasons.
307 i repeat my findings starting at paragraph 241 of these reasons.
308 i repeat my findings starting at paragraph 243 of these reasons.
309 i repeat my findings starting at paragraph 247 of these reasons.
310 i repeat my findings starting at paragraph 249 of these reasons.
311 with respect to the superannuation asset pool, i have assessed that the parties’ contributions justify a 75 / 25 division of the available superannuation property in the respondent’s favour.
312 in dollar terms, this results in the applicant being entitled to $35,612.50 and the respondent being entitled to $106,837.50.
313 as discussed above, it is difficult to understand why the applicant has such a small superannuation holding. he has, from his evidence, undertaken years of work in paid employment. it may be because he has received much of his income in cash until he commenced with company cc. in any event, the issue was not greatly explored and no evidence was provided to explain this discrepancy.
314 the applicant has shown that he is capable of earning a greater income than he does currently. if he contributes to his superannuation from now on, he should be able to accumulate a reasonable level of superannuation over the next 24 years until retirement.
315 i repeat my findings at paragraph 258 of these reasons.
316 i repeat my findings starting at paragraph 259 of these reasons.
317 with respect to the other factors under s 90sm(4)(d)-(g), including those relevant factors under s 90sf(3), i find that there should be no adjustment to either party.
318 both parties are similarly positioned to build their superannuation interests in the future. while the respondent does have children in her care, i also take into account the disparity in the parties’ capital bases resulting from my assessment of contributions under s 90sm(4)(a)-(c).
conclusion in relation to superannuation property
319 the parties’ superannuation assets will be divided on a 75 / 25 basis in favour of the respondent. at a total value of $142,450.00, in dollar terms the applicant is entitled to $35,612.50 the respondent to $106,837.50, of the superannuation pool.
320 the applicant’s superannuation holding, as determined at paragraph 298 above, amounts to $10,450.00. this means that, to make up the applicant’s 25% entitlement, the respondent will have to split from her superannuation holding a payment of $25,162.50. this leaves the respondent with her entitlement of $106,837.50, being 75% of the parties’ total superannuation assets.
321 i am satisfied that this division of the parties’ superannuation, in accordance with my assessment above, is just and equitable.
final assessment — are the terms and effect of the proposed order just and equitable?
322 i have concluded that the applicant should receive 32.5% of the non-superannuation property pool and 25% of the superannuation property pool.
323 the division, in effect, requires the respondent to pay the applicant $125,336.25 in cash and to split from her superannuation a payment of $25,162.50 to the applicant’s superannuation holding.
324 as foreshadowed earlier, the respondent did not submit that there should be a superannuation splitting order. she did submit, as an alternative, that any amount owing to the applicant above $66,754.00 should be split from her superannuation instead of being paid in cash. to pay the applicant his full non-superannuation property entitlement in cash would, in her view, force her to sell the b street, suburb c property thereby losing the home for herself and her children. the respondent submits on that basis that it is just and equitable for her to provide the balance over and above the amount she can borrow, from her superannuation.
325 the applicant, on the other hand, seeks an order requiring the respondent to sell the b street, suburb c property if she cannot immediately pay him the amount owing.
326 in phillips & phillips [2002] famca 350 (‘phillips’) the full court considered the trial judge’s order to sell the home in which the mother and children had resided since separation. the full court, allowing the appeal, stated (emphasis added):
“65. as to ground 5 it is submitted that the result arrived at by the trial judge was unreasonable and unjust in the appellate sense. the wife was seeking to retain the buderim property and avoid a sale and this was what his honour also sought to achieve as is apparent from discussion with counsel. we have found no error on the part of his honour in relation to his inability to find a value for the buderim property. however, consideration of the effect of his honour’s orders reveals that the difference in the value of the net assets asserted by each party was only $30,000 and, for example, if the buderim property sold for $200,000 the husband would receive $5,096 from the proceeds of sale and if it sold for $170,000 the husband would pay $3,903 to the wife. 66. the obligation of a trial judge in dealing with an application pursuant to s.79 of the act is to make an order that is just and equitable in all the circumstances having regard to the matters of contribution and the other factors, including the matters in s.75(2) of the act. a trial judge must identify and value the assets of the parties, identify and assess the matters of contribution and identify and assess the relevant other factors. it is also necessary, having undertaken these tasks, to be satisfied that the proposed outcome is just and equitable. 67. in jel and ddf [2000] famca 1353, (2001) flc 93-075 holden and guest jj said at 88,332:
“140. this is why the ‘‘fourth step’, namely whether the result is just and equitable, becomes important. in clauson and clauson [1995] famca 10, (1995) flc 92-595 the full court (barblett dcj, fogarty and mushin jj) recognised, albeit in a discussion of the s 75(2) factors, that the application of percentages does not necessarily result in a just and equitable result, when it said at 81,911:
“there is, we think, at times a tendency to assess s 75(2) factors in percentage terms without considering its real impact, and we think there is legitimacy in the views expressed in more recent times that the court has tended to operate in this area within artificially delineated boundaries. that is, it appears almost to be inevitable that the s 75(2) factors will be assessed in a range between 10% and 20%. a number of cases will justify an assessment outside those parameters and in any event it is the real impact in money terms which is ultimately the critical issue.”
141. more recently, in russell v russell [1999] famca 1875, (1999) flc 92-877, the full court said at 86,439:
“[i] must be remembered ... that under s 79(2) of the act, the court is required to be satisfied that it is the order to be made which is just and equitable, not just the underlying percentage division of the net value of the parties’ assets.”
142. the full court took the opportunity to emphasise that in the consideration of whether the result is just and equitable, it is the justice and equity of the actual orders not of the percentage distribution which must be considered.”
68. in our view, in this case, if his honour had considered the effect of his findings as to the entitlements of the parties, whatever the value of the buderim property, it would have been apparent, having regard to the narrowness of the issues, and in particular the valuation issue, that it would have been within his discretion to order a transfer of the buderim property to the wife. the land value difference was only $20,000 and is further reduced if allowance is made for costs of sale. the overall difference in value was only $30,000. in our view, this is a case where what was a just and equitable outcome had to be considered not in percentage terms, but rather in terms of the assets that the parties would ultimately hold, even though there was a dispute as to the value of the principal asset and the valuations were not very dissimilar. if his honour had considered the real impact of the orders he proposed, and in particular the order for a sale of the buderim property, it would have been apparent that the result was not just and equitable. 69. while we are extremely conscious of the limits on appellate interference with discretionary judgments, especially in circumstances such as the present where it is not possible to identify any error by the trial judge, and the quantum of the amount in dispute, nevertheless, in our view, to order a sale of the buderim property fell outside the “generous ambit within which reasonable disagreement is possible”. the wife and the children had lived in the property since separation and intended to continue to do so. the wife had paid over $7,000 towards the mortgage since separation thus enabling the property to be retained. this intangible consideration was something we think his honour should have given weight to when framing his orders. (see myerthall v myerthall [1977] famca 59, (1977) flc 90-273). the husband’s entitlement could be satisfied from other assets and he would retain his superannuation. 70. we do not suggest that a trial judge would fall into error simply because he/she did not set out a list of the assets which each party would retain as a result of his/her decision. however, it is necessary to “stand back” and consider if overall the ultimate award was just and equitable to both parties and in our view that is what his honour failed to do in this case. we are therefore satisfied that ground 5 has been established.”[95]
327 pursuant to the division of the non-superannuation asset pool at paragraph 262, the cash sum payable by the respondent to the applicant is $125,336.25. the controlled monies of $16,754.00 will be transferred to the applicant, leaving the respondent to pay a further $108,582.25.
328 the respondent concedes that she can borrow $50,000.00. she therefore asks that the sum of $58,582.25 be split from her superannuation to meet the applicant’s full entitlement to the parties’ non-superannuation assets.
329 as a result of the superannuation property division, the respondent will hold $106,837.50 in superannuation. it is clear that she could, if so ordered, split a payment of $58,582.25 to the applicant’s superannuation holding.
330 if i accept and adopt the respondent’s alternative submission, the applicant would receive a fundamentally different asset than the non-superannuation assets to which he is ultimately entitled pursuant to my assessment in paragraph 262. superannuation cannot generally be accessed until a person reaches preservation age. given the applicant’s current age, 41, he will not access his superannuation for many years.
331 further, the respondent did not produce corroborative evidence for her claim that she cannot finance any amount above $50,000.00. she earns income from her employment in the sum of $1,571.00 per week, and receives $300.00 per week from her parents. she also has a long employment history. importantly, the b street, suburb c property as retained by her will have an equity in excess of $300,000.00. in these circumstances, the respondent should have been able to adduce evidence from a financial institution as to her true borrowing capacity.
332 this situation is distinguishable from phillips. in that case, the amount payable to the husband was at most $5,000.00 and there were other assets from which he could receive that sum. the matter before this court involves no other non-superannuation assets which are available to meet the $58,582.25 payable to the applicant.
333 further, the sum of $58,582.25 represents 46.74% of his entitlement to the parties’ non-superannuation property. this is a sizeable proportion, being almost half of his total entitlement. the applicant has a right to receive this amount now and to use it for current purposes.
334 i find that it is not just and equitable for this court to order the payment of $58,582.25 from the respondent’s superannuation to the applicant’s superannuation in substitution for his entitlement to non-superannuation property of the same value.
335 to ensure that the applicant receives the amounts owed to him, i will include in the order provisions for the sale of the b street, suburb c property in the event that the respondent cannot secure a loan to pay the entire cash amount as ordered.
336 the amount owing to him after receiving the monies in the controlled account is $108,582.25, which constitutes 16.70% of the b street, suburb c property’s gross value. if the home sells, the applicant will receive that percentage of the gross sale price.
337 to accommodate the respondent’s concerns, i will provide her with four months to pay the applicant the sum of $108,582.25. i have extended the period one month longer than i would normally give, because this decision has been handed down just before the christmas and new year break. that time will allow her to complete the relevant applications for finance to financial institutions.
338 in conclusion, and having considered the percentage division and its effect upon the actual property of the parties, i consider the terms of the ultimate order in relation to non-superannuation and superannuation assets to be just and equitable.
associate: dated: 23 december 2021fle
[1] family law act 1975 (cth), s 90rb.[2] affidavit of mr minh, 16 august 2019, [5].[3] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020, [12].[4] affidavit of mr minh, 16 august 2019 (n 2), [11].[5] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [23].[6] affidavit of mr minh, 16 august 2019 (n 2), [12].[7] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [43].[8] affidavit of mr minh, 16 august 2019 (n 2), annex b, 28. the anz one statement account number #2620-41435 of the respondent from 9 october 2015 to 11 october 2017 shows a credit on 19 october 2015 of $179,974.60 as ‘proceeds of loan drawdown’.[9] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [11].[10] ibid [38].[11] financial statement of ms dieu, 16 february 2021, [13].[12] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), annex f.[13] grier & malphas [2016] famcafc 84, [141] (murphy and kent jj).[14] robb & robb [1994] famca 136, [67] (lindenmayer, finn and joske jj).[15] kowaliw & kowaliw [1981] famca 70; (1981) flc 91-092, 76,644.[16] family law act 1975 (cth), s 4aa.[17] ibid s 90sb(a). i note that the parties disagree as to whether or for how long they lived separately at times between 2008 and 2016 as intermittent periods of separation.[18] ibid ss 90sb(b), 90rb.[19] ibid s 90sk.[20] lotta & lotta [2017] famca 50, [281]-[290] (foster j).[21] hunter & borman [2020] famcafc 250, [31]-[33] (ryan, kent and tree jj).[22] fitzmaurice & woolridge [2020] famcafc 64, [20] (strickland, ainslie-wallace and ryan jj).[23] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108, [37] (french cj, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[24] kowaliw & kowaliw (n 15), 76,643-76,644.[25] ibid 76,644.[26] warwick & cutler [2016] famca 934, [127] (mcclelland j).[27] mayne & mayne [2011] famcafc 192, [73] (faulks dcj).[28] kowaliw & kowaliw (n 15), 76,644-76,645.[29] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, [14] (bryant cj, faulks dcj, murphy j); jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78, [61] (alstergren cj, ryan and aldridge jj). see also dovgan & dovgan [2021] famca 306, [347] (harper j), which restates the need to holistically assess contributions following the case of dickons, and that ‘all contributions must be weighed collectively and so it is an error to segment or compartmentalise the various contributions and weigh one against the remainder’.[30] kowaliw & kowaliw (n 15), 76,644.[31] mayne & mayne (n 27), [180] (strickland j).[32] omacini & omacini; sub nom ajo & gro [2005] famca 195, [30] (holden, warnick and le poer trench jj).[33] mayne & mayne (n 27), [78]-[79] (faulks dcj).[34] vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51, [138]-[139] (strickland, murphy and tree jj). see bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, [79] at which bryant cj and thackray j in applying stanford said that ‘“notional property”, which is sometimes “added back” to a list of assets to account for the unilateral disposal of assets, is unlikely to constitute “property of the parties to the marriage or either of them”, and thus is not amenable to alteration under s 79’. the case ultimately did not turn on the issue, with their honours stating that ‘in particular s 75(2)(o) gives ample scope to ensure a just and equitable outcome when dealing with the unilateral disposal of property’.[35] mayne & mayne (n 27), [185].[36] c & c [1998] famca 143, [46] (nicholson cj, ellis and kay jj).[37] koch & kest [2021] famca 408, [21].[38] nhc & rch [2004] famca 633, [56]-[58] (finn, kay and may jj).[39] grier & malphas (n 13), [57] (bryant cj), [141] (murphy and kent jj).[40] grier & malphas (n 13), [57]-[58].[41] ibid [129], [131].[42] ibid [57].[43] affidavit of mr minh, 16 august 2019 (n 2), [24].[44] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [72].[45] blatch v archer [1774] engr 2; (1774) 98 er 969, 970.[46] lavell & lavell [2012] famca 34, [122]-[123] (murphy j).[47] jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298, 308 (kitto j).[48] lavell & lavell (n 46), [122]-[123].[49] australian securities and investments commission v rich [2009] nswsc 1229, [439] (austin j).[50] evidence act 1995 (cth), s 140; briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34; (1938) 60 clr 336, 361-362 (dixon j).[51] mayne & mayne (n 27), [79].[52] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [34].[53] shalhoub v buchanan [2004] nswsc 99, [71] (campbell j). extracted in lavell & lavell (n 46), [124]; australian securities and investments commission v rich [2009] nswsc 1229, [440]. his honour in shalhoub refers to instances in which the party carrying the onus does not call an available witness who could have clarified a matter in dispute. that party’s failure to call such a witness, his honour reasoned, can be taken into account in deciding whether the onus has been discharged ‘in circumstances where such evidence as has been called does not itself clearly discharge the onus’.[54] grier & malphas (n 13), [57].[55] stanford & stanford (n 23), 120.[56] ibid 121-122 (french cj, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[57] ibid [120].[58] family law act 1975 (n 16), s 90ss.[59] ibid s 90sm(3).[60] stanford & stanford (n 23), 121-122.[61] jabour & jabour (n 29), [73] (alstergren cj, ryan and aldridge jj).[62] ibid [82].[63] ibid [83].[64] fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57, [168] (bryant cj and ainslie-wallace j).[65] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [38].[66] gosper & gosper [1987] famca 43, [67], [72].[67] mabb & mabb [2020] famcafc 18, [114] (ainslie-wallace, aldridge and kent jj).[68] affidavit of mr minh, 16 august 2019 (n 2), [10], [11], [14].[69] ibid [31].[70] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [24]-[35].[71] parshen & parshen (1996) flc 92-720, 83,665 (ellis, finn and purdy jj).[72] hutton & hutton [2007] famca 1701, [338]-[339] (carter j).[73] polonius & york [2010] famcafc 228, [77] (boland, thackray and o’ryan jj). cited with approval in tallowfield & tallowfield [2018] famcafc 172, [59] (kent j), directly thereafter noting at [60] that ‘the worth of any capital contribution cannot legitimately be “carried forward” mathematically as the sole determinant in assessing contributions under s 79(4) ... contributions of all kinds as identified in the subsections of s 79(4), including some incapable of being measured in monetary terms, fall into the holistic assessment of contributions in s 79 property settlement determinations’.[74] carron & laniga [2019] famcafc 115, [47] (aldridge, kent and austin jj).[75] ibid [62].[76] ibid [22], [24].[77] affidavit of mr minh, 16 august 2019 (n 2), [19], [51]-[53].[78] ibid [58]-[61].[79] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [61]-[62].[80] dawes & dawes [1989] famca 71, [73] (lindenmayer, strauss and cohen jj).[81] beck & beck [1983] famca 7; (1983) flc 91-318, 78,166 (evatt cj, emery and hase jj).[82] ibid.[83] financial statement of ms dieu, 16 february 2021 (n 11), [9], [13].[84] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [34].[85] clauson & clauson [1995] famca 10; (1995) flc 92-595, 81,911 (barblett dcj, fogarty and mushin jj).[86] affidavit of mr minh, 16 august 2019 (n 2), [44]-[57].[87] ibid [48].[88] ibid [57].[89] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [90]-[99].[90] robb & robb (n 14), [64]-[68] (lindenmayer, finn and joske jj).[91] semperton & semperton [2012] famcafc 132, [78]-[83] (may j).[92] m & m [2006] famca 913, [123] (bryant cj, finn and boland jj).[93] affidavit of ms dieu, 4 june 2020 (n 3), [51].[94] affidavit of mr minh, 16 august 2019 (n 2), [38].[95] phillips & phillips [2002] famca 350, [65] (finn, kay and o’ryan jj).