last updated: 14 april 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
catalan & garcia [2022] fedcfamc2f 63
orders
the court orders that:
1. the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the child x born in 2014 (“x”).
2. x live with the mother.
3. the parties do all things necessary and sign all necessary documents to cause x to be issued with an australian passport, with such passport to be held by the mother.
4. the mother be permitted to relocate with x to country b forthwith.
5. pending relocation pursuant to order 4 herein x spend time with the father as follows:  each tuesday and thursday from 5:00pm until 8:00pm (extending to 9:00pm during school holiday periods), (b) on each alternate weekend from 10:00am saturday until 8:00pm sunday, (c) by whatsapp video or telephone each wednesday at 5:30pm or upon x’s reasonable request, and (d) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   on each alternate weekend from 10:00am saturday until 8:00pm sunday, (c) by whatsapp video or telephone each wednesday at 5:30pm or upon x’s reasonable request, and (d) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   by whatsapp video or telephone each wednesday at 5:30pm or upon x’s reasonable request, and (d) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.
6. following relocation pursuant to order 4 herein x spend time with the father as follows:  in country b on no less than one occasion per calendar year, with the father to provide the mother with 56 days’ written notice of his intention to exercise such time, and the following shall apply: (i) during the father’s visit, x shall spend time with the father for between seven and 14 consecutive or non-consecutive days to be agreed between the parties no less than 28 days prior to travel, (ii) the number of overnights between x and the father shall increase incrementally by one night each visit, commencing with two consecutive overnights on the first visit, (iii) the number of consecutive overnights between x and the father shall not increase beyond seven nights save in accordance with x’s wishes, (iv) the father shall provide the mother with details of x’s accommodation for all overnight time, and (v) the balance of the days x spends with the father for the duration of each trip shall comprise daytime visits only. (b) in australia (i) in february 2023 and during every third february thereafter, with the mother to travel to australia for no less than 21 days, and for x to spend time with her father as per the incremental progression set out in paragraphs 6(a)(i) to 6(a)(iv) herein, (ii) in december 2024 and every third december thereafter, such time to include christmas day, with the mother to travel to australia for no less than 21 days, and for x to spend time with her father as per the incremental progression set out in paragraphs 6(a)(i) to 6(a)(iv) herein, (iii) at such further and/or other times as agreed between the parties in writing. (c) by electronic communication (i) via whatsapp video or such other agreed form of video communication at 7:00pm country b time on such days as agreed between the parties and failing agreement each wednesday and sunday, with the mother to initiate the call to the father, (ii) the mother shall facilitate x contacting the father by video communication upon her reasonable request to do so.   during the father’s visit, x shall spend time with the father for between seven and 14 consecutive or non-consecutive days to be agreed between the parties no less than 28 days prior to travel, (ii) the number of overnights between x and the father shall increase incrementally by one night each visit, commencing with two consecutive overnights on the first visit, (iii) the number of consecutive overnights between x and the father shall not increase beyond seven nights save in accordance with x’s wishes, (iv) the father shall provide the mother with details of x’s accommodation for all overnight time, and (v) the balance of the days x spends with the father for the duration of each trip shall comprise daytime visits only.  ) the number of overnights between x and the father shall increase incrementally by one night each visit, commencing with two consecutive overnights on the first visit, (iii) the number of consecutive overnights between x and the father shall not increase beyond seven nights save in accordance with x’s wishes, (iv) the father shall provide the mother with details of x’s accommodation for all overnight time, and (v) the balance of the days x spends with the father for the duration of each trip shall comprise daytime visits only.  i) the number of consecutive overnights between x and the father shall not increase beyond seven nights save in accordance with x’s wishes, (iv) the father shall provide the mother with details of x’s accommodation for all overnight time, and (v) the balance of the days x spends with the father for the duration of each trip shall comprise daytime visits only.  ) the father shall provide the mother with details of x’s accommodation for all overnight time, and (v) the balance of the days x spends with the father for the duration of each trip shall comprise daytime visits only.   the balance of the days x spends with the father for the duration of each trip shall comprise daytime visits only.   in australia (i) in february 2023 and during every third february thereafter, with the mother to travel to australia for no less than 21 days, and for x to spend time with her father as per the incremental progression set out in paragraphs 6(a)(i) to 6(a)(iv) herein, (ii) in december 2024 and every third december thereafter, such time to include christmas day, with the mother to travel to australia for no less than 21 days, and for x to spend time with her father as per the incremental progression set out in paragraphs 6(a)(i) to 6(a)(iv) herein, (iii) at such further and/or other times as agreed between the parties in writing. (c) by electronic communication (i) via whatsapp video or such other agreed form of video communication at 7:00pm country b time on such days as agreed between the parties and failing agreement each wednesday and sunday, with the mother to initiate the call to the father, (ii) the mother shall facilitate x contacting the father by video communication upon her reasonable request to do so.   in february 2023 and during every third february thereafter, with the mother to travel to australia for no less than 21 days, and for x to spend time with her father as per the incremental progression set out in paragraphs 6(a)(i) to 6(a)(iv) herein, (ii) in december 2024 and every third december thereafter, such time to include christmas day, with the mother to travel to australia for no less than 21 days, and for x to spend time with her father as per the incremental progression set out in paragraphs 6(a)(i) to 6(a)(iv) herein, (iii) at such further and/or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  ) in december 2024 and every third december thereafter, such time to include christmas day, with the mother to travel to australia for no less than 21 days, and for x to spend time with her father as per the incremental progression set out in paragraphs 6(a)(i) to 6(a)(iv) herein, (iii) at such further and/or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  i) at such further and/or other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   by electronic communication (i) via whatsapp video or such other agreed form of video communication at 7:00pm country b time on such days as agreed between the parties and failing agreement each wednesday and sunday, with the mother to initiate the call to the father, (ii) the mother shall facilitate x contacting the father by video communication upon her reasonable request to do so.   via whatsapp video or such other agreed form of video communication at 7:00pm country b time on such days as agreed between the parties and failing agreement each wednesday and sunday, with the mother to initiate the call to the father, (ii) the mother shall facilitate x contacting the father by video communication upon her reasonable request to do so.  ) the mother shall facilitate x contacting the father by video communication upon her reasonable request to do so.
7. the father shall facilitate x briefly telephoning the mother prior to bedtime each night x stays with the father, and briefly again on the following morning, unless agreed between the parties in writing.
8. unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, changeover shall occur as follows:  for time pursuant to order 5 herein at c supermarket, (b) for time pursuant to order 6(a) herein, the father shall collect x from the mother’s residence at the commencement of time and shall return x to the mother’s residence at the conclusion of time, and (c) for time pursuant to order 6(b) herein, the mother shall accompany x to and from melbourne on each occasion and the costs of the mother’s travel shall be borne solely by the mother.   for time pursuant to order 6(a) herein, the father shall collect x from the mother’s residence at the commencement of time and shall return x to the mother’s residence at the conclusion of time, and (c) for time pursuant to order 6(b) herein, the mother shall accompany x to and from melbourne on each occasion and the costs of the mother’s travel shall be borne solely by the mother.   for time pursuant to order 6(b) herein, the mother shall accompany x to and from melbourne on each occasion and the costs of the mother’s travel shall be borne solely by the mother.
9. the parties shall share equally in the cost of flights for x to travel to australia pursuant to order 6(b) herein.
10. both parties be permitted to attend all school events relating to x normally attended by parents and receive at their expense all school reports, school photograph order forms and newsletters.
11. each party shall advise the other of any serious illness or injury suffered by x as soon as practicable following the onset of the illness or occurrence of the injury and shall provide sufficiently detailed information and any necessary authorities to allow the other parent to obtain information directly from any treating medical practitioners.
12. both parties facilitate x’s attendance at any birthday parties or agreed extra-curricular activities which coincide with their period of care.
13. each party keep the other informed at all time of their current residential address and contact telephone number.
14. the parties continue to do all things necessary to facilitate x receiving ongoing therapeutic assistance, including by:  pending relocation continuing to facilitate x’s attendance on and follow all recommendations of ms d or her nominee, and (b) following relocation engaging her with a suitably qualified and experienced child psychologist in country b,   following relocation engaging her with a suitably qualified and experienced child psychologist in country b,
15. the mother shall provide x’s psychologist in country b with the following:-  an authority to speak with the father, (b) a copy of the family report of dr e dated 20 may 2021, and (c) a sealed copy of these orders.   a copy of the family report of dr e dated 20 may 2021, and (c) a sealed copy of these orders.   a sealed copy of these orders.
16. the parties and their families be restrained by injunction from:  denigrating the other parent in the presence or hearing of x and shall ensure a neutral or positive tone is used in all references to the other parent, (b) discussing adult issues with x, including but not limited to these proceedings, (c) questioning x in relation to her involvement with and attendance upon professionals, including but not limited to the family report writer and the psychologist appointed pursuant to these orders, and (d) exposing x to family violence, including but not limited to physically disciplining her or threatening to use physical discipline.   discussing adult issues with x, including but not limited to these proceedings, (c) questioning x in relation to her involvement with and attendance upon professionals, including but not limited to the family report writer and the psychologist appointed pursuant to these orders, and (d) exposing x to family violence, including but not limited to physically disciplining her or threatening to use physical discipline.   questioning x in relation to her involvement with and attendance upon professionals, including but not limited to the family report writer and the psychologist appointed pursuant to these orders, and (d) exposing x to family violence, including but not limited to physically disciplining her or threatening to use physical discipline.   exposing x to family violence, including but not limited to physically disciplining her or threatening to use physical discipline.
17. the father retain his right, title and interest in the property situate at f street, suburb g in the state of victoria (“the property”) to the exclusion of the mother.
18. the mother forthwith do all things necessary at her expense to remove the caveat currently lodged by her over the property.
19. unless otherwise specified in these orders and save for the purposes of enforcing any monies due under these or any subsequent orders:  each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all superannuation and other property (including choses-in-action) owned by or in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders (the furniture, personal possessions, and like chattels in the property being deemed to be in the possession of the father). (b) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon. (c) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon. (c) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for judgment
judge bender:
introduction
1 this matter relates to both parenting and property matters following the breakdown of the parties’ seven year marriage.
2 the father is seeking parenting orders for the parties to have equal shared parental responsibility for their seven year old daughter x born in 2014 (“x”), that the mother and x remain living in australia and that x live with each of her parents on a week about basis (such time to build up over six months) and for special occasions.
3 in relation to the property matter, the father is seeking orders each party retain all assets in their name or possession. this would result in the father retaining all assets in australia, including the property at f street, suburb g in the state of victoria (“former matrimonial home”) which he owned at the commencement of the relationship and the mother retaining property she owns or has an interest in in country b.
4 the mother is seeking orders that from january 2022 she be permitted to relocate with x to country b. she proposes that upon relocation she have sole parental responsibility for x. if permitted to relocate the mother proposes x spend time with the father on at least one occasion each calendar year in country b and for 2 out of every three years for a period of no less than 21 days when the mother and x will travel to australia.
5 if permitted to relocate the mother seeks orders that the father retain the former matrimonial home and otherwise the parties keep all other property owned by them.
6 if not permitted to relocate, the mother seeks orders the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x, x live with her and spend time with the father on tuesday and thursday evenings and each alternate weekend from 10:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday. in relation to financial matters, she seeks orders the former matrimonial home be sold and the net proceeds be divided equally between the parties and the parties’ superannuation entitlements be equalised. she proposes the parties otherwise retain all other assets owned by them.
background
7 the father was born in country b in 1962 and is aged 59 years. he and his family migrated to australia when he was 11 years old. he is an australian citizen. he has two adult children from his first marriage, mr h who has 2 young children of his own (about x’s age) and ms j. the ages of the father’s adult children are unknown. the father has not re-partnered.
8 when the parties commenced cohabitation and during the relationship the father ran his own handyman business. due to covid-19 restrictions the father ceased trading. he is now employed as a tradesman with employer k earning approximately $53,000 per annum.
9 the mother was born in country b in 1973 and is aged 48 years. she has not re-partnered. she is engaged in home duties. despite genuine efforts since separation to find paid employment in australia, she has not been able to do so.
10 the parties commenced a long distance relationship in 2009. they met through the mother’s cousin who lives in queensland and is a friend of the father and his family. the father saw a photo of the mother at her sister’s wedding and made contact with her.
11 the parties became engaged in 2011. it was agreed between the parties that the mother would initially move to melbourne but they would return to live in country b in the medium term.
12 the mother migrated to australia in 2012 and the parties in 2012.
13 when the mother came to australia, the parties lived in the former matrimonial home. the father had retained the former matrimonial home from the property settlement from his first marriage. its value and the amount owing on the mortgage at this time is unknown.
14 in 2013 the mother obtained an administrative position at employer l (before migrating to australia she was an administrative assistant in a company in country b). she ceased this employment when x was born.
15 during their relationship the parties (and x when she was born) travelled to country b every year for four to six weeks to visit the mother’s family. the father would also spend time with his extended family in country b. the fares for their travel were paid by the father with occasional assistance from the mother’s family.
16 the parties separated under the one roof in april 2019. the mother describes this as “very unpleasant”.[1]
17 after separation the mother deposes to feeling “trapped” in melbourne and of her staying in the spare room at the back of the house when the father was home. x refused to sleep in her own room and insisted on sleeping with the mother – something she is still doing to this day.
18 it is the mother’s evidence that in july 2019 she was warned by a friend that the father was surveilling her. she then discovered a hidden microphone in the dining room which she believes the father was using to monitor her phone discussions with her family in country b.
19 the mother annexed to her trial affidavit a photograph of the device she found and an advertisement for a recording device that looked identical to the photograph of the device found by the mother.
20 it is the father’s evidence the device photographed by the mother was a charger for his mobile phone. however a picture of the charger for his phone does not match the photo taken of the device found by the mother in the dining room. for those reasons i am satisfied the father was recording the mother’s conversations using the device the mother photographed.
21 the mother and x moved out of the former matrimonial home in october 2019.
22 after the parties separated under the one roof, x began to exhibit severe separation anxiety becoming very distressed when left by the mother at kindergarten. whilst having some separation anxiety earlier, it was not nearly as severe.
23 after the parties physically separated, x spent frequent time with the father by agreement. x was reluctant to spend time with the father unless his eldest daughter ms j was present. x refused to spend any overnight time with the father.
24 when x’s separation anxiety worsened, the mother proposed that x see a psychologist. whilst the father considered x’s separation anxiety to be a normal childhood occurrence and not a serious concern, he agreed for x to attend upon psychologist, ms m in september 2019.
25 in november 2019 the mother sought legal advice. on the advice of her then solicitor, the mother placed a caveat on the former matrimonial home in december 2019.
26 the father was very angry (and remains very angry) that the mother placed a caveat on the former matrimonial home. when the parties separated the father had agreed to pay child support in the sum of $150 per week. after the caveat was lodged the father texted the mother (the text was in language b and the mother annexes the original text and a sworn translation to her trial affidavit) as follows: -
21:57pm from today x is not seeing the psychologist any more under my order. i’ll notify on monday. try to change with her because you’re passing her insecurity. start by leaving her to wipe her backside. 22:20pm there is not help from me, you get paid monthly the amount human services states.
27 it is the mother’s evidence that after the caveat was lodged the father’s anger and threatening behaviour towards her, including threatening that he would keep x overnight, increased. the mother sought advice and was advised to apply for an intervention order which she did in late january 2020. when the interim intervention order was granted, the father emailed x’s psychologist ms m withdrawing his consent to x being treated and cancelled all future appointments.
28 the father continued to spend regular day time only with x.
29 in may 2020 the parties attended family dispute resolution with victoria legal aid and entered into a parenting plan in the following terms:
1) that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x born in 2014. 2) that x live with her mother. 3) that x spend time and communicate with her father as follows: each tuesday and thursday from 5:00pm until 8:00pm, commencing 30 may 2020 and each alternate saturday thereafter from 11:00am until 6:00pm, commencing 26 july 2020 and each alternate sunday thereafter from 11:00am until 6:00pm, by telephone each wednesday from 5:30pm until 6:00pm, and as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing. 4) that the parties be and are hereby restrained by injunction from: denigrating the other party or members of the other parties family in the presence of hearing of x. 5) that for the purposes of changeover this occur at c supermarket. 6) that the parties enrol in and complete a post separation parenting course and provide proof of completion to the other parties solicitor. 7) that the father enrol in and complete a tuning into kids course and provide proof of completion to the mother. 8) that the parties do all acts and things necessary to ensure x attends upon a psychologist forthwith and for this purpose: the solicitors for the father provide to the solicitors for the mother the names of three proposed psychologists and the mother elect on of the proposed psychologists, that the parties be at liberty to communicate with and attend upon the psychologist, and the parties follow all reasonable recommendations of the psychologist, the parties equally meet the cost of such psychologist notation that pursuant to s68p of the family law act that insofar as the intervention order is inconsistent with the parenting plan that this parenting plan prevails. that the mother’s preference for x’s attendance upon a psychologist is from n counselling and when providing the three proposed psychologists referred to in paragraph 8 hereof that the father will take that into account.
30 pursuant to the terms of the parenting plan, the father provided the mother with the names of three psychologists in june 2020. it is the mother’s evidence that none of these psychologists were available and/or prepared to assist x.
31 on 9 september 2020 the father instituted the current proceedings seeking both parenting and property orders.
32 on 9 december 2020 the mother filed her response.
33 on 12 december 2020 interim consent orders were made which provided inter alia: the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x. x live with the mother. x spend time with the father each alternate weekend:- until 9 january 2021 from 11:00am to 6:00pm on saturday and sunday. for 2 weekends 11:00am saturday to 11:00am sunday. for 2 weekends 11:00am saturday to 2:00pm sunday, from 6 march 2021 from 11:00am saturday to 6:00pm sunday. from 16 april 2021 from 6:00pm friday to 6:00pm sunday. on special occasions.
34 the orders also provided for the parties to attend upon dr e for the preparation of a family report.
35 it is the mother’s evidence x’s severe general anxiety and separation anxiety continued throughout 2020/2021. the mother put forward several proposals to the father and obtained a mental health plan for x to attend upon a psychologist given her ongoing extreme anxiety. the father objected to the contents of the mental health plan and the proposed letters of instruction prepared by the mother’s solicitors.
36 on 20 may 2021 dr e released her family report. whilst dr e’s report will be considered in more detail later in this judgment, dr e found x to be “a shy, reserved child who is temperamentally predisposed to anxiety”. in paragraph 55 of her family report dr e states:-
her difficulties appear to have become more acute in the context of parental separation, including more generalised anxiety (many typical childhood worries and fears) and more impairing separation anxiety. she appears to currently meet criteria for separation anxiety disorder. she expressed a belief that her father has made comments to her about killing her mother, which has compounded her worry about her mother’s wellbeing in her absence. x does not present as fearful of her father and seems to believe mr catalan’s comments were said in jest, however, she is highly anxious about night-time at his home due to other features of his property and her pre-existing separation anxiety. her presentation is consistent with a child who has been primarily cared for by her mother and, though she loves her father, she experiences him as insensitive to her emotional needs and obstructive to attempts to get support through connection to her mother.
37 dr e noted the current arrangement whereby x spent time with the father for two nights each alternate weekend appeared to be exacerbating her worries and recommended this time be pulled back to the overnight commencing saturday morning instead of friday afternoon and for the father to facilitate x having contact with the mother during the weekend for reassurance.
38 in paragraph 46 of her report dr e sets out part of her discussions with x as follows:
using visual aids (st luke’s innovative resources “the bears” cards), the writer explored x’s feelings about different events being discussed. when talking about the sleepovers, x chose a scared looking bear and said she felt “worried”. when asked to tell the writer more about that, she said, “i worry sleeping in someone else’s house because daddy said we’re going to kill my mummy but we’re not.” when asked to clarify who the “we” was who was going to kill her mummy, she said, “daddy.” x was unable to tell the writer anything about the context of these alleged statements (e.g., what was happening when daddy said this? what happened after he said that?) other than that it was something her father said directly to her. when asked to select a bear to show how daddy felt when he said this to her, x chose a laughing bear, saying she thought he felt “cheeky” when he said it, but x’s own affect was somber (sic) and frightened when giving her account.
39 as noted dr e’s report was released to the parties on 20 may 2021. it is the father’s evidence that he was “horrified by this allegation and i believe that (the mother) has coached x to say these words in her interview with dr e.”[2]
40 x spent time with the father on 22 may 2021, immediately after the release of the family report. to use the father’s words, he “interrogated” x about why she told lies to dr e about him wanting to kill the mother.
41 the father recorded his questioning of x because, to quote his evidence “if someone asks me, i can say is the truth”.
42 the recording of the father’s questioning of x was played to the court. this is a transcript of part of that recording:-
mr catalan: ... what you said. you said that i was bad to you. you said that i want to kill your mother. why did you say those things? did somebody told you to say that? you can tell me. tell me the truth. you won’t get in trouble or nothing, but – no. your little friend told you that? no. can’t be ..... who could have told you that. but if you told me the truth – just tell me the truth? who was it? you – no one is going to get in trouble. it’s just that if you don’t tell me the truth i won’t be able to see you. you won’t be able to stay here. you understand. x: ..... o (who is a 4 year old friend of x) mr catalan: no. it wasn’t o. you’re not telling me the truth. please tell me the truth. x: it was my mother. mr catalan: it was your mother, was it? and why did she say that? and remember i said to you you must tell the truth when ..... yes? doesn’t matter. that’s all right. we can fix it. we can do – hey. we can fix it. don’t worry. i promise you that – i promise you that we will always be together. okay? and your mother shouldn’t have told you that because that’s bad. you’re only a little kid. but thanks for telling me what you said, okay, because we can fix it. we can go back to normal. all right? you don’t have to feel bad. okay. daddy loves you very much. lada loves you very much. all the family that you have here, we all love you, and we all want you to stay here, okay, with us. all together. okay. x: okay. mr catalan: all right. you happy now? x: yes. mr catalan: so thank you for telling me the truth.
43 the father’s tone was such that his questioning of x is appropriately described as “an interrogation”. the father’s tone, aggression and anger at x are palpable and x sounds frightened.
44 when asked if he thought it was appropriate to question x about the family report, the father replied:
“i regret it because i shouldn’t ask a seven year old...but think worse situation – telling a kid to lie is more important than my questioning. ... knowing x hasn’t been telling the truth – very important to me to know where that lie was coming from.”
45 on 27 may 2021 after the family report was released, the mother’s solicitors wrote to the father suggesting x’s time with the father be reduced to one overnight as recommended by dr e. the father did not agree to this.
46 on 17 june 2021 x’s school contacted the mother in relation to x telling her friends and teacher that the father had threatened to kill the mother and that he had hit her and locked her in her room. because of x’s comments, her school notified the police and the department of families, fairness and housing (“dffh”).
47 following x’s disclosures to the school, the police obtained an interim intervention order for the protection of the mother and x on 22 june 2021. the existing parenting orders were not suspended at that time.
48 on 24 june 2021 dffh spoke to x. whilst she disclosed physical abuse by the father, her description of that abuse was inconsistent. she told dffh she had been punched by the father and was bleeding as a result. however the mark on her face that x showed dffh (a small scratch) did not match her story. x also told dffh the father left her alone at night and did not let her call anyone if she was scared or worried.
49 when dffh interviewed the father he denied all allegations and expressed his belief that x was being influenced by the mother to make the allegations as they would support the mother’s application to relocate to country b.
50 on 23 june 2021 the mother issued an application in a case seeking interim orders for x’s alternate weekend time with the father to be reduced to one overnight in line with dr e’s recommendations. the mother’s application came before the court on 23 august 2021. after an interim defended hearing the court ordered inter alia:- x’s alternate weekend time with the father reduce from 2 nights to 1. when with the father overnight x be permitted to call the mother before bed and again in the morning. the parties be restrained from denigrating the other, discussing adult issues, questioning her about her involvement with professionals and any report writer/psychologist and exposing x to family violence including physical discipline. the parties forthwith engage with a child psychologist in relation to her anxiety and they share the costs of same.
51 on 20 september 2021 x started seeing psychologist ms d.
52 on 27 september 2021 a final intervention order was made without admission against the father for the protection of the mother and x for a period of 12 months.
property
53 as previously set out in this judgment, the father owned the former matrimonial home at the commencement of the relationship. it is the father’s evidence that he had equity in the former matrimonial home at the time of approximately $110,000. it is his further evidence he had $20,000 in savings.
54 it is agreed that the former matrimonial home is currently valued at $740,000 and the mortgage is $196,000.
55 the father sold a motor vehicle 1 after separation for $5,000. it has a red book value of $34,000. it is the father’s evidence this car was in need of extensive repairs and the amount he sold it for reflects its poor condition.
56 at the commencement of the relationship the mother was the registered owner of an apartment in country b being p street, city q, country b (“p street”). she and her sister were the registered owners of r street, city s, country b (“r street”).
57 it is the mother’s evidence that all monies for the purchase of these properties were provided by her parents and they were registered in either her or her and her sister’s names for asset management purposes.
58 it is the mother’s evidence that before moving to australia she executed a power of attorney in favour of her parents to enable them to manage the properties. any rental income earned from p street, city q was retained by her parents. it is her further evidence r street, city s is a beach/holiday home which is used by the family and not rented out.
59 it is the mother’s evidence that in 2019 her parents decided to sell p street, city q. her parents did not consult her in relation to this decision as they had power of attorney to manage the property. further they had funded its purchase. on 17 june 2019 p street, city q was sold to the mother’s sister for usd$60,000. it is the mother’s evidence her parents received the whole of the sale proceeds.
60 it is the father’s evidence he obtained market appraisals for the mother’s country b properties in june 2020 which he annexed to his trial affidavit. the appraisal for p street, city q is usd$180,000 and usd$140,000 for r street, city s.
61 it is the father’s evidence that during the relationship the mother received the rental income from p street, city q which was paid into an account in the mother’s name in country b.
62 the mother denies receiving any rental income for property in country b and denies having a bank account in her name in country b. it is her evidence that the only account she had in country b after she and the father married was a joint account she and the father opened to receive wishing well gifts. it is her evidence that the parties emptied the account after they married.
63 neither party put any sworn or independent evidence before the court in relation to the mother’s country b properties, any alleged bank accounts in her name in country b or the dealings relating thereto.
the evidence
the father
64 the father relies on his trial affidavit sworn 11 october 2021 and his financial statement sworn 9 september 2020. the father also gave vive voce evidence at the final hearing.
65 it is the father’s evidence he has a close and loving relationship with x. he argues that if the mother is permitted to relocate with x to country b his relationship with x will be reduced to nothing because of the distance between australia and country b and the very limited time they will be able to spend together.
66 it is the father’s evidence that he does not believe the mother will support x’s relationship with him if she and x are allowed to relocate as the mother has manipulated x to tell lies about him to the report writer, her school and dffh in order to be allowed to return to country b.
67 the father agrees he and the mother did agree they would return to live in country b after they married. it is his evidence however that this was on the understanding this would only be when his parents passed away. the father rejected the mother’s counsel’s suggestion that he and the mother’s return to country b was conditional upon his parents’ passing was a “recent” invention on his part.
68 the father also agrees that from the commencement of the relationship, the mother has wanted to return to country b to live.
69 the father agrees with the mother’s evidence that she had a very good relationship with his family during their marriage, but that since the parties separated his family and in particular his daughter ms j and his brother no longer have any relationship with her. he notes there was an occasion when the mother contacted his adult son asking him to look after x when the mother had a fall, was admitted to hospital and the father did not respond to the mother’s calls for assistance.
70 whilst agreeing x has some anxieties, the father’s evidence is they are “usual childhood worries”.
71 it is the father’s evidence that x is scared of noises, spiders and, he realised after reading the family report, the concrete “lion” in his garden. he explained that as a result of the tuning into kids course that he completed, he has developed strategies to address x’s fears by taking x to see the things that are scaring her so that she is able to realise that she does not need to be scared of them.
72 it is the father’s evidence that x started experiencing separation anxiety in 2019 whilst he and the mother were separated under the one roof. the father agrees that he believed this to be a stage that she was going through as both his adult children had similar problems at kindergarten. however because the mother was so insistent x needed help, he agreed to her attending upon psychologist ms m. when cross-examined as to why he had withdrawn his consent to x continuing to attend upon ms m, especially when on his evidence x was making considerable progress with her, the father explained that he did so because ms m was only speaking to the mother and not to him, that ms m was therefore only getting the mother’s version of what was happening and that the mother was manipulating the information ms m was receiving in order to support her desire to relocate from australia to country b.
73 when questioned as to why he did not agree to x attending upon psychologists suggested by the mother, despite there being agreement in their may 2020 parenting plan that she do so, the father explained that he did not agree to the psychologists proposed by the mother because the mental health plans that the mother had obtained from x’s treating general practitioners were based on information provided by the mother only and that he wanted input into what the psychologist was told.
74 whilst saying the mother is a terrific person and mother, the father observed that the mother is very overprotective of x and that many of x’s fears stem from the mother and her own fears to which she exposes x.
75 the father’s “interrogation” of x in relation to comments made by her to the report writer that were contained in dr e’s family report are set out in paragraphs 41 to 46 of this judgment. the father showed no remorse and exhibited no insight into the impact of this questioning on x when giving his vive voce evidence.
76 it is the father’s evidence that he has a very good relationship with x, that she can tell him anything, that she now happily spends overnight time with him and on occasion asks to be able to stay longer.
77 it is the father’s evidence that he believes that x should be spending equal time with both her parents as they both love her and she would benefit from equal input from both of them. it is his evidence and he believes that increasing x’s time with him from the current one night a fortnight to seven nights a fortnight would be something she could easily manage over the next six months.
78 in relation to financial matters, it is clear from the father’s evidence that he remains very angry that the mother placed a caveat on the former matrimonial home, in part as it has restricted his capacity to borrow in order to fund these legal proceedings.
79 it is the father’s evidence that he does not accept that the mother does not have a continuing interest in p street, city q and r street, city s and that they have a value considerably greater than that given to them by the mother.
80 it is the father’s further evidence that he believes that the mother is receiving rental income from p street, city q which is being held on her behalf in bank accounts in country b. in support of this, he questions how the mother has managed to save $9,600 since the parties’ physical separation when her only source of income is said by her to only be centrelink payments. the father argues the mother has only been able to save these monies because she is receiving assistance from her family and rental income from the properties in country b. he concedes however that there is no evidence from the mother’s discovered australian bank accounts that any such income has been received by her.
81 whilst the father agrees that when the parties physically separated he agreed to pay the mother $150.00 per week for the support of x, he immediately ceased those payments when she placed a caveat on the former matrimonial home.
82 it is the father’s evidence that when the parties were together his income from his business was less than he currently earns as an employee of the employer k. it is his further evidence that when the parties were together he was able to fund most of the parties’ annual travel to country b to visit the mother’s and his family. he was also able to meet the parties’ living costs in australia.
the mother
83 the mother relies on her trial affidavit sworn on 25 october 2021 together with her financial statement sworn on the same date. the mother also gave vive voce evidence at the final hearing.
84 the mother seeks orders she be able to relocate with x to country b so that they will have the emotional, financial and practical support of her family.
85 it is the mother’s evidence that since her separation from the father she has been and continues to be isolated in australia. when she was in a relationship with the father, it is her evidence that she had the support of not only the father but also his extended family, sharing a close relationship with his parents, his brother and his two adult children. with the parties’ separation that support and those relationships have been withdrawn and the mother has not seen or had any support from either the father’s daughter ms j, his parents or his brother. it is the mother’s evidence that she was able to call upon the father’s adult son to look after x on one occasion when she had a fall and had to go to hospital. he came to her assistance but this was a one-off and otherwise she has no regular contact or offers of support from him.
86 the mother agrees that she has a cousin who lives in melbourne and that if relocation is not allowed she would be seeking the court’s permission to move closer to her cousin in order to have her support. she notes however that because of covid-19, her ability to interact with her cousin has been very limited. her only other relatives in australia are a cousin in regional victoria and two cousins on the region t with whom she has limited contact.
87 in relation to x’s anxiety, the mother’s evidence is that x continues to be reluctant to separate from her and is insisting upon sleeping with her despite the efforts of x’s new psychologist.
88 the mother agrees with the father that x has good friends at school. it is the mother’s evidence that x will not go for sleepovers at her friends’ homes or spend any lengthy period of time at their homes, always wanting to know where the mother is and when she will be coming to pick her up.
89 it is the mother’s evidence that she believes x has a good relationship with her father and she enjoys spending time with him as well as with her half-brother and -sister.
90 the mother spoke generally positively of the father’s parenting, observing that x loves him and that they do interesting and fun things together which x enjoys.
91 the mother expresses concern however about some aspects of the father’s parenting. in particular she is concerned about his interrogation of x after the release of the family report, her belief that he is discussing these proceedings and other adult issues with x and that there have been occasions when he and ms j have denigrated her to x, telling her that she is a bad mother.
92 when giving her vive voce evidence the mother told the court that on the weekend that x spent with the father immediately prior to the final hearing, she was the happiest and the most settled that she had known x to be after time with the father. x was happy and relaxed when the mother called her on the saturday night and returned in a happy and positive frame of mind.
93 it is the mother’s evidence that telephone communication between x and the father had some difficulties with x being reluctant to talk to her father at times. it is the mother’s evidence that since the father and x have started talking to each other by whatsapp, their communication has improved considerably with x taking her phone into her bedroom to show the father things she has been doing, the two of them singing and reading together and the two of them chatting together happily in an involved and loving way.
94 the mother readily concedes that x’s relationship with her father will be dramatically altered if relocation is allowed as she will no longer be able to spend time with her father on a weekly basis. it is the mother’s belief however that x will be able to maintain a meaningful relationship with the father if she sees him at least once each year as is proposed by her and if they continue to have regular video electronic communication.
95 it is the mother’s proposal that when the father travels to country b to see x, he be responsible for the cost of his airfares, noting he has family in country b with whom he can stay so he will not need to pay for accommodation.
96 it is the mother’s proposal that when she and x travel to australia for x to spend time with the father, she will be responsible for the cost of her own airfares and that she and the father share the cost of x’s airfares. it is the mother’s evidence that her father will assist her in funding her and x’s travel expenses to australia until such time as she is well-established in secure full-time employment after which she will be able to personally afford the cost of her and her share of x’s travel.
97 it is the mother’s evidence that she believes the father will be able to afford to travel to country b to spend time with x. she notes that during the marriage the father was primarily responsible for the family’s airfares to travel to country b though there were two or three occasions when her family also assisted. it is the mother’s evidence the father told her he regularly travelled to country b to visit his family prior to their marriage, those trips being funded by him.
98 placed into evidence before the court was information from centrelink which evidenced the mother’s genuine but unsuccessful efforts since separation to obtain employment. the mother told the court that she had a second interview for a job working in a take away shop shortly after the conclusion of the final hearing. it is the mother’s evidence that she was a secretary in country b before marrying the father and moving to australia and that she will be able to obtain similar employment in the event of her return to that country.
99 the mother denies that she has influenced or manipulated x to make the disclosures and allegations she has made to the report writer, her school and dffh in relation to the father. it is the mother’s evidence those disclosures came solely from x. whilst concerned about the disclosures made by x, the mother’s evidence is that when x told her about the incidents where she says the father scratched/hit her, she told the mother it was an accident and there were no injuries on x that supported the descriptions that she gave to the school or dffh.
100 it is the mother’s evidence that she has never denigrated the father to x and that she has always supported her relationship with the father. the mother’s only requirement in relation to the time x spends with the father is that it reflects x’s anxieties and her capacity to happily spend time away from her.
101 in relation to the father’s proposal that if relocation is not allowed a shared care arrangement be put in place for x within the next six months, it is the mother’s evidence that she believes such an arrangement is not in x’s best interests. it is the mother’s evidence that x is primarily attached to her and could not manage a shared care arrangement given x’s anxieties and inability to manage being away from her for longer than a single night.
102 in relation to financial matters, the mother confirmed her proposal that in the event relocation is allowed each of the parties retain the property that they currently own. it is the mother’s evidence that she believes this would be an equitable outcome in circumstances where she would have the practical and financial support of her family in country b.
103 it is the mother’s proposal that if relocation is not allowed, there should be an equal division of the parties’ assets which on her evidence consist of the former matrimonial home and the father’s superannuation.
104 the mother argues that such an outcome is just and equitable. if she is required to remain in australia her financial resources are limited. she will need that level of financial support in order to be able to properly accommodate and care for herself and x in australia where her employment prospects are limited and she will continue to be x’s primary carer.
105 it is the mother’s evidence that the sale of p street, city q to her sister was a decision made by her parents. whilst p street, city q was in her name all funds for its purchase were provided by her parents. when the mother moved to australia she gave her parents full power of attorney on the clear understanding they could deal with the property in whatever way they chose, including deciding to sell it. the mother does not know why her parents decided to sell the property after the parties separated and could not comment on the suggestion of the father’s counsel that they did so in response to her separation from the father.
106 in relation to r street, city s, it is the mother’s evidence that whilst that property is in her and her sister’s joint names, it was paid for by her parents and is treated as a family property. all members of the family use it for holidays and on weekends. now that her parents are retiring, it is the mother’s evidence r street, city s will be used more regularly by her parents during the week as well.
107 the mother absolutely refutes that other than $2,000.00 which her parents gave her when she physically separated from the father in order to pay for a bond on a rental property when she moved out of the former matrimonial home, her parents have provided no financial support to her since separation. it is her evidence that after p street, city q was sold to her sister, her sister has rented it out and it is she who is receiving the rental income.
108 the mother denies that she has any bank accounts currently in country b.
dr e
109 dr e is a clinical psychologist and family report writer employed in private practice. dr e was engaged by the parties to prepare a family report. that report is dated 20 may 2021 and is before the court by way of an affidavit sworn by dr e on 24 june 2021. dr e also gave vive voce evidence at the final hearing.
family report
110 dr e describes the father in paragraph 13 as affable and easy-going and said that his attitude to the mother “was one of mistrust and he appeared to feel maligned by her.”
111 the father told dr e that x was affectionate and had previously been quite timid, but “normal”.
112 the father told dr e that x is happy at school, has four or five close friends and that her teacher does not report any concerns about her behaviour. he emphasised that the teacher told him he had not observed x to have any difficulties separating from her mother.
113 the father told dr e that during the relationship x always slept in he and the mother’s room in her own bed. he raised no concerns about x’s mental health or development. when dr e asked the father about the impact upon x of separation under the one roof, she reports the father told him there were no changes in any routines other than the mother slept in the spare room and that there was “no change for x”.
114 the father told dr e that when x is with him she never asks for her mother, and never asks to call the mother unless she wants to share something. x is always sad about leaving at the end of her time with him, telling him that she doesn’t want to go and that he is the best dad in the world.
115 dr e reports that the father told her the mother had been “seemingly fixated on the idea that x needed professional help” and that he thought this was unnecessary as her separation anxiety at kindergarten was a “normal phase” for a child, noting that she came out of her shell a few months after she first exhibited this behaviour.
116 the father told dr e that it was mother who first arranged for x to see a psychologist and that whilst he initially agreed to this he later realised that the mother was “feeding” the psychologist information about their home life and telling her that he had a bad influence on x.
117 dr e reports that the father did not believe x requires professional support as he doesn’t see any signs of anxiety when she is in his care. however he wanted dr e to consider this issue in her assessment.
118 when discussing his concerns about the mother’s care of x, the father told dr e he felt the mother was “very fake” and that he couldn’t trust her. he reported that the mother had always been “a terrific person” during their relationship but there was now a “big plot” between her and her parents to action the relocation.
119 under the heading ‘plans for the future’ dr e reports the father’s plans in paragraph 26 as follows:
26. mr catalan reported that there was no future for x in country b. he reported that this had always been a concern for him, and the matter was never settled (though he acknowledged it was his intention to move the family to country b after his parents passed away). he said, “if she goes to country b, it will destroy x.” he estimated that he would only be able to visit her once or twice a year at most and it would destroy his relationship with her. mr catalan endorsed his application for week-about care, insisting this was the best arrangement for x.
120 when discussing the mother, dr e describes her as presenting in a friendly manner, with an attitude towards the father that was respectful but incredulous because of his alleged denial and fabrication. the mother told dr e that she was fearful of the father.
121 the mother told dr e that the parties’ relationship difficulties came to a head on their trip to country b in late 2018/early 2019 and that she moved into their spare room on their return from that trip. she told dr e “it was hell” until she moved out in october 2019.
122 dr e sets out in paragraph 33 the mother’s description of the parties’ separation under the one roof as follows:
33. ms garcia reported that, during the separation under one roof, mr catalan would pick fights and criticise her all the time, that “it was a problem” if he arrived home and she was not there. ms garcia reported that she felt she could not leave the home if he were home as he would call and ask, “where are you?” and often get angry. ms garcia reported that she found a microphone in the furniture after being alerted to its presence by someone mr catalan confided in about having planted it there to monitor ms garcia. she reported that mr catalan later messaged her father and told him he had been spying on ms garcia for five months. she maintained that his denial of certain behaviours (planting a microphone to record her without her permission) was contradicted by superior evidence that she could provide to the court if required. ms garcia reported that mr catalan disconnected the internet so she was unable to contact her family for about a week and took her keys to her car for four days in the middle of winter. she said he then gave her keys back. ms garcia reported that her car later suspiciously stopped working and she suspected he sabotaged it somehow, resulting in her having no transport for six weeks, leaving her dependent on the kindness of friends and public transport to get x to and from kindergarten. she said mr catalan refused to take x to kindergarten (though he was home and not working at the time) and made her catch the bus in the rain. ms garcia recalled mr catalan refusing to collect her and x from hospital (after x was seen for stomach pain). she described him as rude, aggressive and screaming complaints at her. ms garcia reported that x witnessed this frequently. she reported that, after one particular “big fight,” mr catalan walked out of the home and x said to her, “we have to move out of here.”
123 the mother describes x to dr e as an amazing, very kind, very sensitive child who is smart, affectionate, empathic and friendly. the mother told dr e that x had a history of separation anxiety but this did not emerge until her second year of kindergarten (2019) in the context of increased parental conflict after separation under the one roof.
124 the mother told dr e that x still insists that she stay with her until the bell at the start of school and that she walk her to her classroom but other than the odd occasion x is happy to go into class after this.
125 the mother reported that x always slept in a separate bed in her parents’ room until the mother moved into the spare room after which x began to sleep with her. the mother believes that this was in the context of the high verbal and emotional violence of the father towards her until they moved out. the mother reported that x started getting anxious about going to kindergarten, would cry and resist going, hugging her leg and needing to be pried off at drop off. the mother told dr e that the educators at the kindergarten said that x was crying at nap time and they expressed worry about her at home. having noted x’s increased anxiety the kindergarten as part of x’s transition plan to school suggested to the mother that x see a psychologist. the mother agreed with this suggestions.
126 in paragraph 38 dr e reports the response to her question of the mother about x’s relationship with the father. she states:
38. ms garcia reported that she could not say now as she did not see them together except at changeover, but when x was younger, she was often tense around her father and did not want to bother him, because he would “never talk to her in a nice way.” ms garcia reported that she and ms j often spoke to him about the need to adopt a softer and kinder tone with x. ms garcia said that, since separation, mr catalan had said “bad things” to x that scared her, such as that she was going to die because she’s not eating enough vegetables. ms garcia said mr catalan said “you’re going to die” all the time and at times x could not sleep because she was so afraid of dying. ms garcia said x came home on tuesday worrying because ms j had apparently said she was fat. ms garcia said mr catalan told x he was going to take her on a plane and “disappear from this world,” which left ms garcia having to comfort x and reassure her that there mr catalan couldn’t take her anywhere due to covid-19.
127 the mother reported that the father told x that only babies cry. because of this, x feels she has to hide how she is feeling from the father when she is upset. the mother also told dr e that x told her the father and ms j talked badly about the mother to x and to others and had told x “don’t ever say mum or her name in my house”. the mother said that x had told her she cried before bed because the father wouldn’t let her call her to talk to her before going to bed.
128 in paragraph 39 dr e reports as follows:
39. ms garcia said mr catalan told x he wished ms garcia were dead and he would be the one to kill her. she said she tried to reassure x that mr catalan just said these things and didn’t mean them, reminding her how he used to say the same thing about ms j (ms garcia maintained that mr catalan did not have a good relationship with ms j prior to separation, once changing the locks because she had a key, and often fighting and saying he wished she were dead).
129 in response to a question about her concerns in relation to the father’s care of x, dr e reports that the mother told her that aside from the emotional harm the father was causing x by denigrating the mother and making threats to kill, she felt he did not provide appropriate supervision to x as she had seen the father leave x waiting outside a store while he browsed inside and that she was therefore not safe.
130 in relation to the mother’s plans for the future, the mother told dr e she needed to return to country b because she missed her family and needed their support to help care for x as she was unable to rely on the father. further her previous good relationship with the father’s family was no more as the father had forbidden members of his family to maintain contact with her, leaving her isolated.
131 the mother told dr e that:
...her family was more than 70 people in country b and x already spoke with many of them daily. she said x was never anxious about being left with her maternal grandparents if ms garcia needed to go out when they visited country b, indicating a high level of comfort and familiarity with the grandparents. she stressed that the locale was a “safe, good neighbourhood” in the capital city of city q, which was well resourced with bilingual schools and psychological support for x. ms garcia reported that she did not expect x’s anxiety to immediately remit if they relocated, and she intended to seek professional support.
132 in relation to x, dr e describes her engaging in a shy, softly-spoken manner.
133 in paragraph 46 dr e discusses exploring x’s feelings about the different events being discussed using visual aids (st luke’s innovative resources “the bears” cards). dr e states:
when talking about the sleepovers, x chose a scared looking bear and said she felt “worried.” when asked to tell the writer more about that, she said, “i worry sleeping in someone else’s house because daddy said we’re going to kill my mummy but we’re not.” when asked to clarify who the “we” was who was going to kill her mummy, she said, “daddy.” x was unable to tell the writer anything about the context of these alleged statements (e.g., what was happening when daddy said this? what happened after he said that?) other than that it was something her father said directly to her. when asked to select a bear to show how daddy felt when he said this to her, x chose a laughing bear, saying she thought he felt “cheeky” when he said it, but x’s own affect was somber (sic) and frightened when giving her account.
134 in paragraph 49 dr e states she returned to discussing the topic of sleepovers at the father’s home with x. dr e writes:
49. x reported that she did not like sleepovers because “at night-time there are lots of trees and bats in his backyard and a statue of a lion – it all makes me scared.” she explained that she did not feel worried being there during the day. she said at night-time she worried that the lion statue could turn alive. x said she did not feel scared at mummy’s apartment because “no one can break in.” when asked if she thought she would be scared having a sleepover with daddy if he lived in an apartment too, x appeared confident that she wouldn’t be scared then, noting that she had once “stayed in an apartment with daddy for three nights and i felt very safe because we were on the 16th floor.”
135 in paragraph 50 dr e states:
50. the writer asked x whether she was able to talk to anyone about how she felt, and x indicated she cannot. she said she can’t tell daddy because, “if i do, he says that i’m a baby, so i keep it inside.” when asked how she felt at school, x said, “always at school i worry about something bad happening to mum.”
136 in paragraph 51 dr e sets out that she explored x’s relationship with her parents using animal figurines, using space to show closeness in relationships. dr e states:
51. x positioned the figurines for both parents equally close to her. when asked about her choices, x reported that she felt the same love and closeness to each parent. when asked how her parents felt about each other, x said, “angry.” when asked if they both felt angry, x responded affirmatively.
137 dr e observed x with each of her parents for 30 minutes. she describes x’s interactions with her mother as warm and familiar and that their interactions suggested a close relationship. in relation to the father, dr e observed x to appear as similarly comfortable and relaxed in the company of her father as with her mother.
138 under the heading ‘evaluation’, dr e states the following:
55. x presented as a shy, reserved child who is temperamentally predisposed to anxiety. she has a longstanding history of subthreshold separation anxiety (not impeding functioning) and a family history of the same (her mother had childhood separation anxiety with somatic symptoms). her difficulties appear to have become more acute in the context of the parental separation, including more generalised anxiety (many typical childhood worries and fears) and more impairing separation anxiety. she appears to currently meet criteria for separation anxiety disorder. she expressed a belief that her father has made comments to her about killing her mother, which has compounded her worry about her mother’s wellbeing in her absence. x does not present as fearful of her father and seems to believe mr catalan’s alleged comments were said in jest, however, she is highly anxious about night-time at his home due to other features of his property and her pre-existing separation anxiety. her presentation is consistent with a child who has been primarily cared for by her mother and, though she loves her father, she experiences him as insensitive to her emotional needs and obstructive to attempts to get support through connection to her mother. 56. ms garcia presents as a child-focused mother with a sound understanding of her daughter’s sensitivities. there was no evidence at this assessment of her contaminating x’s views or “planting things in her head” as alleged by mr catalan. there was no evidence of restrictive (unjustified) gatekeeping, her assessments of risks to x were measured and her responses appeared proportionate. her proposal to relocate appears driven by the reduction in emotional and practical support available to her in australia as a result of the separation (the loss of mr catalan and his family), which has left her isolated. she shares close, unproblematic relationships with her parents and family in country b and seeks to avail herself of the “village” there to help her raise x. one must wonder whether she would be taking such action if mr catalan had actively provided support to her after separation. 57. mr catalan presents as a loving father with a somewhat unsophisticated understanding of x’s experience. he downplays her anxiety – as he does not see it – but x’s report suggests that he responds insensitively when she does express distress, with inappropriate expectations of the child. x’s report raised significant concerns about mr catalan’s understanding of the impact of denigration of a parent to a child and suggests he and ms j are sabotaging their own relationships with x by their callous disregard for her mother. mr catalan casually brushed off the allegations of violent comments to x, though ms garcia reported that such comments were commonplace for mr catalan when he was engaged in interpersonal conflict (e.g., with his ex-wife, his daughter). mr catalan was similarly dismissive of other allegations of wrongdoing, including his actions that led to his first wife obtaining an ivo against him and ms garcia’s allegations of mr catalan recording her without her consent. 59. the current assessment suggests that x’s parents are not equally matched in their capacities to meet her emotional needs, therefore equal shared care, as sought by mr catalan, is not in her best interests. even the current arrangement is stressful for x, the high frequency contact with her father is positive, but the extended weekends appear to exacerbate her worries. it is suggested that, if x remains in australia, this time be pulled back (to reduce to a single overnight, commencing saturday morning instead of friday afternoon), that mr catalan facilitate x to have contact with ms garcia during the extended visit for reassurance, and there be restraints by injunction on mr catalan or other paternal family members from denigrating ms garcia in the presence or hearing of x. it is important that these injunctions be enforced to reflect the seriousness of the emotional harm it causes to x. if it continues, mr catalan risks his time becoming further reduced and, possibly, supervised, to protect x. 60. if the international relocation is not permitted, the writer would consider ms garcia’s alternative relocation (to the west region of melbourne) to have little impact on the care arrangements that are currently recommended for x, particularly given that mr catalan is working in the west full-time. 61. x’s need for psychological support has been a point of contention between the parties. the writer is of the view that x’s anxiety is well beyond a developmentally appropriate level and, whether she remains in australia or relocates to country b, she is likely to benefit from professional intervention to develop anxiety management skills and reduce symptomatology. 62. the issue of whether relocation to country b is in the best interests of x is one that must be determined by the court. the writer recognises that the psychological wellbeing and resourcefulness of ms garcia is likely to increase in country b, given the high level of family support available. this may have some indirect positive consequences for x. she will likely benefit from the increased access to her maternal family network and the sense of belonging this invites. however, there is a risk of harm to x’s relationship with her father and of developmental harm to x from the loss of her father in her life if she is permitted to relocate to country b. from a psychological perspective, children do best with quality relationships with two involved parents. it is widely recognised that fathers can make unique, important contributions to their child’s development. there is a large body of longitudinal research that identifies the positive relationship between father-involvement and psychosocial adjustment in adolescence and adulthood. in relocations, it is the loss of the father’s social and psychological involvement that can create harm for the child (austin, 2008). 63. a relocation to country b would inevitably reduce mr catalan’s involvement with x. if ms garcia’s evidence is preferred, mr catalan has not maximised his opportunities for social and psychological involvement with x to date and his involvement has not always been positive. however, this is a father who, from the date of separation, sought to see his child every day. he is psychologically invested. while he is not currently x’s preferred caregiver and arguably has some limitations in his capacity to provide emotional support to her now, she feels a close bond with him. relationships are not static and can change over time as children (and parents) mature. it is possible that mr catalan’s relationship with x will strengthen over time if she remains in australia, hence the court must consider the loss of the potential, as well as the current, relationship 64. though an international relocation would reduce mr catalan’s face-to-face involvement, at six years old, x may be able to maintain a meaningful relationship with her father via virtual contact if it is frequent, consistent and facilitated by ms garcia or another caregiver. the writer notes the time difference between australia and country b (13 hours) is somewhat restrictive and the poor coparenting relationship is a contraindication for success, given some level of communication and cooperation is required. nevertheless, it does not seem beyond these parents to make it work. that mr catalan is from country b himself also removes other potential cultural and language barriers that can obstruct relationships following international relocations. 65. if the relocation is permitted, it would be in x’s best interests to spend face-to-face time with mr catalan as frequently as possible, both in her new home country and in australia. the writer recognises that financial restraints make this unlikely to be more frequent than twice each year. at this time, x is unlikely to manage extended separations from her mother (e.g., more than two consecutive nights) whether in australia or country b, meaning time would need to be limited to daytime only for most of the visits until her separation anxiety sufficiently remits and she is comfortable spending more extended time in her father’s care. x’s readiness to increase time is difficult to predict, but one would hope that with treatment, x’s overnights away from ms garcia could reasonably increase in 12-18 months, with gradual increases in time each visit.
139 dr e’s recommendations are contained in paragraph 67 as follows:
67. based on the available information and in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it is respectfully recommended that a) the parents, mr catalan and ms garcia, share equal parental responsibility for x,
a) the parents, mr catalan and ms garcia, share equal parental responsibility for x,
b) x live primarily with ms garcia, c) if x is permitted to relocate to country b with ms garcia,
i. she spend time with mr catalan in australia on no less than seven (7) and no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in two of every three years, and in country b on no less than one occasion per calendar year as per ms garcia’s proposal, ii. she communicate with mr catalan via videocall at least twice weekly, with ms garcia to facilitate the calls, iii. ms garcia to email or message mr catalan updates of x’s wellbeing and progress at least weekly, iv. the number of sleepovers increase incrementally each visit, commencing with two consecutive overnights (e.g., overnights on days 1 and 2, but daytime only on days 4, 5, 6 and 7), building up to five consecutive overnights, with additional overnights in accordance with x’s wishes, d) if x is not permitted to relocate to country b with ms garcia, i. she spend time with mr catalan each tuesday and thursday from 5.00pm to 8.00pm and each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday to 8.00pm sunday, ii. in 12 months, the alternate weekend time extend to commence from 6.00pm friday, iii. for all overnights, mr catalan facilitate brief phone calls from x to ms garcia before x goes to bed and the following morning, for reassurance, e) x engage with a suitably qualified and experienced psychologist or mental health social worker for evidenced-based treatment of her anxiety disorder, f) the parties and their families be restrained by injunction from denigrating the other parent in the presence or hearing of x and ensure a neutral or positive tone is used in all references to the other parent.
d) if x is not permitted to relocate to country b with ms garcia,
e) x engage with a suitably qualified and experienced psychologist or mental health social worker for evidenced-based treatment of her anxiety disorder, f) the parties and their families be restrained by injunction from denigrating the other parent in the presence or hearing of x and ensure a neutral or positive tone is used in all references to the other parent.
f) the parties and their families be restrained by injunction from denigrating the other parent in the presence or hearing of x and ensure a neutral or positive tone is used in all references to the other parent.
vive voce evidence
140 counsel for the father asked dr e what she considered to be the strengths that the father offered to x. dr e answered:
he’s a very, warm, loving parent. he’s fun, he had his two older siblings in the – not necessarily in the home, but as part of that paternal family network that x really, you know, engages with... he’s warm, he’s gentle, he’s fun. he’s a loving dad who provides the important sense of her identity, and all the things good dads provide... overall, i think that she has a strong connection to her father... she was very comfortable and relaxed when she was with him. i think there was a really secure bond there.
141 counsel for the father asked dr e whether she considered x’s attachment was still establishing with her father. dr e responded:
no. she has certainly displayed the sort of behaviours i would expect to see from a child who has a secure attachment – a secure bond with a parent in that... she knows that he’s a safe and secure person and secure base for her. there were also aspects of the relationship that were a bit contradictory in that he might say things that are upsetting or that have kind of cut her a little bit that, you know, she remembers him saying that she was annoying or she remembers him saying... quite awful things about her mother and so children can mesh contradictory experiences into one relationship. it’s not an unconditional kind of relationship, you know, feeling that she can say anything that she wants to him because she’s, you know, she’s aware that dad might react in a particular way. but in saying that, unpacking all those layers of a really complex relationship, but at the core... she knows that he’s someone that she can rely on for safety and security, which is what we’re looking at for attachment.
142 counsel for the mother asked dr e to expand on her comments in paragraph 62 of her report where she said “there is a risk of harm” and “there is a risk of harm to x’s relationship with her father and of developmental harm to x from the loss of her father if she is permitted to relocate to country b”. dr e’s evidence is:
i think at her age and the distance it’s going to be challenging to maintain the type of relationship that she might be able to maintain if she remained in australia or in melbourne. simply because relationships form from frequency of contact, they’re incidental in a sharing of one’s day to day life and it’s that kind of cumulative kind of build up of knowledge of that person and their experience that then generates that connectivity, that feeling of knowing what to say next, knowing what to ask, knowing what’s important to her. and so if there is – if dad loses that opportunity – or x loses that opportunity to be able to have dad being involved and seeing her day to day life it’s going to be difficult for him to just pick up where they left off and, you know, “what’s happen with this person at school?” or “how was art today?” or – it’s going to be a much more removed kind of conversation and that connectivity is going to be much more disrupted and fractured. now that’s not to say they can’t maintain a relationship, i think it will be a challenge to maintain the type of quality and closeness that you can maintain when you’re in the same vicinity and being able to spend high frequency time together.
143 dr e was then asked by the father’s counsel what harm did she believe could happen to x’s development if relocation is allowed. dr e responded:
so what we know about human development is that we are designed for social connectedness and we actually do better with, you know, the greater number of quality connections and quality relationships. and what we’re doing is – if we’re removing dad or we’re saying that dad is going to be – sorry, a fly. if we’re saying that that relationship is going to – dad is going to be – his contact is going to be much more reduced and that that relationship is going to be of a lower quality then we are cutting off that – all the good, all the protective factors – all the protectiveness that comes with that relationship and comes with that connection. so that’s not to say that someone else can’t – that we’re, you know – that it’s a one-to-one relationship if a child is – does not have a relationship with their father that they’re going to be destined to, you know, a life of mental health issues or substance abuse or anything like that. but we know that it’s a risk factor. we know that reducing quality of relationships and connectedness is a risk factor for a whole range of, you know, poor outcomes. now, it’s a risk and i think that the developmental harm of not having a father and having that influence and his involvement is going to be a loss that will need to be mitigated by, you know, others in the village – you know, when i talk about the village, i mean it takes a village to raise a child. and there – i’m sure there will be other people that step in and mum is not going to be – mum will be well supported. but, yes, there’s something very unique about a maternal or a paternal connection to a child and i think we’re increasing the likelihood of challenges for x. that’s not to say it’s not the right decision or it’s in a – you know, on balance that it’s not in her best interests. but there are obviously risks associated with that decision.
144 the father’s counsel asked dr e to clarify what she meant by there being the possibility of harm to occur in x’s’ development. dr e responded:
so when i say “development harm” i think about – we think about development across the lifespan. and going through childhood without a father– so in childhood we’re talking about role-modelling, we’re talking about playfulness, fun, you know, the kind of yin and yang that mums and dads or two different people bring to a child... certainly, you know, the father – or the father literature speaks to a really unique additional benefit that a second parent – which has typically been the father – brings to a child’s wellbeing in terms of their confidence, their adaptability, their problem solving. we see better outcomes in these areas with high father involvement. you know, problem solving, conflict resolution. and so then you move into adolescence and we’re looking for identification and individuation, becoming her own person, having other people to kind of bounce off and look at as representations of – again, role-modelling, but – yes, also identification for her own identity. and then as we moved into adulthood and, you know, the relationships with parents evolve again. so the – it’s very hard to say what – looking at her now, what – you know, which of those events in her pathway are going to be challenging for her. and all we can say is that she is at increased risk of having greater difficulties in – and it’s really a whole spectrum, i could – you know, of wellbeing.
145 dr e then made the observation that the question is how x is going to internalise the absence of her father:
is it going to be a positive one? is it going to be a positive thing that we moved away because we had to but, you know, “daddy still loves me,” and you can maintain that relationship. and i think in this scenario it will be, i don’t think that there’s anything in this case that she would take on as being, you know, “i wasn’t good enough,” or, “daddy didn’t want me and that’s why we moved away.” in some cases that might be a part of the narrative. i don’t think it is in this case, but i still think it will be a big job to maintain that relationship across that distance and time zone.
146 dr e was asked if the court were to be of the view that relocation is in x’s best interests, should that relocation be delayed to enable x’s separation anxiety to decrease as you would expect as she gets older so that she is able to maximise the time that she is able to spend with her father before relocation occurs. dr e responded:
if we think about the timing and allowing her more – the more time that she has to be able to develop the – the relationship with dad, and – and have a more, kind of, typical spend time arrangement, is going to be of benefit to x. so in terms of a relocation now might be premature in terms of her treatment of anxiety in that it hasn’t – the separation anxiety is still impeding the relationship. and it – it would be better to make a decision based on a child who doesn’t have a clinical presentation and you’re just basing it on, you know, a free and unencumbered relationship. so, yes, the more time you give her to – for those – for treatment of those symptoms and for her to move towards, you know, a more typical functioning in terms of her anxiety management, the better.
147 dr e had explained to her the father’s response to the family report and his “interrogation” of x about some of the things that she had told dr e. dr e expressed concern in relation to the father’s behaviour. when asked to explain why she was concerned dr e said:
i’m really concerned about children already being the focus of – and so much weight being put on x, the burden of – of this – you know, she’s – she’s stuck in the middle of two parents and being expected to answer questions that she can’t answer that are, you know, beyond her capability. and it’s really missing any attunement or sensitivity to her needs and – and being driven by – you know, being kind of uncontained in – in – and unrestrained in – in pushing your own needs onto a child, if you’re engaging in that sort of behaviour.
148 it was then put to dr e that the father’s behaviour in questioning x about the family report raises questions about the father’s insight into how putting adult questions to a six-year-old child impacts that child. dr e responded:
yes, which is consistent with what mum has been – mum’s concerns, or the stated – the concerns she stated to me – just because a child has separation anxiety, that doesn’t mean there’s not another, you know, extra layer of kind of pressure and – on this child, that even once the separation anxiety has resolved or has remitted, you know, we may still see some justified, you know, estrangement behaviour, because of the father’s conduct that is, you know, mutually exclusive to the separation anxiety.
149 dr e explained that it was possible that x would move on and would be able to happily separate from her mother, go on school camps, have sleepovers and still not want to go and stay at the father’s house. she said:
because of those sort of behaviours, and what we see with children who are subjected to that sort of pressure is it’s – it’s intolerable – it’s untenable for them to maintain two relationships that are – that are, you know – that cannot exist and co-exist together, so we will see her making – having to make a choice, and that is – these are – that is the worst thing you can do to a child, is make them choose between their parents.
150 dr e explained a further concern about the father’s questioning of x to be:-
those sort of conversations really compromise x’s trust in authority... and next time she goes into this sort of situation, she’s going to remember that. “oh that’s right. last time that i spoke to you, dr e, i copped it, and i’m going to be less trusting and less open”, and so our – our capacity to – her capacity to utilise professional support is potentially compromised in future.
151 dr e was told of the disclosures that x made to her school and to dffh in relation to what she said was happening in her father’s home shortly after the father had questioned her about her disclosures in the report. she was asked whether the fact that x made these sorts of disclosures, whether true or not, is of concern in the context of her relationship with her father. dr e responded:
that’s right. and i would agree, that’s really – when we start to see those escalating allegations or more strident kind of allegations of conduct from a parent, it often speaks to the child trying to resolve that loyalty conflict and trying to create that safety for themselves and – and, yes, making up and fabricating allegations – or exaggerating experiences to resolve that conflict and resolve that pressure.
152 dr e agreed with the mother’s counsel’s proposals that the concerns that she explored with the father’s counsel in relation to x’s relationship with the father and development are concerns that are present when we consider separating families across large distances and are not unique to this matter.
153 the mother’s counsel suggested to dr e that there were some mitigating factors in relation to the concerns discussed by her in this particular case. she then asked dr e to comment on each of those factors. their exchange is as follows:
mother’s counsel: the first is that there is – country b is not only a place familiar to the father but, in fact, his country of origin as well? dr e: yes. mother’s counsel: so we don’t have language barriers or lack of understanding of the system or anyone to go and stay with or all those sort of things. they’re all not a factor? dr e: yes. mother’s counsel: would you agree also that we have fortunately, although not overwhelming wealth, we have sufficient funds or evidence that they have traditionally gone back and forth about once a year in any event. so we haven’t got a situation where no one can afford to go anywhere? dr e: yes. mother’s counsel: we also have what is clearly a very supportive family in terms of the maternal family in country b, they are strongly supportive of the mother? so that she has a safe landing pad? dr e: yes. mother’s counsel: and people with whom she is familiar already – x is familiar already? dr e: yes.
154 dr e was then asked by the mother’s counsel:
so when we’re talking about maintaining relationships, there is – you’re really talking about degrees of richness and complexity to that relationship, rather than a concern, in this case, that there would be a complete severing or a loss of dad, you’re talking about, okay, it’s gradations of how rich and fully developed that relationship might be?
155 dr e responded:
right. whatsapps, and daily kids’ messaging, that’s the frequency that they need to – for dad to be able to catch those little bits of – “what, did you swim 100 metres today, things like that that she will be able to, you know, tell dad about that, rather than, you know, if it’s a scheduled phone call once a week, that’s when things can’t kind of manage that – maintaining that information to hold onto that for – it needs to be much more incidental and cumulative, and consistent.
156 dr e was asked if the father’s insensitivity to some of x’s concerns and anxieties and his response to the recommendations and information contained in the family report were to continue could that damage the relationship between the father and x. dr e responded:-
yes. i think it’s really key as to how people respond to feedback. so a big family report like that, there’s a lot in there that you can take away and say, “right, this is the things that i should be working on”, and it’s quite concerning for me to hear that, you know, there’s this quick succession of events of – where that feedback that hasn’t – it’s just really missed the mark, and the feedback hasn’t been taken on.
157 it was then put to dr e that one of the risk factors that she had discussed with the father’s counsel was the loss of a future good relationship and the building of that relationship between x and the father. it was put to her:
is there also a concern hearing that that we may, in fact, be looking at a relationship that might deteriorate if he doesn’t take onboard the messages that you have set out for him in this?
158 dr e responded:
yes... when i was talking with – answering [the father’s counsel]’s questions, it was talking only about, you know, pure separation anxiety, kind of, situation and scenario, which you would expect to remit over time. but what the – the events that you’re putting to me now is that there’s – there are certainly other things going on consistent with what the mother put to me and that was her narrative at interview. and so, yes, there’s absolutely a strong possibility that... – the picture’s not going to change in 12 months – 24 months if – if these behaviours don’t change in dad – and dad doesn’t change his behaviour.
159 dr e was asked by the court whether she had a view as to what was in x’s best interests from the three options available to court, these options being that she remains in melbourne, she be allowed to relocate to country b immediately or she is allowed to relocate to country b but such relocation be delayed to afford x the opportunity to consolidate her relationship with the father and therefore maintain the best possible relationship she can with him upon relocation. dr e responded:
look, i would not be surprised to hear that the court found it was in her best interests to allow dad a little bit more time and x a little bit more time to – to consolidate that relationship and give it a really strong foundation but, ultimately, that that, you know, the information at this point perhaps suggests that he(sic) father is reaching the, you know, the limit of his capabilities and that there’s not a – a strong kind of suggestion there that he’s taking on, you know, taking all the information that we’re giving him and he’s making the best of the situation and that, i suppose, dulls the prospects, for me, of – of him being that dad who’s able to move to that – eventually move to that shared care relationship or have, you know, a really substantial time even if she was living in australia. so i wouldn’t be surprised to – i suppose, if the outcome was that “let’s give dad a, you know, a little bit more time and really hope he – he takes this onboard,” but, ultimately, a relocation is supported. i would – i would – i would sleep okay with that outcome.
160 dr e was questioned in relation to the father’s evidence that x’s reporting of the father hitting her and his wanting to kill the mother were lies and were because the mother had manipulated her to say those things.
161 it is dr e’s evidence that x’s comments to her “didn’t feel like a fabrication” to her as they “didn’t come with the other hallmarks of fabrication...lack of context, really invested in the statement, really emotional about the statement.”
162 dr e was asked “you didn’t get any impression that it was something she [x] was saying at the behest of her mother?” dr e replied “no...it’s missing all the hallmarks of...of being a kind of fable memory or an implanted memory.”
the law
163 in this matter, the mother is seeking to be allowed to relocate to country b with the parties’ seven year old daughter x.
164 whilst relocation cases are often discussed as if they form a discreet subset of parenting cases that should somehow be determined differently to other parenting matters, the jurisprudence makes it clear that this is not so and that a relocation matter is to be determined in the same way that all parenting matters are determined, that is, by following the legislative framework prescribed under the family law act 1975(cth) (the “act”) to determine what orders are in the child’s best interest.
165 the full court in taylor v barker [2007] 37 fam flr 461 at 475, held:
when dealing with a case concerning the future living arrangements for a child, and involving a significant change in the geographical place where the child is to live, the preferred approach according to established principle has been not to deal with that change, or relocation, as a separate or discrete issue, but rather as just one of the proposals for the child’s future living arrangements, at least in so far as that approach is possible: see u v u (2002) 211 clr 238, 191 alr 289, 29 fam lr 74, (2002) flc 93-112, [2002] hca 36 and bolitho v cohen (2005) 33 fam lr 471, (2005) flc 93-224, [2005] famca 458.
166 the act does not address the concept of relocation. however, over time the superior courts have set out a number of principles to assist judges when they are dealing with parenting matters where relocation is in issue. in paragraph [44] of fyfe v kingsley [2020] fcca 1535, judge mcguire (as he then was) summarised those principles as follows:  relocation matters are to be determined generally in accordance with part vii of the act and within the context of making the necessary findings relevant to children's best interests with reference to the factors in s.60cc of the act but also within the context of s.65daa considerations of equal time or 'substantial and significant time' and ‘reasonable practicability’,   the child's best interests remain the paramount but not the sole consideration,   neither party bears an onus to establish that the relocation or a continuation of an existing regime will best promote the interests of the child, (d) an applicant for relocation need not show 'compelling reasons' in support of the relocation but must, in my view... give or adduce probative evidence which permits the court, on balance, to find that a parenting order which involves a relocation of a child is in that child's best interest, (e) the child's best interest must be weighed and balanced with the open 'right' of a parent’s freedom of movement but such right must ultimately defer to the child's best interest, (f) the court must consider the advantages and disadvantages of each of the parent’s proposals including the proposed relocation and may, if required, formulate proposals itself in the best interests of the child.   an applicant for relocation need not show 'compelling reasons' in support of the relocation but must, in my view... give or adduce probative evidence which permits the court, on balance, to find that a parenting order which involves a relocation of a child is in that child's best interest, (e) the child's best interest must be weighed and balanced with the open 'right' of a parent’s freedom of movement but such right must ultimately defer to the child's best interest, (f) the court must consider the advantages and disadvantages of each of the parent’s proposals including the proposed relocation and may, if required, formulate proposals itself in the best interests of the child.   the child's best interest must be weighed and balanced with the open 'right' of a parent’s freedom of movement but such right must ultimately defer to the child's best interest, (f) the court must consider the advantages and disadvantages of each of the parent’s proposals including the proposed relocation and may, if required, formulate proposals itself in the best interests of the child.   the court must consider the advantages and disadvantages of each of the parent’s proposals including the proposed relocation and may, if required, formulate proposals itself in the best interests of the child.
best interests of the child
167 part vii of the act deals with children. section 60b of the act sets out the objects and underlying principles of part vii of the act as follows:
1. the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. 2. the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
3. for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child’s or torres strait islander child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right:   to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and   to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and   to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.
168 section 60ca of the act provides that:
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
169 to determine what is in the best interests of the child, the court must consider the matters set out in section 60cc(2) and section 60cc(3) of the act. each of the matters contained in those subsections, where relevant to the matter before the court must be considered and assessed in the context of each of the parties’ proposals. the court should then make a decision as to which of the parties proposals or such other arrangements as the court determines given the court is not bound by the parties’ proposals (see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160, u & u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238), is in the children’s best interests.
section 60cc (2)
170 section 60cc(2) of the act sets out the primary considerations that the court must take into account when determining what is in the child’s best interests. they are as follows:
section 60cc(2)(a) – the benefit of the child having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents
171 in heath v hemming (no.2) [2011] famca 749, justice kent in paragraph [104] reviewed the authorities relating to parenting cases involving proposed relocation. in subsection (a) of paragraph 104 his honour considered section 60cc(2)(a) and summarised the case law in relation to the benefit of the child having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents as follows:  s60cc(2)(a) expresses the primary consideration of the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents. similarly, s60cc(3)(b) requires the court to consider the nature of the relationship of the child with, inter alia both parents and the objects and principles expressed in s60b also contain various references to the involvement of both parents in the life of their child.
in sigley & evor [2011] famcafc 22, (2011) 44 fam lr 439 the full court recently considered what is required by the term “meaningful relationship” in s60cc(2)(a). the full court:   approved the interpretation that a “meaningful relationship” is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child (citing mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520, (2007) 37 fam lr 518 per brown j and mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92, (2009) flc 93-405 per the full court), (ii) concluded that the preferred interpretation of “benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship” in s60cc(2)(a) is that the court should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents (referred to by the full court as “the prospective approach”). however, the full court noted that s60cc(3)(b) requires a court to explore existing relationships between a child and the child’s parents and other persons and thus, depending upon the factual circumstances, examination of the evidence as to the nature of the child’s relationships at the date of hearing (referred to by the full court as “the present relationship approach”) may also be relevant, for example where a significant relationship had not been established between a child and a parent at the date of trial, (iii) confirmed that the legislation aspires to promote a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship. (citing m v s [2006] famca 1408, (2007) flc 93-313 per dessau j at [38]-[39], godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102 per kay j at [33]-[36] and champness v hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 per the full court at [103]), (iv) concluded that “meaningful relationship” is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a meaningful relationship,  ) concluded that the preferred interpretation of “benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship” in s60cc(2)(a) is that the court should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents (referred to by the full court as “the prospective approach”). however, the full court noted that s60cc(3)(b) requires a court to explore existing relationships between a child and the child’s parents and other persons and thus, depending upon the factual circumstances, examination of the evidence as to the nature of the child’s relationships at the date of hearing (referred to by the full court as “the present relationship approach”) may also be relevant, for example where a significant relationship had not been established between a child and a parent at the date of trial, (iii) confirmed that the legislation aspires to promote a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship. (citing m v s [2006] famca 1408, (2007) flc 93-313 per dessau j at [38]-[39], godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102 per kay j at [33]-[36] and champness v hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 per the full court at [103]), (iv) concluded that “meaningful relationship” is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a meaningful relationship,  i) confirmed that the legislation aspires to promote a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship. (citing m v s [2006] famca 1408, (2007) flc 93-313 per dessau j at [38]-[39], godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102 per kay j at [33]-[36] and champness v hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 per the full court at [103]), (iv) concluded that “meaningful relationship” is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a meaningful relationship,  ) concluded that “meaningful relationship” is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a meaningful relationship,
clearly, if it is determined that a meaningful relationship with both parents is in the child’s best interests the starting point will be to consider whether such a relationship is already established. if not, whilst all factors must be weighed in the balance, it may be a determinative factor in assessing a proposed relocation. if such a relationship is already established, the consideration will be whether such a relationship can be promoted in the context of the proposed relocation. in either case, factors such as the child’s age and level of maturity (s60cc(3)(g)) may assume particular importance. this may also lead a court to consider some proposal other than that of either party, for example, providing for some period of time before the relocation is permitted to occur during which a “meaningful relationship” with the non-relocating parent may be established or further established or to allow the child to reach an age where it is likely that a meaningful relationship will be maintainable.”
172 x has a close and loving relationship with her mother. the parties and dr e agree that it is the mother to whom she is primarily attached.
173 x also has a loving relationship with her father. it is dr e’s evidence that she has a secure attachment, a secure bond with the father. dr e notes that x’s relationship with the father is not an unconditional relationship given x’s belief that there are things she cannot say to her father because of her concerns about how he will react.
174 if the mother and x are permitted to relocate to country b, x will only be able to spend face to face time with her father once or twice a year. this will impact upon and diminish her relationship with the father and impact the development of that relationship as x gets older.
175 it is dr e’s evidence that x may be able to maintain a meaningful relationship with her father via virtual contact as long as it is frequent, consistent and facilitated by the mother.
176 the father is also from country b and therefore there are no cultural or language barriers for the father and x. this removes one of the factors that can impact and obstruct relationships following international relocations.
177 the parties and x travelled annually to country b during the marriage to visit the mother’s extended family. x is therefore familiar with and able to manage the lengthy travel between country b and australia.
section 60cc(2)(b): the need to protect the child from physical and psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence
178 x has two loving and caring parents.
179 there is a concern about the father’s capacity to separate his own adult issues from what is in x’s best interests. this arises in the context of his very disturbing “interrogation” of x after the release of the family report which he justifies on the basis that what she told dr e was a lie and that it was more important that the truth be known even if such questioning was distressing for x.
180 it is also of concern that the father stopped the counselling that x was receiving because of her anxieties and was obstructive in the engagement of an alternative psychologist, even when this was agreed between the parties. he did so on the basis that he felt he wasn’t being heard by the psychologist rather than putting x’s need for psychological help at the forefront of his thinking.
181 dr e’s evidence is that if the father were to continue to be unable to take on board the advice that his behaviour is inappropriate and is damaging x and continued to behave in this matter, then it will not only damage x emotionally and psychologically, it could also have the effect of undermining his relationship with her.
182 the father’s capacity to take on board the necessity for him to change how he interacts with x in relation to these issues is of concern given his vive vice evidence that he does not recognise that what he did in questioning x in the manner he did was inappropriate. it raises the question that if in the future x raised matters that the father did not believe reflected his understanding of the truth he would again behave in this way.
section 60cc(3)
183 section 60cc(3) of the act sets out the additional considerations the court must consider when determining what is in x’s best interests. each of the matters under this section will be considered in turn where applicable to this matter.
section 60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
184 given x’s age and current level of anxiety, x’s views were not sought.
section 60cc(3)(b): the nature of the relationship of the child with:(i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparents or other relative of the child)
185 x is a much-loved little girl. she has a close and loving relationship with both her parents. she is closely attached to her mother and has a strong bond with her father as well.
186 x has a positive relationship with her extended paternal family in australia. this includes her adult half-brother and sister from her father’s first marriage, her paternal grandparents and her cousins being her brother’s children.
187 since x’s birth she has spent extended time with her maternal family in country b every year. it is the mother’s evidence that she and x speak with the maternal family in country b by video on a daily basis. for these reasons x has a close relationship with her extended maternal family despite the distance between them.
section 60cc(3)(c): the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity:(i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and(ii) to spend time with the child, and(iii) to communicate with the child
188 both parties love x and are actively involved in her care.
189 since the parties separated physically in october 2019, x has spent regular time with the father albeit x’s anxiety has meant that her overnight time with the father to date has been limited.
190 the father’s distrust of the mother and his belief that she is manipulating x and her treaters in an effort to support her desire to move back to country b resulted in the counselling assistance x desperately needing being cancelled by the father. he did so because he felt those treaters were not hearing “his side of the story”. this focus on his rights and the adult issues rather than on x’s best interests meant that the father was not able to reach agreement with the mother on an appropriate counsellor for many months which delayed x’s counselling and exacerbated her anxiety.
section 60cc(3)(ca): the extent to which each of the child’s parents have fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligation to maintain the child
191 when the parties first physically separated the father agreed he would voluntarily pay the mother the sum of $150.00 per week for the support of x. when the mother’s solicitors placed a caveat over the former matrimonial home the father took extreme exception to this and immediately stopped paying the mother this level of support for x.
192 the father currently pays child support of $28.00 per week as assessed by the child support agency and otherwise the mother is responsible for x’s support.
section 60cc(3)(d): the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:(i) either of the child’s parents, or(ii) any other child or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living
193 if x is permitted to relocate with the mother to country b her ability to spend face to face time with the father will be limited as a matter of necessity to once or twice each year.
194 further, if x lives in country b with the mother she will be limited in the time that she can spend with her melbourne-based paternal family save for those occasions when she travels to australia to spend time with the father. the mother’s proposal is that she and x travel to melbourne two out of every three years to spend time with the father and that otherwise the father travel to country b to spend time with x on no less than one occasion each calendar year.
195 if the mother is not permitted to relocate to country b, x’s time with her extended maternal family will be limited to visits to country b with the mother or if the maternal family are able to visit australia.
section 60cc(3)(e): the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
196 if x and the mother relocate to country b there are considerable practical difficulties in x spending face to face time with the father given the considerable distance between australia and country b.
197 whilst the father’s evidence is that his research showed that airfares between australia and country b at this time are anything up to $7,000.00, the mother’s enquiries during the running of the trial indicated that those costs are between $1,500.00 and $2,500.00.
198 x is used to travelling between australia and country b as the parties returned to country b annually throughout the entirety of the parties’ relationship. accordingly undertaking such travel may be a little less strenuous for her than it is for children who have not grown up experiencing regular international travel.
199 the cost of the parties’ annual trips to country b were primarily funded by the father with the occasional assistance from the mother’s family. it is the mother’s evidence that her family will continue to assist her in the costs she would incur in bringing x to australia to spend time with the father and that once she is able to obtain full-time employment she will be able to afford that travel herself. the father questions his ability to now fund his and x’s travel if relocation is permitted despite his evidence that during the parties’ relationship he paid for nearly all the families’ travel costs and is now earning more than he did at that time.
200 the father and x have now established a routine for regular whatsapp electronic communication. it is the mother’s evidence that this form of communication is working very well with x being able to show her father things of interest to her, the father reading stories to x, then singing and playing together. she therefore believes they will be able to continue this communication on a regular basis if relocation is allowed.
201 it is noted that there is a thirteen hour time difference between australia and country b which would work in favour of regular electronic communications. six or seven o’clock in the morning in australia would be six or seven o’clock at night in country b and enable sensible communication to take place between x and the father.
section 60cc(3)(f) – the capacity of: (i) each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
202 the court’s concern about the father’s ability to protect x from adult issues and not expose her to inappropriate questioning and comments relating to these proceedings and the mother are well set out in this judgment.
203 the recording made by the father of his questioning of x after he received the family report and read what he believed to be x’s lies about his behaviour to the report writer was very disturbing. the father used the word “interrogation” to describe his questioning of x and it is an accurate description. he was badgering x, was clearly angry with her and bullied her to give the answer that he wanted. he explained he recorded he and x’s exchange so he would have evidence that x had lied and had done so at the mother’s behest.
204 when asked if he felt his action on this occasion was in x’s best interests, the father answered that it was not good to question x but it was a worse situation to tell a child to lie and discovering that she had done so was more important than the impact his questioning had on x.
205 it is also clear from the evidence that x feels there are things she cannot tell the father, particularly her fears and anxieties, because the father has told her she is a baby when she has raised them with him.
206 the father’s belief that any anxieties exhibited by x were just usual childhood anxieties and his belief that the mother was seeking counselling for x, not because x needed it to assist her manage her severe anxieties but to support the mother in her application to relocate meant that the father prevented x from receiving the counselling that she clearly needed in respect of her anxieties for in excess of 18 months.
207 this focus on his own needs ahead of x’s needs is most concerning and raises questions about the father’s capacity to meet x’s emotional and psychological needs historically and going forward.
208 whilst it is the father’s evidence that the mother is manipulating x and coaching her to lie about him, it is the clear evidence of dr e that she does not believe the mother to have manipulated x or in any way influenced her to make the disclosures that x has made. it is dr e’s evidence that x’s disclosures are her own and reflect her experiences or her reaction to her experience of the interactions she has had with her father.
209 dr e found the mother to be child focussed and a parent who is prioritising the best interests of her daughter.
section 60cc(3)(g): the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant
210 both parties were born in country b and share the same language and cultural background.
211 the father migrated to australia with his family when he was eleven. he has maintained ties with country b, regularly visiting his family who continue to reside there as well as being involved with the community in australia.
212 the mother came to australia when she married the father in 2012. her parents, sister and extended maternal family continue to reside in country b. she has a cousin in melbourne and cousins in regional victoria and queensland. the parties visited the mother’s family in country b annually throughout the entirety of their marriage.
section 60cc(3)(h): if the child is an aboriginal child or torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right
213 this subsection is not relevant.
section 60cc(3)(i): the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
214 that these parties love their daughter and genuinely wish what is best for her is not in doubt.
215 as has been well set out in this judgment, the father has not always been able to prioritise x’s best interests from adult issues and his need to validate his story and experiences. in this regard he is not being a responsible parent.
section 60cc(3)(j): any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.section 60cc(3)(k): if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter.
216 the mother currently has an intervention order for the protection of herself and x that was made upon the application of the police after x made disclosures at her school and to dffh that she has been badly treated when with her father and that he had hit her in the face.
217 the court’s finding that the father recorded the mother’s telephone conversations whilst they were separated under the one roof is previously set out in this judgment.
218 dr e assessed the father as being someone with a low risk of family violence. it was apparent from the mother’s evidence to the court that she was not concerned that she or x are at risk of physical harm from the father. the mother’s concerns in relation to the father relate to his questioning of x after the release of the family report and his and the extended paternal family’s denigration of her to x and in x’s presence.
section 60cc(3)(l) – whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
219 the mother’s wish to relocate to country b with x has coloured the parties’ interactions since the breakdown of their marriage. it is anticipated that with the resolution of this issue the necessity for litigation will abate and they can concentrate on being the best possible parents for x.
220 if relocation is allowed, it will be vitally important that the mother ensures that she complies with orders that enable x to spend face to face time with her father both in australia and country b. it will also be vital that the mother facilitates regular multi-weekly electronic communication between x and the father as it is dr e’s evidence this will assist x and the father to maintain their meaningful relationship.
221 if relocation is not allowed, the father is seeking that x live equally with each of her parents within six months’ time. the clear evidence of dr e is that such an order is not in x’s best interests. it is dr e’s evidence there needs to be a very gentle and slow approach to increasing the amount of overnight time x spends with her father that is commensurate with a diminution in x’s anxiety and is reflective of her capacity to manage that level of separation from her mother.
section 60cc(3)(m) – any other factor or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
222 as set out in the previous paragraph, the father is seeking a shared care arrangement in the event relocation is not allowed.
223 it is the clear evidence of dr e that this is not in x’s best interests and she should remain in her mother’s primary care with a very gradual increase in the amount of overnight time that she spends with her father.
224 the mother is also seeking that she be able to live in the western suburbs of melbourne near her cousin in the event relation is not allowed. this appears to be consented to by the father albeit he doesn’t appear to have considered how this would impact on his application for shared care given that the mother and x do not live close enough to the father to enable a shared care arrangement.
225 it is the evidence of the parties that when they were still together they had discussed and agreed that they would return to live in country b. it is the father’s evidence that the parties agreed this move would not take place until his parents passed away as they are aged and he and his brother assist in their care. it is the mother’s evidence that she and the father never discussed or agreed they would not return to country b until his parents had passed away and that this is a recent invention by the father.
226 whether the parties had agreed their move to country b was not to take place until his parents’ passing is something of a moot point now that the parties have separated. there is clear evidence before the court that in the event relocation is allowed the father has previously shown a willingness to move to live in country b and there is nothing preventing him from doing so some time in the future if he should chose to do so given he is from country b, speaks the language, understands the culture and has family living there.
presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the consideration of equal or substantial and significant time
227 section 61da of the act provides that the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. this presumption is rebutted if there are reasonable grounds to believe that either of the child’s parents have engaged in abuse of the child or family violence or where there is evidence that it would not be in the child’s best interests for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for that child.
228 the father seeks orders that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x whether she is resident in australia or in country b.
229 the mother proposes that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility in the event that relocation is not allowed but that she have sole parental responsibility in the event that relocation is allowed.
230 the mother argues that an order for sole parental responsibility in the event of relocation is necessary as on a practical basis it will be very difficult for her and the father to liaise and make decisions for x given the distance between country b and australia.
231 in her family report dr e recommends that orders be made that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x, wherever she resides.
232 the mother’s argument that it will be difficult for decisions to be jointly made in relation to x’s care in the event of a relocation is without merit. modern communication technology means that the parties are able to speak to each other whenever a long term decision needs to be made. there is no reason this cannot take place wherever the parties are living.
233 the real question in relation to the question of parental responsibility is the difficulty the parties have had in communicating sensibly with each other since separation and in particular, whilst the court proceedings has been on foot. this is perhaps best evidenced by the difficulties in the parties being able to reach agreement for a counsellor for x. however, the evidence before the court is that the parties are able to discuss and make decisions for x and have done so since separation.
234 whilst there is a current intervention order in place, the order was obtained by the police and was not an order sought by the mother. the order relates to matters reported by x about incidences that allegedly occurred in the father’s home that are not necessarily an accurate reflection of the father’s care of her or of the positive relationship that they have.
235 i am satisfied that it is in x’s best interests that both her parents have input into the major decisions that will need to be made for her, no matter where it is that she lives. accordingly an order will be made for the parties to have equal shared parental responsibility for her.
236 where parents have equal joint parental responsibility for a child, section 65daa of the act requires the court to consider the child spending equal time, or a substantial and significant time, with each parent.
237 section 65daa(1) provides as follows:
1. if a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, the court must: (a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.”   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.”   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.”   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.”
238 sections 65daa(2) and (3) of the act provide as follows:
2. if:   a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents, the court must:  consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (ii) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (iii) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.
3. for the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend substantial and significant time with a parent only if:   the time the child spends with the parent includes both:  days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and (b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in: (i) the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.
239 section 65daa(5) of the act provides as follows:
5. in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have regard to:   how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.”   the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and
240 in the matter of mrr v gr [2010] hca 4, the high court considered the interrelationship between section 60ca, section 61da(1) and section 65daa of the act.
241 in mrr v gr (supra), the high court held at paragraph [9]:
each of sub-ss (1)(b) and (2)(d) of s 65daa require the court to consider whether it is reasonably practicable for the child to spend equal time or substantial and significant time with each of the parents. it is clearly intended that the court determine that question. sub-section (5) provides in that respect that the court "must have regard" to certain matters, such as how far apart the parents live from each other and their capacity to implement the arrangement in question, and "such other matters as the court considers relevant", [i]n determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child's parents.
242 the high court then held at paragraph [13]:
section 65daa(1) is expressed in imperative terms. it obliges the court to consider both the question whether it is in the best interests of the child to spend equal time with each of the parents (par (a)) and the question whether it is reasonably practicable that the child spend equal time with each of them (par (b)). it is only where both questions are answered in the affirmative that consideration may be given, under par (c), to the making of an order. the words with which par (c) commences ("if it is") refer back to the two preceding questions and make plain that the making of an order can only be considered if the findings mentioned are made. a determination as a question of fact that it is reasonably practicable that equal time be spent with each parent is a statutory condition which must be fulfilled before the court has power to make a parenting order of that kind. it is a matter upon which power is conditioned much as it is where a jurisdictional fact must be proved to exist. if such a finding cannot be made, sub-ss (2)(a) and (b) require that the prospect of the child spending substantial and significant time with each parent then be considered. that sub-section follows the same structure as sub-s (1) and requires the same questions concerning the child's best interests and reasonable practicability to be answered in the context of the child spending substantial and significant time with each parent.
243 the high court further held at paragraph [15]:
section 65daa(1) is concerned with the reality of the situation of the parents and the child, not whether it is desirable that there be equal time spent by the child with each parent. the presumption in s61da(1) is not determinative of the questions arising under s.65daa(1). section 65daa(1)(b) requires a practical assessment of whether equal time parenting is feasible. since such parenting would only be possible in this case if both parents remained in mount isa, coker fm was obliged to consider the circumstances of the parties, more particularly those of the mother, in determining whether equal time parenting was reasonably practicable.
244 thus, the court must consider not only whether it is in the child’s best interests to spend equal or significant and substantial time with each of their parents but also whether it is reasonably practicable for the child to do so.
245 in the event the mother is permitted to relocate to country b with x, it is neither practical nor possible that orders be made for x to spend equal or significant and substantial time with the father.
246 in the event relocation is not allowed, the father is seeking an order that x live equally with both of her parents. the mother opposes that application and instead is seeking orders that x live in her primary care and continue to spend significant and substantial time with her father, albeit the amount of overnight time that x spends with her father only gradually increase from the current one night per fortnight. she proposes that in accordance with the recommendations of dr e such increase take place at a pace commensurate with x’s reduction in anxiety and her capacity to manage additional overnight time away from her mother.
247 the evidence before the court in relation to x’s living arrangements in the event relocation is not allowed is very clear. it is dr e’s evidence that given x’s anxiety an order for equal time cannot be supported as x would not be able to manage such an arrangement.
248 further, the father’s lack of attunement to x’s emotional and psychological needs and his inability to take guidance in respect to his parenting do not support a shared care arrangement. the court is satisfied that an order for equal time is not in x’s best interests, particularly as she has only very recently commenced counselling to assist her in addressing her anxiety.
249 it is also very apparent from the evidence before the court that if relocation is not allowed x should continue to spend regular time with her father that includes at least two mid-week visits as well as alternate overnight weekend time. the overnight time should increase from one night to two then to three or four nights over a period that is commensurate with the improvements in x’s capacity to manage that time.
conclusion
parenting
250 relocation cases can be amongst the most difficult matters to determine, particularly those that involve an application for a parent and child to move out of australia. if relocation is allowed in a matter of that type it must as a matter of necessity result in a child living a considerable distance from one of their parents severely limiting the amount of time that child can spend with their non-resident parent and the level of involvement the non-resident parent can have in their child’s day to day activities.
251 the cases become even more difficult where you have two loving, caring and involved parents with whom the child has a close and loving relationship and with whom the child post-separation has had as an active part of their daily lives.
252 this is such a case. since separation the father has actively pursued his relationship with his daughter and has sought to be as involved with her and in her life as he can be. the mother has been, and continues to be x’s primary carer and x is very closely attached to her.
253 both parties were born in country b. the father moved to australia with his family when he was 11. his parents remain living in australia. he also has two adult children from his first marriage as well as grandchildren who are of a similar age to x in australia. the father has maintained his connections with country b, visiting that country regularly and maintaining relationships with his country b-based family.
254 the mother is also from country b where she lived until moving to australia in 2012 when she married the father.
255 both parties agree that they had discussed returning to country b to live with x during their relationship and it was something that they had intended to do.
256 whilst the parties were together, the mother had a very positive relationship with the paternal family based in australia, being close to the father’s parents, his adult children, particularly his daughter ms j and the father’s brother. when the parties’ relationship broke down the paternal family sided with the father and the mother’s support from and relationship with the extended paternal family ceased.
257 the mother is now seeking to relocate to country b with x so that she and x can have the love and emotional, practical and financial support of her family.
258 it is the mother’s evidence that she is isolated in australia and that other than a cousin who lives in melbourne she has no other family who live near her.
259 it is the mother’s further evidence that despite her very best efforts, she has been unable to find employment in australia leaving her solely dependent on social security and the minimal child support that she receives from the father.
260 the father opposes the mother’s application to relocate to country b with x. he argues that his current close and loving relationship with x will be reduced to nothing because of the distance between australia and country b and the very limited time they will be able to spend together. the father also expresses very strong doubts about the mother facilitating his relationship with x in the event relocation is allowed and questions whether she would in fact comply with orders requiring her to bring x to australia to spend time with him or cooperating with him spending time with x in country b in the event that he has travelled there.
261 in her family report dr e assesses the mother as being child-focussed with a sound understanding of her daughter’s sensitivities. she states that there was no evidence of the mother contaminating x’s views of the father or planting things in her head as alleged by the father. she notes the mother’s proposal to relocate is driven by the reduction in the emotional and practical support available to her in australia as a result of the separation that has left her isolated. she notes the mother to share a close and unproblematic relationship with her parents and family in country b and that the mother is seeking to avail herself of the “village” in country b to assist her to raise x.
262 dr e asks whether the mother would be making the application to relocate to country b if the father had actively provided support to her after separation and had encouraged the extended paternal family to continue to befriend and support the mother and x as well.
263 dr e describes the father as a loving father who has a somewhat unsophisticated understanding of his daughter’s experiences. she notes him to downplay x’s anxiety and that x’s reports suggest that the father responds insensitively to her when she expresses distress to him. dr e observes the father to have a poor understanding of the impact of denigration of a parent to a child and suggests that he is possibly sabotaging his own relationship with x by his callous disregard for the mother.
264 dr e assessed the parties as not being equally matched in their capacity to meet x’s emotional needs which is why she does not support orders being made for equal time in the event relocation is not allowed. in her may 2021 family report, dr e suggested that there be a reduction from two nights to one night overnight that x was then spending with the father as x was clearly not coping with that arrangement.
265 dr e recognised that the psychological wellbeing and resourcefulness of the mother would increase in country b given the high level of family support available to her there and that this would have indirect positive consequences for x as a result.
266 dr e however states that there is a risk of harm to x’s relationship with her father and the possibility of developmental harm to x from the loss of her father in her day to day life if she is permitted to relocate to country b.
267 when discussing these observations in her report when giving her vive vice evidence, dr e explained that the literature shows that children do best when they have quality relationships with two involved parents and that it is widely recognised that fathers can make unique and important contributions to their child’s development. dr e’s evidence is that if x and the father are unable to have frequent contact and share their day to day life experiences then the quality of their relationship must diminish as the cumulative build-up of knowledge of each other and their experiences is what generates connectivity and deep relationships.
268 dr e agrees that the concerns that she expressed in relation to the impact on x’s relationship with her father and possible developmental difficulties are present in most international relocation cases and that the matters that she was highlighting do not necessarily mean that relocation will be developmentally harmful for x. this is particularly so if x has her mother’s “village” in country b supporting her and particularly if her parents ensure that she is able to maintain regular and frequent electronic communication with her father and they maximise to the best of their ability x’s capacity to spend as much face to face time with her father as is practically and financially possible.
269 there is no doubt that x loves her father and is closely bonded to him. there is also no doubt that the father loves x, wants to have the best possible relationship he can with her and be able to spend as much time with her as he can.
270 there are however aspects of the father’s relationship with x and his parenting of her which is of concern to the court. the father’s insensitivity to x’s anxieties and his downplaying of same resulted in x feeling that she cannot at times tell the father how she is really feeling or express to him her fears and concerns.
271 the father’s reaction to the family report, which has been thoroughly canvassed in this judgment, is also of real concern. that his immediate response was to “interrogate” x for what he perceived to be a lie and denigration of him was grossly inappropriate. the recording that he took of that exchange is really concerning. perhaps of even greater concern is that the father is unable to understand just how inappropriate his behaviour was in questioning x as he did and the impact it had on his daughter.
272 x is a somewhat shy young girl who dr e assessed as meeting the criteria for separation anxiety disorder. she expressed the view that x’s anxiety is well beyond a developmentally appropriate level and that she needs professional intervention to develop anxiety management skills and reduce symptomology.
273 whilst separated under the one roof the parties agreed to x obtaining professional assistance. she engaged with a psychologist for the last six months of 2019. after the parties physically separated in late 2019 the father withdrew his consent to x attending upon her psychologist. the basis for this was that he hadn’t been able to speak to the psychologist directly and his belief that the mother was manipulating the psychologist to support her wish to relocate to country b and was therefore denigrating him to the psychologist who wasn’t getting to hear his side of the story.
274 the difficulty with the father’s evidence that the psychologist hadn’t heard his side of the story is that he sent the psychologist a very lengthy letter setting out his concerns about the mother, her behaviour and the difficulties that he believes that had caused. further, there is nothing in that correspondence, which is an annexure to the father’s trial affidavit that mentions x in any way.
275 it was after the father had sent x’s psychologist that correspondence that he withdrew his consent to her continuing x’s treatment. annexed to the father’s trial affidavit is a copy of the letter in which he withdraws his consent. that correspondence is all about how the father felt and does not discuss x, her treatment or asks the psychologist of the impact on x if her counselling was to stop as he proposed.
276 it was another 18 months before x was able to be linked with a psychologist. this was because of a number of factors that included covid-19, the preparedness of a psychologist to assist a family that was in the middle of court proceedings but also because the father would not agree to psychologists suggested by the mother as he took umbrage with the mental health plans that the mother obtained for x from x’s treating gp on the basis that he hadn’t been spoken to.
277 the delay in x obtaining the professional assistance that she needed and still needs was primarily as a result of the father’s own insecurities and his concerns about his rights and not about the best interests of his daughter in ensuring she got the assistance she needed.
278 the evidence of the father’s questioning of x after the release of the family report and the subsequent disclosures x made to her school and dffh was put to dr e when giving her vive voce evidence. dr e expressed a concern that if the father was unable to change the kind of behaviours described to her then there was a genuine risk that his relationship with x would be undermined and their relationship could deteriorate as it would become untenable for x to maintain that relationship because she would be being made to feel by the father that she had to choose one parent over the other.
279 when asked to express a view as to what outcome would be in x’s best interests, that is that she not relocate, that she relocate immediately or that relocation be allowed but there be a delay in that relocation to enable x to consolidate her relationship with her father, dr e expressed the view it was possible the father had reached the limit of his parenting capabilities and as a result there was little prospect that this would be a matter in which x would spend really substantial time with the father even if in australia and that therefore the court found relocation to be in x’s best interests.
280 i found the mother to be an honest and genuine witness. her evidence that she knows x loves her father, that he is an important figure in her life and that she needs to have a relationship with him and the extended paternal family is genuine. i am therefore of the view that if permitted to relocate, the mother will ensure that x is able to continue and maintain a relationship with her father and will ensure that x regularly travels to australia to spend time with her father. i am also satisfied that she will facilitate x spending time with the father when he travels to country b and will ensure that x remains in regular contact via electronic communication with the father.
281 the father is genuine in his love for his daughter and his desire to be actively involved in her life. he is understandably concerned about the impact of relocation on the strength and quality of their father/daughter relationship.
282 there are aspects of the father’s evidence that are concerning. in particular the father impressed as someone who is at times more focussed on his rights and how he is impacted by the things x is saying than on x’s best interests or how his responses and behaviours impact her. he was unable to put his feelings aside and mitigate his behaviour so that he did what was best for x as opposed to what was best for him.
283 dr e describes the mother as “child-focussed” with a “sound understanding of her daughter’s sensitivities”. this was borne out in her evidence before the court. she was able to acknowledge the father’s strengths as a parent, x’s love for him and the importance of their relationship.
284 there is no doubt that the father loves x and that she loves him. he has many positive attributes as a father. dr e describes him as a very loving parent who is warm, gentle and fun. she also describes him as a parent who has an unsophisticated understanding of x’s experience, responding insensitively when she experiences distress, downplaying her anxiety and lacking an understanding of the impact of denigration of a parent on a child.
285 the court’s concerns about the father’s inappropriate and concerning questioning and recording of x after the release of the family report, his belief that such an “interrogation” was appropriate in the face of what he believed was a lie and his inability to appreciate the impact this had on x is well set out in this judgment.
286 also set out in this judgment are the court’s concerns about the father delaying x’s ongoing access to a psychologist because of his adult concerns being given precedence over x’s best interests.
287 there is a genuine concern about the father’s capacity to change his behaviours when his beliefs/rights are challenged, even when failing to do so negatively impacts x. because of this, dr e questions whether the father has reached the limits of his parenting capabilities and is unable to take on the advice/information given to him to be able to better parent x and meet her emotional needs.
288 for these reasons it is apparent that x’s emotional and psychological needs have been and will be best met by the mother and that the father will struggle to meet x’s emotional and psychological needs going forward.
289 x currently spends one night per fortnight with her father as well as several day time only visits per week. because of the matters discussed in the paragraphs 284 – 288, dr e’s evidence is that it “dulls the prospective... of him being that dad who’s able to... eventually move to a shared care relationship or have...really substantial time even if she [x] was living in australia”.
290 the conclusion drawn from this evidence is that x will in all likelihood continue to live primarily with her mother now and into the future. it is therefore in x’s best interests that the mother’s living circumstances and support base allow her to parent x to the best of her abilities.
291 if relocation is not allowed the mother’s isolation, her lack of support emotionally, practically and financially and her inability to find well remunerated employment will make it much more difficult for her to parent x compared to the practical, financial and emotional support that would be available to her and x if she were able to return to country b to live within her “village”, to use dr e’s words. the mother would have better access to accommodation and employment were she to be in country b.
292 there is no doubt that if relocation is allowed x’s relationship with her father will and must change as it will not be possible for them to have the level of normal day to day face to face interaction that has been taking place and would continue to take place in the event x continued to live in australia.
293 whilst it will be difficult and challenging for x to maintain a meaningful relationship with her father from country b, i am satisfied that it will be possible for her to do so through annual face to face time with him as well as regular and frequent multiple weekly electronic communications. i am satisfied that the mother will ensure that this happens and believe the father’s love of his daughter is such that he will do everything within his power to maximise the amount of time that he is able to spend with her.
294 it is also not outside the realms of possibility that the father may choose to return to country b to live for a period of time in order to be more actively involved in his daughter’s life as this is something he was prepared to contemplate doing upon marriage to the mother.
295 for these reasons i am of the view that x’s best interests will be met if the mother is permitted to relocate to country b with her.
296 whilst dr e suggested that relocation be delayed in order to enable the father and x to further consolidate their relationship, i am not persuaded that such an order would be in x’s best interests. the father will understandably be very disappointed and disagree with this decision. his capacity to shield x from his distress and disappointment with the decision must be questioned in light of his response to the matters in the family report with which he disagreed. there is a concern the father may intentionally, or unintentionally, undermine the decision and try and influence x to become oppositional to relocation if it is delayed. this cannot be seen to be in x’s best interests.
297 there is also the reality that the treatment for x’s anxiety is only in its early stages. it is dr e’s evidence that it could be anywhere from 12 to 24 months before x will be capable of spending any increased overnight time with the father. this raises the question as to how long do you delay relocation if the basis for that delay is to enable x’s anxiety to abate so she can spend additional overnight time with the father before she leaves.
298 the evidence of dr e that the father may have reached the limits of his capabilities as a parent is such that it is possible he will not be a dad who is able to spend substantial overnight time with his daughter also mitigates against there being any further consolidation of the father/daughter relationship, and which is deemed as already being a close and loving one.
299 for these reasons the mother and x will be permitted to relocate to country b without delay.
300 orders will therefore be made that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x and otherwise substantially in the terms proposed by the mother in her outline of case document.
property
301 the father is seeking property orders be made that each of the parties retain all assets currently held in their name and that they indemnify the other in relation to same.
302 the mother’s position is that if she is permitted to relocate to country b, the orders proposed by the father are a just and equitable outcome in circumstances where each of the parties will have adequate financial security if they retain those assets they currently own.
303 given relocation is being allowed, the parties are in agreement as to what property orders should be made.
304 given there is no independent sworn evidence in relation to the value of the mother’s property in country b and the circumstances of the transfer of p street, city q is unknown, it is not possible to know what the actual asset pool is. this means it is not possible to give a percentage division to the orders proposed by the parties.
305 what is clear is that the orders that are proposed by the parties ensures the father shall retain his home. he is now in secure employment. the mother will have accommodation for herself and x provided to her by her family. her evidence is she will be able to obtain well-remunerated employment upon her return home which will enable her to support herself and x.
306 for these reasons the court is satisfied that the orders agreed to by the parties are a just and equitable outcome and should be made by the court.
dated: 28 january 2022
[1] paragraph 41 of the mother’s affidavit sworn 25 october 2021. [2] paragraph 105 of the father’s affidavit filed 11 october 2021.