last updated: 14 april 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
nicholson & andrews [2022] fedcfamc2f 76
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
1. all previous orders are discharged except for order 6 to 9 of the orders made on 10 june 2021 which will remain in place until the mother departs for tasmania with x.
parental responsibility
2. the parties shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, x born in 2015 (hereinafter “the child”).
3. the mother shall have responsibility for making decisions for the day to day care of the child when the child is in her care.
4. the father shall have responsibility for making decisions for the day to day care of the child when the child is in his care.
live with
5. the child shall live with the mother and the mother be and is permitted to relocate the child to live in tasmania.
spend time with
6. unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties, the child shall spend time with the father following the mother’s move to tasmania as follows:  during school term time, on the first weekend of each month in sydney from friday evening until 5.00 pm on sunday or 5.00 pm monday if the monday selected is a public holiday or a pupil free day. with changeovers to take place at an agreed location and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport. (b) on one further occasion each month in tasmania, provided it is not a month during which the tasmanian school holidays fall, from after school on friday until 5.00 pm on sunday and such time shall not occur on a consecutive weekend to the time provided for in order 6(a). (c) the father be permitted to extend the time in order 6(b) on one occasion each school term so that it commences after school thursday until before school tuesday provided he provides the mother with 21 days’ notice in writing. (d) during term 1, 2 and 3 tasmanian school holiday periods, for one block period of seven (7) nights by agreement but failing agreement from the first saturday after school concludes until 5.00 pm the following saturday. (e) during the january tasmanian school holiday period, for two separate non-consecutive periods: (i) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 29th of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm on 15 january until 3.00 pm on 27 january. (ii) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 23rd of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm 13 january until 3.00 pm on 25 january. (f) for the periods of time spent with the father during school holiday periods, the mother shall deliver the child to the father at the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport, at 1.00 pm on the specified day and the father shall return the child to the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport at 3.00 pm on the specified day and dependent upon the reasonably available flights. (g) if changeover does not occur at school in tasmania, then changeover is to occur at the front of the airport terminal in tasmania or such other location as agreed between the parties in writing. (h) between 1 october and 1 december each year, the parties will agree upon the schedule of visits for the child in the following year commencing 1 january. the agreed schedule will include the dates of travel, preferred flight and person booking flights. the schedule will not be varied unless with the consent of both parties. (i) at other times as agreed between the parties.   on one further occasion each month in tasmania, provided it is not a month during which the tasmanian school holidays fall, from after school on friday until 5.00 pm on sunday and such time shall not occur on a consecutive weekend to the time provided for in order 6(a). (c) the father be permitted to extend the time in order 6(b) on one occasion each school term so that it commences after school thursday until before school tuesday provided he provides the mother with 21 days’ notice in writing. (d) during term 1, 2 and 3 tasmanian school holiday periods, for one block period of seven (7) nights by agreement but failing agreement from the first saturday after school concludes until 5.00 pm the following saturday. (e) during the january tasmanian school holiday period, for two separate non-consecutive periods: (i) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 29th of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm on 15 january until 3.00 pm on 27 january. (ii) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 23rd of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm 13 january until 3.00 pm on 25 january. (f) for the periods of time spent with the father during school holiday periods, the mother shall deliver the child to the father at the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport, at 1.00 pm on the specified day and the father shall return the child to the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport at 3.00 pm on the specified day and dependent upon the reasonably available flights. (g) if changeover does not occur at school in tasmania, then changeover is to occur at the front of the airport terminal in tasmania or such other location as agreed between the parties in writing. (h) between 1 october and 1 december each year, the parties will agree upon the schedule of visits for the child in the following year commencing 1 january. the agreed schedule will include the dates of travel, preferred flight and person booking flights. the schedule will not be varied unless with the consent of both parties. (i) at other times as agreed between the parties.   the father be permitted to extend the time in order 6(b) on one occasion each school term so that it commences after school thursday until before school tuesday provided he provides the mother with 21 days’ notice in writing. (d) during term 1, 2 and 3 tasmanian school holiday periods, for one block period of seven (7) nights by agreement but failing agreement from the first saturday after school concludes until 5.00 pm the following saturday. (e) during the january tasmanian school holiday period, for two separate non-consecutive periods: (i) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 29th of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm on 15 january until 3.00 pm on 27 january. (ii) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 23rd of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm 13 january until 3.00 pm on 25 january. (f) for the periods of time spent with the father during school holiday periods, the mother shall deliver the child to the father at the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport, at 1.00 pm on the specified day and the father shall return the child to the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport at 3.00 pm on the specified day and dependent upon the reasonably available flights. (g) if changeover does not occur at school in tasmania, then changeover is to occur at the front of the airport terminal in tasmania or such other location as agreed between the parties in writing. (h) between 1 october and 1 december each year, the parties will agree upon the schedule of visits for the child in the following year commencing 1 january. the agreed schedule will include the dates of travel, preferred flight and person booking flights. the schedule will not be varied unless with the consent of both parties. (i) at other times as agreed between the parties.   during term 1, 2 and 3 tasmanian school holiday periods, for one block period of seven (7) nights by agreement but failing agreement from the first saturday after school concludes until 5.00 pm the following saturday. (e) during the january tasmanian school holiday period, for two separate non-consecutive periods: (i) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 29th of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm on 15 january until 3.00 pm on 27 january. (ii) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 23rd of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm 13 january until 3.00 pm on 25 january. (f) for the periods of time spent with the father during school holiday periods, the mother shall deliver the child to the father at the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport, at 1.00 pm on the specified day and the father shall return the child to the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport at 3.00 pm on the specified day and dependent upon the reasonably available flights. (g) if changeover does not occur at school in tasmania, then changeover is to occur at the front of the airport terminal in tasmania or such other location as agreed between the parties in writing. (h) between 1 october and 1 december each year, the parties will agree upon the schedule of visits for the child in the following year commencing 1 january. the agreed schedule will include the dates of travel, preferred flight and person booking flights. the schedule will not be varied unless with the consent of both parties. (i) at other times as agreed between the parties.   during the january tasmanian school holiday period, for two separate non-consecutive periods: (i) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 29th of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm on 15 january until 3.00 pm on 27 january. (ii) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 23rd of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm 13 january until 3.00 pm on 25 january. (f) for the periods of time spent with the father during school holiday periods, the mother shall deliver the child to the father at the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport, at 1.00 pm on the specified day and the father shall return the child to the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport at 3.00 pm on the specified day and dependent upon the reasonably available flights. (g) if changeover does not occur at school in tasmania, then changeover is to occur at the front of the airport terminal in tasmania or such other location as agreed between the parties in writing. (h) between 1 october and 1 december each year, the parties will agree upon the schedule of visits for the child in the following year commencing 1 january. the agreed schedule will include the dates of travel, preferred flight and person booking flights. the schedule will not be varied unless with the consent of both parties. (i) at other times as agreed between the parties.   in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 29th of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm on 15 january until 3.00 pm on 27 january. (ii) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 23rd of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm 13 january until 3.00 pm on 25 january.  ) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00 pm on the 23rd of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1.00 pm 13 january until 3.00 pm on 25 january.   for the periods of time spent with the father during school holiday periods, the mother shall deliver the child to the father at the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport, at 1.00 pm on the specified day and the father shall return the child to the agreed location, and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport at 3.00 pm on the specified day and dependent upon the reasonably available flights. (g) if changeover does not occur at school in tasmania, then changeover is to occur at the front of the airport terminal in tasmania or such other location as agreed between the parties in writing. (h) between 1 october and 1 december each year, the parties will agree upon the schedule of visits for the child in the following year commencing 1 january. the agreed schedule will include the dates of travel, preferred flight and person booking flights. the schedule will not be varied unless with the consent of both parties. (i) at other times as agreed between the parties.   if changeover does not occur at school in tasmania, then changeover is to occur at the front of the airport terminal in tasmania or such other location as agreed between the parties in writing. (h) between 1 october and 1 december each year, the parties will agree upon the schedule of visits for the child in the following year commencing 1 january. the agreed schedule will include the dates of travel, preferred flight and person booking flights. the schedule will not be varied unless with the consent of both parties. (i) at other times as agreed between the parties.   between 1 october and 1 december each year, the parties will agree upon the schedule of visits for the child in the following year commencing 1 january. the agreed schedule will include the dates of travel, preferred flight and person booking flights. the schedule will not be varied unless with the consent of both parties. (i) at other times as agreed between the parties.   at other times as agreed between the parties.
7. if the parties are residing within the same city, on the child’s birthday and the party’s birthdays as follows:  if the child is in the care of the father, the mother is to spend time with the child for two (2) hours on that day at a time agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 5.00 pm until 7.00 pm. (b) if the child is in the care of the mother, the father is to spend time with the child for two (2) hours on that day at a time agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 5.00 pm until 7.00 pm. (c) the child shall spend time with the mother on the mother’s birthday, for a period of at least two (2) hours, if the child is not spending time with the mother. (d) the child shall spend time with the father on the father’s birthday, for a period of at least two (2) hours, if the child is not spending time with the father.   if the child is in the care of the mother, the father is to spend time with the child for two (2) hours on that day at a time agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 5.00 pm until 7.00 pm. (c) the child shall spend time with the mother on the mother’s birthday, for a period of at least two (2) hours, if the child is not spending time with the mother. (d) the child shall spend time with the father on the father’s birthday, for a period of at least two (2) hours, if the child is not spending time with the father.   the child shall spend time with the mother on the mother’s birthday, for a period of at least two (2) hours, if the child is not spending time with the mother. (d) the child shall spend time with the father on the father’s birthday, for a period of at least two (2) hours, if the child is not spending time with the father.   the child shall spend time with the father on the father’s birthday, for a period of at least two (2) hours, if the child is not spending time with the father.
8. the mother will use her best endeavours to facilitate the child spending time with paternal family members in the event that they visit tasmania, including facilitating their attendance at any extracurricular and school activities in which the child is engaged.
9. where the time arrangements with the father require flights to occur:  the father shall provide two (2) months’ notice of the second weekend of time with the child pursuant to order 6(b). (b) the parties shall allow for a one to two hour difference in the commencement or conclusion of time, to allow for flight schedules and possible flight delays and the parties shall keep one another informed as to same. (c) within seven (7) days of such time occurring, the parties shall provide the relevant flight itinerary to the other party.   the parties shall allow for a one to two hour difference in the commencement or conclusion of time, to allow for flight schedules and possible flight delays and the parties shall keep one another informed as to same. (c) within seven (7) days of such time occurring, the parties shall provide the relevant flight itinerary to the other party.   within seven (7) days of such time occurring, the parties shall provide the relevant flight itinerary to the other party.
10. the mother be at liberty to have a delegate or nominee attend changeover and/or travel interstate with the child and that the child shall be able to travel as an unaccompanied minor when he reaches high school, or such earlier time as agreed between the parties in writing.
travel costs
11. for the purposes of travel costs:  the mother shall contribute $1,000 per annum towards the costs of the child’s airfares and after that amount has been spent, the parties shall share the costs of the child’s travel equally. (b) the mother shall make all flight bookings for the child’s flights between tasmania and sydney balancing the need for the cheapest flights possible with the convenience of travel times for child and the father. (c) the mother will advise the father of the cost of the airfares and the amount to be reimbursed by him pursuant to order 11(a). reimbursement of the costs is to be made within 14 days of the request being made by the mother to the father. (d) the costs of the father’s travel shall be borne solely by the father. (e) the costs of the mother’s travel shall be borne solely by the mother. (f) the costs of the mother’s nominee or delegate shall be borne solely by the mother. (g) the mother shall use her best endeavours to ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle at all times that he is in tasmania.   the mother shall make all flight bookings for the child’s flights between tasmania and sydney balancing the need for the cheapest flights possible with the convenience of travel times for child and the father. (c) the mother will advise the father of the cost of the airfares and the amount to be reimbursed by him pursuant to order 11(a). reimbursement of the costs is to be made within 14 days of the request being made by the mother to the father. (d) the costs of the father’s travel shall be borne solely by the father. (e) the costs of the mother’s travel shall be borne solely by the mother. (f) the costs of the mother’s nominee or delegate shall be borne solely by the mother. (g) the mother shall use her best endeavours to ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle at all times that he is in tasmania.   the mother will advise the father of the cost of the airfares and the amount to be reimbursed by him pursuant to order 11(a). reimbursement of the costs is to be made within 14 days of the request being made by the mother to the father. (d) the costs of the father’s travel shall be borne solely by the father. (e) the costs of the mother’s travel shall be borne solely by the mother. (f) the costs of the mother’s nominee or delegate shall be borne solely by the mother. (g) the mother shall use her best endeavours to ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle at all times that he is in tasmania.   the costs of the father’s travel shall be borne solely by the father. (e) the costs of the mother’s travel shall be borne solely by the mother. (f) the costs of the mother’s nominee or delegate shall be borne solely by the mother. (g) the mother shall use her best endeavours to ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle at all times that he is in tasmania.   the costs of the mother’s travel shall be borne solely by the mother. (f) the costs of the mother’s nominee or delegate shall be borne solely by the mother. (g) the mother shall use her best endeavours to ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle at all times that he is in tasmania.   the costs of the mother’s nominee or delegate shall be borne solely by the mother. (g) the mother shall use her best endeavours to ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle at all times that he is in tasmania.   the mother shall use her best endeavours to ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle at all times that he is in tasmania.
electronic communication
12. the child shall communicate with the parent he is not with (“non-resident parent”) via telephone/video call:  at least two times a week on days and times to be agreed by the parties. (b) on his and the parties’ birthdays at 5.00 pm with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call. (c) on christmas day at 10.00 am with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call. (d) on easter sunday at 10.00 am with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call. (e) on father’s day, if the child is not already spending time with the father (and the father shall be entitled to change a weekend time to ensure that the child is with him on that weekend), at 10.00 am with the mother to initiate the call.   on his and the parties’ birthdays at 5.00 pm with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call. (c) on christmas day at 10.00 am with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call. (d) on easter sunday at 10.00 am with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call. (e) on father’s day, if the child is not already spending time with the father (and the father shall be entitled to change a weekend time to ensure that the child is with him on that weekend), at 10.00 am with the mother to initiate the call.   on christmas day at 10.00 am with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call. (d) on easter sunday at 10.00 am with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call. (e) on father’s day, if the child is not already spending time with the father (and the father shall be entitled to change a weekend time to ensure that the child is with him on that weekend), at 10.00 am with the mother to initiate the call.   on easter sunday at 10.00 am with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call. (e) on father’s day, if the child is not already spending time with the father (and the father shall be entitled to change a weekend time to ensure that the child is with him on that weekend), at 10.00 am with the mother to initiate the call.   on father’s day, if the child is not already spending time with the father (and the father shall be entitled to change a weekend time to ensure that the child is with him on that weekend), at 10.00 am with the mother to initiate the call.
non-denigration
13. neither parent shall threaten, harass, abuse, assault or denigrate the other parent or members of their family, nor allow the child to remain in the presence or hearing of a third party who is threatening, harassing, abusing, assaulting or denigrating the other parent or members of their family.
medical
14. if the child is involved in any medical emergency the parent who has care of the child shall notify the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable.
15. each party shall ensure the other party is kept informed as soon as is reasonably practicable of:  any medical problems or illness suffered by the child whilst in their care, (b) any medication that has been prescribed or otherwise given for the child, (c) any specialist medical appointments with any medical doctor, psychiatrist, psychologist, counsellor or therapist regarding the child, (d) any social, school or religious functions which the child is to attend, (e) the telephone contact number, residential address and email address of either party, and (f) any other matter relevant to the welfare of the child.   any medication that has been prescribed or otherwise given for the child, (c) any specialist medical appointments with any medical doctor, psychiatrist, psychologist, counsellor or therapist regarding the child, (d) any social, school or religious functions which the child is to attend, (e) the telephone contact number, residential address and email address of either party, and (f) any other matter relevant to the welfare of the child.   any specialist medical appointments with any medical doctor, psychiatrist, psychologist, counsellor or therapist regarding the child, (d) any social, school or religious functions which the child is to attend, (e) the telephone contact number, residential address and email address of either party, and (f) any other matter relevant to the welfare of the child.   any social, school or religious functions which the child is to attend, (e) the telephone contact number, residential address and email address of either party, and (f) any other matter relevant to the welfare of the child.   the telephone contact number, residential address and email address of either party, and (f) any other matter relevant to the welfare of the child.   any other matter relevant to the welfare of the child.
16. each of the parents shall authorise and direct any medical practitioner, psychologist, counsellor or therapist who has consulted with or treated the child to provide both parents with any and all information.
ancillary orders
17. each of the parents is restrained from requesting or directing the child to convey any information or request to the other parent, and shall unless in the case of an emergency communicate with the other parent by way of whatsapp messaging service.
18. each party is at liberty to attend at the child’s school, sporting and extracurricular events for the purposes of any function or activity normally attended by parents.
19. the mother shall pay the full costs of the independent children’s lawyer.
20. the independent children’s lawyer be discharged.
21. the matter be removed from the list of cases awaiting finalisation.
reasons for judgment
introduction
1 these are parenting proceedings with respect to the child x (“x”) born in 2015, who is aged 6.
2 the mother is seeking to relocate x to tasmania.
3 the father is not agreeable to the relocation.
4 these reasons for judgment explain why i have determined that it is in x’s best interests to permit him to relocate to tasmania with his mother.
agreed orders
5 during the course of the hearing the parties consented to the following final parenting orders:  that they have equal shared parental responsibility for x. (b) that on an interim basis x live with the mother (until such time as he may transition to spending equal time with the father). (c) some general information orders and restraints.   that on an interim basis x live with the mother (until such time as he may transition to spending equal time with the father). (c) some general information orders and restraints.   some general information orders and restraints.
6 these agreed matters are contained in the interim consent orders dated 10 june 2021. they are incorporated into the final orders where appropriate.
issues
7 the significant issues requiring determination are:  whether x be permitted to relocate to tasmania, and (b) what time the father is to spend with x.   what time the father is to spend with x.
background
8 the father was born in 1979 and is aged 42 years.
9 the mother was born in 1979 and is aged 42 years.
10 the mother lived in tasmania from 1981 and attended school there. in 1998 she moved to sydney to commence tertiary studies. the mother’s parents and some of her immediate family remain in tasmania.
11 the parties met in 1998 and commenced a relationship later that year.
12 the parties commenced cohabitation in canberra in 1999. they moved to sydney in 2002, and married in usa in 2012.
13 x was born in 2015.
14 on 12 september 2018 the parties separated under the one roof when the father moved into the granny flat at the former matrimonial home. on 25 january 2019 the father vacated the former matrimonial home.
15 between january and september 2019 the father arranged and spent time with x on approximately 9 to 11 occasions. each visit lasted approximately 4 to 9 hours and one occasion included overnight time while the paternal grandparents were visiting.
16 interim consent orders were made on 23 september 2019 by judge m neville providing for x to live with the mother and spend time with the father on each alternate saturday from 10:00am until sunday at 5:00 pm, and on each tuesday from after childcare until 7:00 pm.
17 on 10 june 2021 the parties agreed to incrementally extend the father’s time with x. pursuant to those orders x spends alternate weekends with the father from after school on friday until the commencement of school on monday and each tuesday from after school until 7:00 pm. x has also been spending block periods with the father during school holidays.
18 as at the date of the final hearing:  the mother lives in suburb b, nsw. (b) the mother works for employer c as a professional. (c) the mother has been in a relationship with mr d (“mr d”) since january 2019. mr d resides in city e, tasmania, with his three children from a previous relationship who are aged 18, 12, and 7. (d) the father lives in suburb f, nsw. (e) the father is employed as a professional in the armed services based in sydney. (f) the father has been in a relationship with ms g (“ms g”) (born in 1986) since around february 2018.   the mother works for employer c as a professional. (c) the mother has been in a relationship with mr d (“mr d”) since january 2019. mr d resides in city e, tasmania, with his three children from a previous relationship who are aged 18, 12, and 7. (d) the father lives in suburb f, nsw. (e) the father is employed as a professional in the armed services based in sydney. (f) the father has been in a relationship with ms g (“ms g”) (born in 1986) since around february 2018.   the mother has been in a relationship with mr d (“mr d”) since january 2019. mr d resides in city e, tasmania, with his three children from a previous relationship who are aged 18, 12, and 7. (d) the father lives in suburb f, nsw. (e) the father is employed as a professional in the armed services based in sydney. (f) the father has been in a relationship with ms g (“ms g”) (born in 1986) since around february 2018.   the father lives in suburb f, nsw. (e) the father is employed as a professional in the armed services based in sydney. (f) the father has been in a relationship with ms g (“ms g”) (born in 1986) since around february 2018.   the father is employed as a professional in the armed services based in sydney. (f) the father has been in a relationship with ms g (“ms g”) (born in 1986) since around february 2018.   the father has been in a relationship with ms g (“ms g”) (born in 1986) since around february 2018.
the position of the parties and the evidence
19 both parties were legally represented and an independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) was appointed to represent x’s best interests.
20 the father’s proposal is set out in his case outline. for ease of reference the orders he seeks are extracted in annexure a but can be summarised as follows:   that the parties shall have equal shared parental responsibility. (b) that x shall live with the mother in sydney. (c) that in the first three months from the making of these orders, the father spend overnight time with x two nights each alternate weekend, and one night each intervening week. (d) that thereafter x’s overnight time with the father progress to one extra night each alternate weekend and by one night during the week each intervening week. (e) that once x commences year two, he spend time with each parent on a week about basis.   that x shall live with the mother in sydney. (c) that in the first three months from the making of these orders, the father spend overnight time with x two nights each alternate weekend, and one night each intervening week. (d) that thereafter x’s overnight time with the father progress to one extra night each alternate weekend and by one night during the week each intervening week. (e) that once x commences year two, he spend time with each parent on a week about basis.   that in the first three months from the making of these orders, the father spend overnight time with x two nights each alternate weekend, and one night each intervening week. (d) that thereafter x’s overnight time with the father progress to one extra night each alternate weekend and by one night during the week each intervening week. (e) that once x commences year two, he spend time with each parent on a week about basis.   that thereafter x’s overnight time with the father progress to one extra night each alternate weekend and by one night during the week each intervening week. (e) that once x commences year two, he spend time with each parent on a week about basis.   that once x commences year two, he spend time with each parent on a week about basis.
21 the father relied upon:   initiating application filed 17 july 2019, (b) notice of risk filed 17 july 2019, (c) affidavit of mr nicholson filed 6 may 2021, (d) affidavit of ms g filed 6 may 2021, (e) affidavit of ms h filed 21 may 2021, and (f) affidavit of ms j filed 6 may 2021.   notice of risk filed 17 july 2019, (c) affidavit of mr nicholson filed 6 may 2021, (d) affidavit of ms g filed 6 may 2021, (e) affidavit of ms h filed 21 may 2021, and (f) affidavit of ms j filed 6 may 2021.   affidavit of mr nicholson filed 6 may 2021, (d) affidavit of ms g filed 6 may 2021, (e) affidavit of ms h filed 21 may 2021, and (f) affidavit of ms j filed 6 may 2021.   affidavit of ms g filed 6 may 2021, (e) affidavit of ms h filed 21 may 2021, and (f) affidavit of ms j filed 6 may 2021.   affidavit of ms h filed 21 may 2021, and (f) affidavit of ms j filed 6 may 2021.   affidavit of ms j filed 6 may 2021.
22 the father called the following witnesses who were cross-examined by the mother and the icl:  ms j, and (b) ms h.   ms h.
23 the mother’s proposal is set out in her case outline filed 26 may 2021. for ease of reference the orders she seeks are extracted in annexure b but can be summarised as follows:  that the parents shall have equal shared parental responsibility. (b) that x shall live with the mother and the mother be permitted to relocate with x to live in tasmania. (c) that during the school term the father shall spend time with x for two weekends each month, and during school holidays.   that x shall live with the mother and the mother be permitted to relocate with x to live in tasmania. (c) that during the school term the father shall spend time with x for two weekends each month, and during school holidays.   that during the school term the father shall spend time with x for two weekends each month, and during school holidays.
24 the mother relied upon:   response to initiating application filed 16 september 2019, (b) notice of risk filed 16 september 2019, (c) affidavit of ms andrews filed 10 may 2021, (d) affidavit of mr k filed 10 may 2021, (e) affidavit of mr l filed 10 may 2021, (f) affidavit of mr d filed 10 may 2021, and (g) affidavit of ms m filed 11 may 2021.   notice of risk filed 16 september 2019, (c) affidavit of ms andrews filed 10 may 2021, (d) affidavit of mr k filed 10 may 2021, (e) affidavit of mr l filed 10 may 2021, (f) affidavit of mr d filed 10 may 2021, and (g) affidavit of ms m filed 11 may 2021.   affidavit of ms andrews filed 10 may 2021, (d) affidavit of mr k filed 10 may 2021, (e) affidavit of mr l filed 10 may 2021, (f) affidavit of mr d filed 10 may 2021, and (g) affidavit of ms m filed 11 may 2021.   affidavit of mr k filed 10 may 2021, (e) affidavit of mr l filed 10 may 2021, (f) affidavit of mr d filed 10 may 2021, and (g) affidavit of ms m filed 11 may 2021.   affidavit of mr l filed 10 may 2021, (f) affidavit of mr d filed 10 may 2021, and (g) affidavit of ms m filed 11 may 2021.   affidavit of mr d filed 10 may 2021, and (g) affidavit of ms m filed 11 may 2021.   affidavit of ms m filed 11 may 2021.
25 the mother called the following witnesses who were cross-examined by the father and the icl:  ms m, (b) mr k, (c) mr d, and (d) mr l.   mr k, (c) mr d, and (d) mr l.   mr d, and (d) mr l.   mr l.
26 the icl’s proposal was prepared on the final day of the hearing. for ease of reference the orders sought by the icl are extracted in annexure c but can be summarised as follows:   that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x. (b) that x live with the mother in the sydney metropolitan area. (c) that x spend time with the father each alternate weekend during school terms with such time to increase on a graduated basis to each alternate weekend from after school friday until before school monday, and after school tuesday until before school wednesday in the intervening week.   that x live with the mother in the sydney metropolitan area. (c) that x spend time with the father each alternate weekend during school terms with such time to increase on a graduated basis to each alternate weekend from after school friday until before school monday, and after school tuesday until before school wednesday in the intervening week.   that x spend time with the father each alternate weekend during school terms with such time to increase on a graduated basis to each alternate weekend from after school friday until before school monday, and after school tuesday until before school wednesday in the intervening week.
credit
27 generally the court is reluctant to make adverse findings in respect of a party’s credit in parenting proceedings.[1] however, it has been necessary to do so in this matter. this is because i cannot discharge my obligation to make orders that are in the best interests of x unless i make an assessment regarding the differing accounts given by the parties in respect to their conduct.
28 the mother was observed to be visibly anxious by the presence of the father in court. her cross-examination was paused on an occasion due to her distress.
29 she demonstrated an ability to consider the perspectives of those around her and remained child focussed. she gave direct and honest answers to questions, even when the answers she was giving did not support her case.
30 for example, in cross-examination the mother conceded that she made snide remarks to the father about x spending time with his partner, ms g. furthermore, she admitted to feeling humiliated by the father, and remarked to counsel for the icl that she did not have photos of the father in her home for x to look at as she “find[s] those very difficult to see on a day to day basis.”[2]
31 for these reasons i found the mother to be a credible witness.
32 the father was observed to find the process of cross-examination very stressful and tiring. i found that he gave evidence with as much detail as was permissible. on several occasions, he talked over counsel and endeavoured to provide information that he was not asked to provide. he had a tendency to be argumentative. during cross-examination he blamed others, especially the mother, for any personal shortcomings or matters he might be criticised for. i formed the view that he lacked insight into his behaviour and the impact that it might have on those around him.
33 for example, the father was asked by counsel for the icl about his “anger issues” and an email he wrote to the mother where he stated “i have anger issues”. the following line of cross-examination took place:[3] unsel for the icl]: you were telling her more than that, that you were actually saying in a broad sense you had anger issues? [the father]: that is my assessment, no – so i made that after being badgered and bullied. [counsel for the icl]: and you – so do you blame her that you had anger issues? [the father]: no, i blame her for the email that i wrote. [counsel for the icl]: what do you mean by that, sir? [the father]: when i was being constantly bullied and harassed whilst i was at work by ms andrews. [counsel for the icl]: do you regret saying – writing that you had anger issues? [the father]: very much. [counsel for the icl]: so you don’t believe you had anger issues? [the father]: i don’t believe i have anger issues. [counsel for the icl]: so why did you write it? [the father]: out of exasperation and frustration.
34 the father was cross-examined about an altercation he had at the swimming pool when x was present. he again used the opportunity to apportion some blame on the mother for the exchange:[4] unsel for the mother]:...do you remember having an issue with another parent at x’s swimming pool in december 2018 and you writing a text message to the mother where you use the following words. you say you had words to the stupid indian woman and that her kid is a shit and disrupts the lessons continuously and saying probably because the filthy indian went and complained. do you remember that message which is annexure f to the mother’s affidavit? [the father]: yes. [counsel for the mother]: now, when you wrote that were you angry? [the father]: no. [counsel for the mother]: were you cool, calm and rational? [the father]: yes. [counsel for the mother]: so in a cool, calm and rational way you do things like tell your child that you’re going to put a bunny rabbit in the oven, that you will refer to filthy indian people whose kids are a shit, that stupid indian woman. these are the kinds of things you say in a cool, calm and rational way? [the father]: to an adult, yes, that’s what i said. [counsel for the mother]: i see, see? [the father]: not to a child. [counsel for the mother]: so it wasn’t anger? [the father]: it was not. [counsel for the mother]: these comments about this indian woman, that wasn’t done in anger. i think that’s what you’ve said, right? [the father]: it was done in the heat of the moment where i was being accused by my former partner of something.
35 where there is conflict between versions of events i prefer the accuracy of the mother’s evidence.
the single expert report
36 rule 15.06a of the federal circuit court rules 2001 (cth) applied at the time of hearing this matter and defines expert as follows:
"expert", in relation to a question, means a person (other than a family and child counsellor or a welfare officer) who has specialised knowledge about matters relevant to the question based on that person's training, study or experience.
37 the icl relied upon the single expert report prepared by ms n (“ms n”). the mother also relied upon an affidavit of her treating psychologist ms m affirmed 11 may 2021.
38 there was a controversy raised about the admissibility of the single expert report and the father argued against its admission. he contended that the report offended the principle in makita (australia) pty ltd v sprowles [2001] nswca 305, (2001) 52 nswlr 705 (“makita”) which requires the identification of considerations upon which an expert’s opinion is based to demonstrate that the opinion is based on the expert’s expertise.
39 the father also contended that the report demonstrates an apprehension of bias against him.
40 these matters would be cured, he argues, by not admitting the report into evidence. in the alternative, he proposed the court consider the admission of the report following cross-examination of the expert by way of a voir dire on the first day, by provisionally admitting the report with consideration as to its rejection or weight at the conclusion of its evidence or admitting the report in its totality and considering weight.
41 at the commencement of the trial i was asked to determine the issue. having heard oral submissions from the legal representatives and read all relevant written material, i determined that the single expert report would be admitted in its totality and i gave reasons for my decision.
42 the admission of the report, does not however mean that the father’s objections to it are disregarded.
43 observing the approach set out by the full court in bass & bass [2008] famcafc 67 ms n was cross-examined and the court now must decide whether to accept, reject or give only limited weight to all, or part of her report.
44 rule 15.07 of the federal circuit court rules 2001 (cth) requires that the expert witness be guided by the federal court practice direction guidelines for expert witnesses. these guidelines are found within the federal court’s expert evidence practice note. in addition to the matters identified at rule 15.07 of the federal circuit court rules 2001 (cth), the practice direction provides that:  the practice direction is to be read with part 23 of the federal court rules 2011 (cth). (b) notwithstanding that expert evidence is relevant, the court may refuse to admit it pursuant to s 135 of the evidence act 1995 (cth) if its probative value is outweighed by other considerations. (c) whilst parties should be cautious not to have inappropriate communications when retaining or instructing an independent expert, there is no principle of law or practice that obliges a party to engage a “consulting expert” to avoid “contamination” of the expert who will give evidence. (d) the court expects that the parties will, at the earliest opportunity, provide to the expert all relevant information (whether helpful or harmful to a party’s case) so as to enable the expert to prepare a report of a truly independent nature. (e) experts should willingly be prepared to change their opinion or make concessions where necessary or appropriate, even if doing so would be contrary to the expert’s previously held or expressed view.   notwithstanding that expert evidence is relevant, the court may refuse to admit it pursuant to s 135 of the evidence act 1995 (cth) if its probative value is outweighed by other considerations. (c) whilst parties should be cautious not to have inappropriate communications when retaining or instructing an independent expert, there is no principle of law or practice that obliges a party to engage a “consulting expert” to avoid “contamination” of the expert who will give evidence. (d) the court expects that the parties will, at the earliest opportunity, provide to the expert all relevant information (whether helpful or harmful to a party’s case) so as to enable the expert to prepare a report of a truly independent nature. (e) experts should willingly be prepared to change their opinion or make concessions where necessary or appropriate, even if doing so would be contrary to the expert’s previously held or expressed view.   whilst parties should be cautious not to have inappropriate communications when retaining or instructing an independent expert, there is no principle of law or practice that obliges a party to engage a “consulting expert” to avoid “contamination” of the expert who will give evidence. (d) the court expects that the parties will, at the earliest opportunity, provide to the expert all relevant information (whether helpful or harmful to a party’s case) so as to enable the expert to prepare a report of a truly independent nature. (e) experts should willingly be prepared to change their opinion or make concessions where necessary or appropriate, even if doing so would be contrary to the expert’s previously held or expressed view.   the court expects that the parties will, at the earliest opportunity, provide to the expert all relevant information (whether helpful or harmful to a party’s case) so as to enable the expert to prepare a report of a truly independent nature. (e) experts should willingly be prepared to change their opinion or make concessions where necessary or appropriate, even if doing so would be contrary to the expert’s previously held or expressed view.   experts should willingly be prepared to change their opinion or make concessions where necessary or appropriate, even if doing so would be contrary to the expert’s previously held or expressed view.
45 as this is a parenting matter, s 69zt(1) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”) applies.
46 section 135 of the evidence act 1995 (cth) provides a general discretion to refuse to admit evidence where its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger that the evidence might:  be unfairly prejudicial to a party, or (b) be misleading or confusing, or (c) cause or result in undue waste of time.   be misleading or confusing, or (c) cause or result in undue waste of time.   cause or result in undue waste of time.
47 after hearing the issue of its admission on day one of the hearing, i ruled that the probative value of the report was not outweighed by the matters contained in section 135. whilst i allowed ms n’s report to be admitted into evidence it is necessary to address the objections raised by the father and determine whether to accept, reject or decide the weight to attach to the report.
the father’s position
48 the father’s first objection to the single expert report was on the grounds of bias. his second objection (and the one that was pressed as the basis for striking out the report), was that in arriving at her conclusions, ms n relied upon two reports prepared on behalf of the mother. one being the report annexed to an affidavit of the mother’s treating psychiatrist dr o (“dr o”)[5] and the other a report annexed to an affidavit of the mother’s treating psychologist, ms ms m (“ms m”). ms m filed an updated affidavit on 11 may 2021 and gave evidence at the hearing. the mother on the other hand did not rely upon dr o’s affidavit and dr o did not give evidence.
49 counsel for the father submitted that the affidavit and reports of dr o and ms m contain a series of assumptions that go beyond the scope of prognosis but rather advocate for the mother’s move to tasmania. that assumption primarily is that the mother’s mental health will improve in the event that she relocates from sydney to tasmania.
50 the objection made was that the material does not form part of the mother’s case nor was dr o called to give evidence. this meant that dr o’s underlying assumptions (which ms n relied upon) were not tested. indeed when ms n prepared her report, based on many things including the clinical observations of dr o and ms m, she wrote that “the advantages [of the relocation] to ms andrews have been unambiguously established.”[6] the report therefore caused a “forensic prejudice” in the eyes of the father, because the assumption “weave[d] its way through [ms n’s] report.”[7]
51 the father contended that the assessment of him by ms n was disproportionately negative, which is supported by her acceptance of the mother’s contentions as fact. this was in circumstances where the evidence was yet to be tested. in doing so, he argues that ms n became a fact finder. he cites another example where ms n dismissed the father’s concerns about the cost of travel, noting that the father could obtain flights and accommodation more cheaply than he was suggesting. this, the husband contended, was indicative of her using her judgement rather than her expertise as a single expert.
52 there are several examples the father relies upon to establish the contention of bias.
53 there was a “mix-up” on the day of the individual interviews between ms n and the father, which caused the interviews to start almost an hour after the scheduled time. at page 9 of the single expert report ms n outlines those circumstances. she then commented:
mr nicholson’s frustration and irritation were palpable and his hostility, which bordered on aggression, was disproportionate to the circumstances, even allowing for the fact that family report interviews are perceived as ‘high-stakes’events and it is acknowledged that parties find them quite stressful because of this.[8]
54 later she observed that:
he [the father] appeared impatient and frustrated with the process on numerous occasions, with a low level of irritation running beneath the surface. he resisted being reflective or responding to prompts for more information and he seemed inexplicably hostile towards questions that were even vaguely challenging. his answers at times had sarcastic overtones and his contempt towards ms andrews was obvious. mr nicholson may not have intended to be intimidating in his manner, but this was how the report writer perceived him.[9]
55 the father contended ms n was irate and upset in her tone towards him. ms j, a receptionist in the employ of his legal representative gave evidence to support this. this incident, the father argued, coloured ms n’s perception and assessment of him, her reading of documents pertaining to the parties and even the observations of the interactions of him and the child.
56 the father sets out at paragraph 190 of his affidavit what he maintains are the errors identified by him in the single expert report:  the report notes that “[a]ll but one member of the mother’s extended family live in tasmania” when the mother’s two aunts and uncles live in sydney. (b) he deposes that he did not punch the wall as reported but rather hit a door and fell onto the wall. (c) he denies telling ms n that the mother “bashed” him with a metal rake but rather that the mother “smashed [him] across the shins with a metal handled broom.” (d) he disputes ms n’s recollection of the delay in the commencement of his interview and that he inferred that she was “inept/incompetent/careless.” (e) he contends that ms n made “unfair and inaccurate assumptions” regarding the costs of travel to and from tasmania. (f) he highlights errors made in the reporting of his relationship with the mother including specific events such as holidays and access to finances.   he deposes that he did not punch the wall as reported but rather hit a door and fell onto the wall. (c) he denies telling ms n that the mother “bashed” him with a metal rake but rather that the mother “smashed [him] across the shins with a metal handled broom.” (d) he disputes ms n’s recollection of the delay in the commencement of his interview and that he inferred that she was “inept/incompetent/careless.” (e) he contends that ms n made “unfair and inaccurate assumptions” regarding the costs of travel to and from tasmania. (f) he highlights errors made in the reporting of his relationship with the mother including specific events such as holidays and access to finances.   he denies telling ms n that the mother “bashed” him with a metal rake but rather that the mother “smashed [him] across the shins with a metal handled broom.” (d) he disputes ms n’s recollection of the delay in the commencement of his interview and that he inferred that she was “inept/incompetent/careless.” (e) he contends that ms n made “unfair and inaccurate assumptions” regarding the costs of travel to and from tasmania. (f) he highlights errors made in the reporting of his relationship with the mother including specific events such as holidays and access to finances.   he disputes ms n’s recollection of the delay in the commencement of his interview and that he inferred that she was “inept/incompetent/careless.” (e) he contends that ms n made “unfair and inaccurate assumptions” regarding the costs of travel to and from tasmania. (f) he highlights errors made in the reporting of his relationship with the mother including specific events such as holidays and access to finances.   he contends that ms n made “unfair and inaccurate assumptions” regarding the costs of travel to and from tasmania. (f) he highlights errors made in the reporting of his relationship with the mother including specific events such as holidays and access to finances.   he highlights errors made in the reporting of his relationship with the mother including specific events such as holidays and access to finances.
the mother’s position
57 the mother’s legal representative argued that ms n’s report should be accepted in its entirety. it was argued that:  the principles of division 12a of the act require the court and the parties to be child focussed in the conduct of the proceedings. therefore a strict application of the rules of evidence, including the makita principles is not appropriate in child related proceedings of this nature. (b) the evidence of ms m is important evidence because she has spent time with the mother on at least 30 occasions in therapy sessions dating back to 2015 for a major depressive disorder. on that basis, her evidence and her understanding of the mother must be given weight. (c) ms n and ms m were witnesses who relied on clinical observations which is what they both did in forming their opinions. (d) there was no clear and compelling evidence of actual bias and it is a serious allegation to level at a highly qualified expert witness. (e) rather than it being a basis for criticism of bias, the strong language used by ms n is demonstrative of the clear and unequivocal conclusion she reached and given the issues in dispute, her evidence should not be disregarded. (f) the factual errors identified by the father in ms n’s report are limited in number and substance, and are argumentative in nature.   the evidence of ms m is important evidence because she has spent time with the mother on at least 30 occasions in therapy sessions dating back to 2015 for a major depressive disorder. on that basis, her evidence and her understanding of the mother must be given weight. (c) ms n and ms m were witnesses who relied on clinical observations which is what they both did in forming their opinions. (d) there was no clear and compelling evidence of actual bias and it is a serious allegation to level at a highly qualified expert witness. (e) rather than it being a basis for criticism of bias, the strong language used by ms n is demonstrative of the clear and unequivocal conclusion she reached and given the issues in dispute, her evidence should not be disregarded. (f) the factual errors identified by the father in ms n’s report are limited in number and substance, and are argumentative in nature.   ms n and ms m were witnesses who relied on clinical observations which is what they both did in forming their opinions. (d) there was no clear and compelling evidence of actual bias and it is a serious allegation to level at a highly qualified expert witness. (e) rather than it being a basis for criticism of bias, the strong language used by ms n is demonstrative of the clear and unequivocal conclusion she reached and given the issues in dispute, her evidence should not be disregarded. (f) the factual errors identified by the father in ms n’s report are limited in number and substance, and are argumentative in nature.   there was no clear and compelling evidence of actual bias and it is a serious allegation to level at a highly qualified expert witness. (e) rather than it being a basis for criticism of bias, the strong language used by ms n is demonstrative of the clear and unequivocal conclusion she reached and given the issues in dispute, her evidence should not be disregarded. (f) the factual errors identified by the father in ms n’s report are limited in number and substance, and are argumentative in nature.   rather than it being a basis for criticism of bias, the strong language used by ms n is demonstrative of the clear and unequivocal conclusion she reached and given the issues in dispute, her evidence should not be disregarded. (f) the factual errors identified by the father in ms n’s report are limited in number and substance, and are argumentative in nature.   the factual errors identified by the father in ms n’s report are limited in number and substance, and are argumentative in nature.
conclusion
the evidence of ms m and dr o
58 dr o is the psychiatrist who has treated the mother since 2015. she prepared a psychiatric report at the request of the mother in march 2020 and it was filed in affidavit form. she indicated that the information in her report was gathered across multiple interviews with the mother. the father objected to her report being provided to ms n but provided no basis for his objection.
59 in preparing her report, dr o confirmed that she had read the expert witness code of conduct and agreed to be bound by the code. she was not called to give evidence. therefore, her report is untested.
60 the mother’s mental health is central to her application. the report was unsurprisingly of interest to ms n who referred to its contents. it was also referred to by ms m.
61 ms m is a psychologist with almost 20 years of registration. she has been treating the mother since her referral in may 2015 for “major depressive disorder.” at the time of writing her report she had provided counselling to the mother on 30 occasions, sometimes in the company of the father.
62 she describes the focus of recent sessions being on “ms andrews anxiety in the context of having interface with mr nicholson and natural anxiety with legal proceedings and the uncertainty this brings.”[10]
63 in her report she refers to having read the report of the mother’s treating psychiatrist, dr o. ms m conceded that she had no communication with dr o or further updates on the mother’s prognosis and condition before she concluded her report.
64 the legal representative for the father and the icl argued that little reliance should be placed on ms m’s report, because she had not obtained an update from dr o, and dr o’s prognosis was untested. ms m did not agree that this was necessary. she said she relied on her clinical judgment and her observations of the mother saying “i could have asked for that for consistency, but i trusted my professional opinion in the presentation that ms andrews had in front of me.”[11]
65 i do not find that ms m assumed the role of advocate rather than therapist for the mother. she has an extensive history of providing therapeutic treatment to the mother, she has had dealings with the father and she was entitled to form the view that the mother’s general mental health would improve by both her relocation to tasmania and fewer unpleasant interactions with him. disregarding, or placing little weight on her recommendation, her report was very useful in understanding the mother’s mental health both in terms of history, treatment and prognosis.
66 i do not place any weight on the recommendations or conclusions drawn by dr o. the content however is relevant to provide a background to the mother’s mental health condition and a context to her application. while it is untested, the father was unable to satisfy me that there was anything contained in her report that would have unfairly prejudiced the father to the extent that reference to it would have “polluted” the reports of ms n or ms m.
the evidence of ms n
67 the father expressed concern that ms n went beyond her role by making conclusions drawn from the facts.
68 it is part of the report writer’s role to gather information from the parties, external sources and make observations in order to make recommendations about the impact of certain outcomes on the child. she is required to record what she has been told and matters she has considered in the course of writing her report. counsel have appropriately challenged some of her assumptions. for example, on the issue of concluding that “the advantages [of the relocation] to ms andrews have been unambiguously established”, i accept that these are findings for the court to make, and not ms n. i will disregard the conclusion she drew on this issue. i do not however accept that her conclusions drawn have weaved their way through her report to such an extent that it causes the father prejudice.
69 i found that ms n gave useful and honest evidence. she agreed with much of the evidence of ms j. she conceded that when they spoke, she was annoyed and frustrated that the interviews had not commenced at the scheduled time. however, she also observed, “i...was taken aback by – by mr nicholson’s aggression towards me.”[12] she was frank about the impact that the father’s behaviour had on her as well as her frustration about the impact of it on the timing of the interviews.
70 i accept that she did not form a positive view of the father. but this does not lead to a finding that she approached the interviews from a position of bias.
71 she was a credible witness and therefore i place weight on her oral and written evidence. her evidence is useful on many levels, not least because she observed the father’s response to a situation that did not go to plan. her observations of his response are consistent with the mother’s evidence.
72 ms n made the following recommendations in her report:   that the parties equally share parental responsibility for x. (b) that x live with the mother. (c) that the mother be able to relocate to tasmania with x. (d) that x spend time with the father as follows: (i) on two weekends each month, once in sydney and once in hobart, (ii) for one block period of five nights during the tasmanian short school holidays, (iii) for two separate and non-consecutive periods of five nights during the january school holidays with time increasing to seven nights from the end of the school holidays in 2021/2022, and (iv) facetime calls each wednesday and saturday at times to be agreed by the parties.   that x live with the mother. (c) that the mother be able to relocate to tasmania with x. (d) that x spend time with the father as follows: (i) on two weekends each month, once in sydney and once in hobart, (ii) for one block period of five nights during the tasmanian short school holidays, (iii) for two separate and non-consecutive periods of five nights during the january school holidays with time increasing to seven nights from the end of the school holidays in 2021/2022, and (iv) facetime calls each wednesday and saturday at times to be agreed by the parties.   that the mother be able to relocate to tasmania with x. (d) that x spend time with the father as follows: (i) on two weekends each month, once in sydney and once in hobart, (ii) for one block period of five nights during the tasmanian short school holidays, (iii) for two separate and non-consecutive periods of five nights during the january school holidays with time increasing to seven nights from the end of the school holidays in 2021/2022, and (iv) facetime calls each wednesday and saturday at times to be agreed by the parties.   that x spend time with the father as follows: (i) on two weekends each month, once in sydney and once in hobart, (ii) for one block period of five nights during the tasmanian short school holidays, (iii) for two separate and non-consecutive periods of five nights during the january school holidays with time increasing to seven nights from the end of the school holidays in 2021/2022, and (iv) facetime calls each wednesday and saturday at times to be agreed by the parties.   on two weekends each month, once in sydney and once in hobart, (ii) for one block period of five nights during the tasmanian short school holidays, (iii) for two separate and non-consecutive periods of five nights during the january school holidays with time increasing to seven nights from the end of the school holidays in 2021/2022, and (iv) facetime calls each wednesday and saturday at times to be agreed by the parties.  ) for one block period of five nights during the tasmanian short school holidays, (iii) for two separate and non-consecutive periods of five nights during the january school holidays with time increasing to seven nights from the end of the school holidays in 2021/2022, and (iv) facetime calls each wednesday and saturday at times to be agreed by the parties.  i) for two separate and non-consecutive periods of five nights during the january school holidays with time increasing to seven nights from the end of the school holidays in 2021/2022, and (iv) facetime calls each wednesday and saturday at times to be agreed by the parties.  ) facetime calls each wednesday and saturday at times to be agreed by the parties.
x
73 it is important to consider x the child who is the subject of these proceedings.
74 x (aged 6) at the time of the trial was in kindergarten at p school.
75 x plays sports, attends swim class and is learning to play an instrument.
76 the parties describe x as an outgoing, intelligent, playful, and affectionate child, with a good sense of humour.
77 ms n’s report noted x “was confident, articulate and friendly”, and “bounced with energy.”[13]
78 she observed that “x’s interactions with his mother indicated that he has a warm and loving relationship with her.”[14] during observations with his mother x “sought physical proximity (for cuddles and nuzzles) and he would then launch out to find another new toy before coming back to her.”[15]
79 ms n observed x to have a loving relationship with his father. she noted that “x loves his father, enjoys his company and looks forward to spending time with him.”[16] however, during observations the father was “largely passive...and – at least up until the final few minutes – he seemed watchful and keener to critique x from a distance than to unreservedly play with him.”[17]
80 when it came time for x to be observed with his father, x reportedly said to his mother “oh you can’t stay here mummy, when daddy comes.” when ms n asked x why not he responded with “[b]ecause daddy doesn’t like mummy.”[18]
81 at the conclusion of the observation, ms n reported that she spent time negotiating an agreement between the parties as to which one should take x home. she states that “both [parents] were clearly tense, and x appeared quite discomforted at this point.”[19] after an agreement was reached x left with his father. ms n observed x at this point as “anxious to get some separation between his two parents.”[20]
82 ms n commented that it was “troubling that x felt he needed to control his parents not coming into contact with each other...and that he was so clear that his father does not like his mother.”[21]
83 ms n formed the view that the parties co-parenting relationship will be limited regardless of where each live and “x is likely to continue to be aware of the antipathy between them.”[22]
the law
84 the principles to be applied when determining competing parenting applications are set out in part vii of the act.
85 when making a parenting order, the court must consider what is in the best interests of the child pursuant to section 60ca. this requires “the practical application of a number of considerations relevant to the individual needs, desires, health and aspirations of the particular child of this parenting relationship.”[23]
86 in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order i must consider the matters set out in s 60cc(2), being the primary considerations, and s 60cc(3), being the additional considerations.
87 there are two primary considerations. the first is the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both their parents and the second is the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
88 there are 13 additional considerations which are set out in s 60cc(3). i will address those which are relevant.
89 in deciding what is in the best interests of the individual child the court is guided by s 61da and s 65daa, and, if the child is subject to an equal shared parental responsibility order, then the amount of time to be spent by the non-resident parent, if reasonably practical, must also be considered.
90 the high court in mrr & gr (2010) 263 alr 368 provides a pathway to be applied to parenting matters where an equal shared parental responsibility order has been made.
91 the act does not treat relocation cases as a special category of parenting orders. in morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230, (2007) flc 93-343, boland j set out the core principles to be applied in relocation cases at [80]. those core principles are:  that the child’s best interests remain the paramount but not the sole consideration, (b) that a parent wishing to move does not need to demonstrate compelling reasons, (c) that a judicial officer must consider all proposals and may, himself or herself, be required to formulate proposals in the child’s best interests, and (d) that the child’s best interests must be weighed and balanced with the right of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement.   that a parent wishing to move does not need to demonstrate compelling reasons, (c) that a judicial officer must consider all proposals and may, himself or herself, be required to formulate proposals in the child’s best interests, and (d) that the child’s best interests must be weighed and balanced with the right of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement.   that a judicial officer must consider all proposals and may, himself or herself, be required to formulate proposals in the child’s best interests, and (d) that the child’s best interests must be weighed and balanced with the right of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement.   that the child’s best interests must be weighed and balanced with the right of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement.
92 the need to weigh and balance the child’s best interests with the right of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement was summarised well by his honour kirby j in ams & aif (1999) 163 alr 501 at 144 when he said:
...a statutory instruction to treat the welfare or best interests of the child as the paramount consideration does not oblige a court, making the decision, to ignore the legitimate interests and desires of the parents. if there is conflict between these considerations, priority must be accorded to the child’s welfare and rights. however, the latter cannot be viewed in the abstract, separate from the circumstances of the parent with whom the child resides.
93 relocation cases are inherently difficult because ultimately one party will feel aggrieved by the decision and feel that some of their fundamental rights are compromised. this is certainly the situation here for x’s parents.
94 the reasoning that will be applied in this case follows the authority of the full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 and the pathways set out in mrr & gr (2010) 263 alr 368. accordingly, regard will now be had to the relevant considerations under s 60cc.
primary considerations
the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents
95 in mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520, (2007) 37 famlr 518 at [26], brown j concluded:
what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of a “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”...a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative objective and not a strictly quantitative one.
96 justice kay in godfrey & sanders [2007] famca 102, (2007) 208 flr 287 at [36], spoke of the legislation promoting a “meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.”
97 in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, (2009) flc 93-405 at [117] the full court adopted the approach of bennett j in g & c [2006] famca 994 saying the enquiry as to whether a relationship is meaningful is “a prospective one which requires the court to evaluate the extent to which a meaningful or significant relationship with both parents is going to be of advantage [to] a child.”
98 x enjoys a strong and loving bond with both parents. there is also no dispute that x has a meaningful relationship with the father, although he regards the mother as his primary attachment.
99 x’s time with the father was sporadic and irregular post separation. however, he has gradually built up the regularity and frequency of his time. the proposals by either party will not lead to a reduction of time between the father and x, but rather will maintain and promote their relationship.
100 the father is seeking that x remain in sydney and that his time with x build up to an equal time arrangement. he therefore argues that should x move to tasmania, his ability to maintain a meaningful relationship will be affected.
101 the mother argues that the orders she seeks will not detract from the relationship between x and his father being significant, important and of consequence.
102 i find that it is in the best interests of x for these meaningful relationships to be maintained and nurtured. i find that this is achievable whether x lives in nsw or tasmania.
need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence
103 any orders made must ensure that they protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.
104 the parties make competing allegations against each other that are relevant to this consideration.
allegations made by the father
105 the father alleges that the mother was physically violent towards him on two occasions in 2001 or 2002.   in one instance the father alleges the mother threw a knife at him that landed between his feet. (b) in another instance the father alleges the mother grabbed a metal handled broom and hit him across the shin. the mother submitted that she hit the father with a broom in an attempt to stop him from spraying her with water from the garden hose. (c) the mother admitted to the incidents, which both occurred approximately 20 years ago. she said “[i]n hindsight, i regret my actions. i have never acted in this manner again since this occurred. it is unlike me to act in this manner.”[24]   in another instance the father alleges the mother grabbed a metal handled broom and hit him across the shin. the mother submitted that she hit the father with a broom in an attempt to stop him from spraying her with water from the garden hose. (c) the mother admitted to the incidents, which both occurred approximately 20 years ago. she said “[i]n hindsight, i regret my actions. i have never acted in this manner again since this occurred. it is unlike me to act in this manner.”[24]   the mother admitted to the incidents, which both occurred approximately 20 years ago. she said “[i]n hindsight, i regret my actions. i have never acted in this manner again since this occurred. it is unlike me to act in this manner.”[24]
106 the father also alleges that the mother engaged in controlling behaviour towards him, particularly of a financial nature.  in or around 20 december 2011 the father recalls the mother telling him to cancel his bank q account as it would be smarter to have all their money in their offset account. the father stated that he complied with this request as he was not in control of the finances.[25] (b) when the father wished to purchase a new bicycle he alleges the mother stated “no, you don’t need it.” after continuing to ask, the mother allowed the father to purchase the bike and transferred the money to the bike shop directly as the father says that he was unable to transfer money.[26] (c) the father states that he attempted to assist with household chores such as washing and cleaning. however, he would often find the mother repacking the dishwasher, refolding the clothes or telling him that he was not doing it right.[27] (d) the father submits that in 2017 he stated to the mother “i hate my life.” the father recalls making the statement in relation to his inability to spend money without the mother’s permission.[28] (e) after leaving the former matrimonial home in 2018, the father received a text message from the commonwealth bank of australia advising him that his credit cards had been frozen. he alleges that the mother froze the cards.[29] (f) in late 2018 the father’s card was declined when he attempted to purchase a coffee. he discovered that a $3.50 monthly limit had been placed on the card.[30] (g) the father maintains that he had difficulty obtaining the necessary bank statements during the transfer of the parties’ properties. when he asked the mother for copies of the statements he alleges that she told him he would need to obtain them himself.[31]   when the father wished to purchase a new bicycle he alleges the mother stated “no, you don’t need it.” after continuing to ask, the mother allowed the father to purchase the bike and transferred the money to the bike shop directly as the father says that he was unable to transfer money.[26] (c) the father states that he attempted to assist with household chores such as washing and cleaning. however, he would often find the mother repacking the dishwasher, refolding the clothes or telling him that he was not doing it right.[27] (d) the father submits that in 2017 he stated to the mother “i hate my life.” the father recalls making the statement in relation to his inability to spend money without the mother’s permission.[28] (e) after leaving the former matrimonial home in 2018, the father received a text message from the commonwealth bank of australia advising him that his credit cards had been frozen. he alleges that the mother froze the cards.[29] (f) in late 2018 the father’s card was declined when he attempted to purchase a coffee. he discovered that a $3.50 monthly limit had been placed on the card.[30] (g) the father maintains that he had difficulty obtaining the necessary bank statements during the transfer of the parties’ properties. when he asked the mother for copies of the statements he alleges that she told him he would need to obtain them himself.[31]   the father states that he attempted to assist with household chores such as washing and cleaning. however, he would often find the mother repacking the dishwasher, refolding the clothes or telling him that he was not doing it right.[27] (d) the father submits that in 2017 he stated to the mother “i hate my life.” the father recalls making the statement in relation to his inability to spend money without the mother’s permission.[28] (e) after leaving the former matrimonial home in 2018, the father received a text message from the commonwealth bank of australia advising him that his credit cards had been frozen. he alleges that the mother froze the cards.[29] (f) in late 2018 the father’s card was declined when he attempted to purchase a coffee. he discovered that a $3.50 monthly limit had been placed on the card.[30] (g) the father maintains that he had difficulty obtaining the necessary bank statements during the transfer of the parties’ properties. when he asked the mother for copies of the statements he alleges that she told him he would need to obtain them himself.[31]   the father submits that in 2017 he stated to the mother “i hate my life.” the father recalls making the statement in relation to his inability to spend money without the mother’s permission.[28] (e) after leaving the former matrimonial home in 2018, the father received a text message from the commonwealth bank of australia advising him that his credit cards had been frozen. he alleges that the mother froze the cards.[29] (f) in late 2018 the father’s card was declined when he attempted to purchase a coffee. he discovered that a $3.50 monthly limit had been placed on the card.[30] (g) the father maintains that he had difficulty obtaining the necessary bank statements during the transfer of the parties’ properties. when he asked the mother for copies of the statements he alleges that she told him he would need to obtain them himself.[31]   after leaving the former matrimonial home in 2018, the father received a text message from the commonwealth bank of australia advising him that his credit cards had been frozen. he alleges that the mother froze the cards.[29] (f) in late 2018 the father’s card was declined when he attempted to purchase a coffee. he discovered that a $3.50 monthly limit had been placed on the card.[30] (g) the father maintains that he had difficulty obtaining the necessary bank statements during the transfer of the parties’ properties. when he asked the mother for copies of the statements he alleges that she told him he would need to obtain them himself.[31]   in late 2018 the father’s card was declined when he attempted to purchase a coffee. he discovered that a $3.50 monthly limit had been placed on the card.[30] (g) the father maintains that he had difficulty obtaining the necessary bank statements during the transfer of the parties’ properties. when he asked the mother for copies of the statements he alleges that she told him he would need to obtain them himself.[31]   the father maintains that he had difficulty obtaining the necessary bank statements during the transfer of the parties’ properties. when he asked the mother for copies of the statements he alleges that she told him he would need to obtain them himself.[31]
107 the mother states that she was primarily responsible for managing the parties’ finances due to her qualifications in finance and accounting, and as the father spent significant periods away with the his employment. she argues that the father showed little interest in understanding or maintaining the finances. in october 2011, the father granted the mother a general power of attorney so she could purchase the former matrimonial home while he was away for work. the mother notes that during the course of the relationship the father purchased around six motor vehicles and six motorcycles.[32]
allegations made by the mother
108 the mother alleges that the father engaged in acts of aggression and family violence during the relationship and in the presence of x.   on 29 july 2018 the mother alleges that, while she was holding x on her waist, the father pushed his motorbike into her. x then grabbed the windshield of the motorbike and the father allegedly screamed to the mother “[i]f x breaks that, i’ll fucking break your nose.”[33] under cross-examination the father stated that he did not recall saying this. (b) on 12 september 2018 the mother was sitting on the father on the lounge when the father admitted he was still having an affair. the mother alleges that x began climbing on the parties and the father yelled at the mother “[i]f he hurts himself i’ll fucking hurt you.”[34] the father concedes that on this occasion he did threatened to break the mother’s nose. (c) later that evening the mother alleges that x witnessed the father barge pass her and knock her to the ground. she states that she ran to her neighbours after this incident as she was afraid of what the father would do.[35] under cross-examination the father denied “barging” into the mother and causing her to drop to the ground as he attempted to leave the former matrimonial home. (d) on 8 december 2018 the mother alleges that the father screamed and yelled at her after she questioned why x was not in an appropriate child restraint in his car. the father then allegedly took x out of his car and threw him into the mother’s car.[36] (e) the mother alleges that the father made threats against x’s rabbit as a means of discipline. the mother submits that on 22 november 2018 the father told x “[i]f you don’t eat your dinner i’ll put the rabbit in the bin or break her neck.” on 12 december 2018 the father allegedly said to x “[i]’ll put the rabbit in the oven if you don’t sit down and eat your dinner.”[37] the father accepts that he made comments about x’s rabbit. he states that those comments were made out of frustration and were not intended to be malicious.   on 12 september 2018 the mother was sitting on the father on the lounge when the father admitted he was still having an affair. the mother alleges that x began climbing on the parties and the father yelled at the mother “[i]f he hurts himself i’ll fucking hurt you.”[34] the father concedes that on this occasion he did threatened to break the mother’s nose. (c) later that evening the mother alleges that x witnessed the father barge pass her and knock her to the ground. she states that she ran to her neighbours after this incident as she was afraid of what the father would do.[35] under cross-examination the father denied “barging” into the mother and causing her to drop to the ground as he attempted to leave the former matrimonial home. (d) on 8 december 2018 the mother alleges that the father screamed and yelled at her after she questioned why x was not in an appropriate child restraint in his car. the father then allegedly took x out of his car and threw him into the mother’s car.[36] (e) the mother alleges that the father made threats against x’s rabbit as a means of discipline. the mother submits that on 22 november 2018 the father told x “[i]f you don’t eat your dinner i’ll put the rabbit in the bin or break her neck.” on 12 december 2018 the father allegedly said to x “[i]’ll put the rabbit in the oven if you don’t sit down and eat your dinner.”[37] the father accepts that he made comments about x’s rabbit. he states that those comments were made out of frustration and were not intended to be malicious.   later that evening the mother alleges that x witnessed the father barge pass her and knock her to the ground. she states that she ran to her neighbours after this incident as she was afraid of what the father would do.[35] under cross-examination the father denied “barging” into the mother and causing her to drop to the ground as he attempted to leave the former matrimonial home. (d) on 8 december 2018 the mother alleges that the father screamed and yelled at her after she questioned why x was not in an appropriate child restraint in his car. the father then allegedly took x out of his car and threw him into the mother’s car.[36] (e) the mother alleges that the father made threats against x’s rabbit as a means of discipline. the mother submits that on 22 november 2018 the father told x “[i]f you don’t eat your dinner i’ll put the rabbit in the bin or break her neck.” on 12 december 2018 the father allegedly said to x “[i]’ll put the rabbit in the oven if you don’t sit down and eat your dinner.”[37] the father accepts that he made comments about x’s rabbit. he states that those comments were made out of frustration and were not intended to be malicious.   on 8 december 2018 the mother alleges that the father screamed and yelled at her after she questioned why x was not in an appropriate child restraint in his car. the father then allegedly took x out of his car and threw him into the mother’s car.[36] (e) the mother alleges that the father made threats against x’s rabbit as a means of discipline. the mother submits that on 22 november 2018 the father told x “[i]f you don’t eat your dinner i’ll put the rabbit in the bin or break her neck.” on 12 december 2018 the father allegedly said to x “[i]’ll put the rabbit in the oven if you don’t sit down and eat your dinner.”[37] the father accepts that he made comments about x’s rabbit. he states that those comments were made out of frustration and were not intended to be malicious.   the mother alleges that the father made threats against x’s rabbit as a means of discipline. the mother submits that on 22 november 2018 the father told x “[i]f you don’t eat your dinner i’ll put the rabbit in the bin or break her neck.” on 12 december 2018 the father allegedly said to x “[i]’ll put the rabbit in the oven if you don’t sit down and eat your dinner.”[37] the father accepts that he made comments about x’s rabbit. he states that those comments were made out of frustration and were not intended to be malicious.
109 notably the father says that since undertaking a parenting course he has become aware that such comments “may not be considered child friendly” and he has since changed the way he speaks to x.[38]
110 ten months after the birth of x the mother expressed concerns about the father’s anger to her psychiatrist, dr o.[39] she later spoke to dr o about the incidents deposed of in her affidavit on the date of separation in september 2018. a report was also made to the police which corroborates the mother’s evidence of the event.
111 the mother also alleges that the father’s behaviour, including his constant criticism of her is psychologically abusive. while the father does not accept this assertion, his affidavit contains at least 17 paragraphs containing criticisms of the mother. these include:  the father conceded that the mother assisted him with his university studies but complains “she would raise the issue often...and belittle my achievements”[40] and that she gave him “ultimatums”[41] to spend less time at university. (b) the father asserts that in 2002, when he was posted to a course for approximately four months and commuting back home every fortnight, the mother used this against him as she was completing her honours year. the father stated that the parties were not intimate during this time and he felt he was being punished.[42] (c) the father states that in 2005 the mother threatened to leave him if he did not fly home when the ship he was on arrived in adelaide. the father flew home from adelaide and asserts that this decision impacted his career progression.[43] (d) in early 2013, the father ceased his saturday morning bike ride and coffee routine at a local café in an attempt to spend more intimate time with the mother. when he raised the idea of seeking professional help to address their lack of intimacy, the mother declined and commented that “[y]our sweat and semen disgusts me. this is why we are not intimate.”[44] (e) when the mother commenced playing sports on weekends the father states he would be left at home with a motorcycle for transport.[45] (f) the father alleges that the mother constantly criticised him while driving to the point where he refused to drive when they were both travelling in the car.[46] (g) the father stated that the mother’s “continuous control, berating and no acknowledgement of the contribution” he made to the matrimonial home caused him to lose interest in his diy pursuits.[47] (h) the father states that the mother refused to provide details of x’s sporting activities to him when requested.[48] (i) the father alleges that the mother does not encourage his facetime/telephone time with x. he states that he has requested the mother to switch off technology and minimise distractions during this time with x but she has not done so.[49] (j) the father submitted that he attempted to enrol in a face to face anger management course but it coincided with his time with x on tuesday nights. he complains that as the mother would not agree to change his time with x and due to the limited availability of face to face courses he instead completed an online course.[50] (k) the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   the father asserts that in 2002, when he was posted to a course for approximately four months and commuting back home every fortnight, the mother used this against him as she was completing her honours year. the father stated that the parties were not intimate during this time and he felt he was being punished.[42] (c) the father states that in 2005 the mother threatened to leave him if he did not fly home when the ship he was on arrived in adelaide. the father flew home from adelaide and asserts that this decision impacted his career progression.[43] (d) in early 2013, the father ceased his saturday morning bike ride and coffee routine at a local café in an attempt to spend more intimate time with the mother. when he raised the idea of seeking professional help to address their lack of intimacy, the mother declined and commented that “[y]our sweat and semen disgusts me. this is why we are not intimate.”[44] (e) when the mother commenced playing sports on weekends the father states he would be left at home with a motorcycle for transport.[45] (f) the father alleges that the mother constantly criticised him while driving to the point where he refused to drive when they were both travelling in the car.[46] (g) the father stated that the mother’s “continuous control, berating and no acknowledgement of the contribution” he made to the matrimonial home caused him to lose interest in his diy pursuits.[47] (h) the father states that the mother refused to provide details of x’s sporting activities to him when requested.[48] (i) the father alleges that the mother does not encourage his facetime/telephone time with x. he states that he has requested the mother to switch off technology and minimise distractions during this time with x but she has not done so.[49] (j) the father submitted that he attempted to enrol in a face to face anger management course but it coincided with his time with x on tuesday nights. he complains that as the mother would not agree to change his time with x and due to the limited availability of face to face courses he instead completed an online course.[50] (k) the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   the father states that in 2005 the mother threatened to leave him if he did not fly home when the ship he was on arrived in adelaide. the father flew home from adelaide and asserts that this decision impacted his career progression.[43] (d) in early 2013, the father ceased his saturday morning bike ride and coffee routine at a local café in an attempt to spend more intimate time with the mother. when he raised the idea of seeking professional help to address their lack of intimacy, the mother declined and commented that “[y]our sweat and semen disgusts me. this is why we are not intimate.”[44] (e) when the mother commenced playing sports on weekends the father states he would be left at home with a motorcycle for transport.[45] (f) the father alleges that the mother constantly criticised him while driving to the point where he refused to drive when they were both travelling in the car.[46] (g) the father stated that the mother’s “continuous control, berating and no acknowledgement of the contribution” he made to the matrimonial home caused him to lose interest in his diy pursuits.[47] (h) the father states that the mother refused to provide details of x’s sporting activities to him when requested.[48] (i) the father alleges that the mother does not encourage his facetime/telephone time with x. he states that he has requested the mother to switch off technology and minimise distractions during this time with x but she has not done so.[49] (j) the father submitted that he attempted to enrol in a face to face anger management course but it coincided with his time with x on tuesday nights. he complains that as the mother would not agree to change his time with x and due to the limited availability of face to face courses he instead completed an online course.[50] (k) the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   in early 2013, the father ceased his saturday morning bike ride and coffee routine at a local café in an attempt to spend more intimate time with the mother. when he raised the idea of seeking professional help to address their lack of intimacy, the mother declined and commented that “[y]our sweat and semen disgusts me. this is why we are not intimate.”[44] (e) when the mother commenced playing sports on weekends the father states he would be left at home with a motorcycle for transport.[45] (f) the father alleges that the mother constantly criticised him while driving to the point where he refused to drive when they were both travelling in the car.[46] (g) the father stated that the mother’s “continuous control, berating and no acknowledgement of the contribution” he made to the matrimonial home caused him to lose interest in his diy pursuits.[47] (h) the father states that the mother refused to provide details of x’s sporting activities to him when requested.[48] (i) the father alleges that the mother does not encourage his facetime/telephone time with x. he states that he has requested the mother to switch off technology and minimise distractions during this time with x but she has not done so.[49] (j) the father submitted that he attempted to enrol in a face to face anger management course but it coincided with his time with x on tuesday nights. he complains that as the mother would not agree to change his time with x and due to the limited availability of face to face courses he instead completed an online course.[50] (k) the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   when the mother commenced playing sports on weekends the father states he would be left at home with a motorcycle for transport.[45] (f) the father alleges that the mother constantly criticised him while driving to the point where he refused to drive when they were both travelling in the car.[46] (g) the father stated that the mother’s “continuous control, berating and no acknowledgement of the contribution” he made to the matrimonial home caused him to lose interest in his diy pursuits.[47] (h) the father states that the mother refused to provide details of x’s sporting activities to him when requested.[48] (i) the father alleges that the mother does not encourage his facetime/telephone time with x. he states that he has requested the mother to switch off technology and minimise distractions during this time with x but she has not done so.[49] (j) the father submitted that he attempted to enrol in a face to face anger management course but it coincided with his time with x on tuesday nights. he complains that as the mother would not agree to change his time with x and due to the limited availability of face to face courses he instead completed an online course.[50] (k) the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   the father alleges that the mother constantly criticised him while driving to the point where he refused to drive when they were both travelling in the car.[46] (g) the father stated that the mother’s “continuous control, berating and no acknowledgement of the contribution” he made to the matrimonial home caused him to lose interest in his diy pursuits.[47] (h) the father states that the mother refused to provide details of x’s sporting activities to him when requested.[48] (i) the father alleges that the mother does not encourage his facetime/telephone time with x. he states that he has requested the mother to switch off technology and minimise distractions during this time with x but she has not done so.[49] (j) the father submitted that he attempted to enrol in a face to face anger management course but it coincided with his time with x on tuesday nights. he complains that as the mother would not agree to change his time with x and due to the limited availability of face to face courses he instead completed an online course.[50] (k) the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   the father stated that the mother’s “continuous control, berating and no acknowledgement of the contribution” he made to the matrimonial home caused him to lose interest in his diy pursuits.[47] (h) the father states that the mother refused to provide details of x’s sporting activities to him when requested.[48] (i) the father alleges that the mother does not encourage his facetime/telephone time with x. he states that he has requested the mother to switch off technology and minimise distractions during this time with x but she has not done so.[49] (j) the father submitted that he attempted to enrol in a face to face anger management course but it coincided with his time with x on tuesday nights. he complains that as the mother would not agree to change his time with x and due to the limited availability of face to face courses he instead completed an online course.[50] (k) the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   the father states that the mother refused to provide details of x’s sporting activities to him when requested.[48] (i) the father alleges that the mother does not encourage his facetime/telephone time with x. he states that he has requested the mother to switch off technology and minimise distractions during this time with x but she has not done so.[49] (j) the father submitted that he attempted to enrol in a face to face anger management course but it coincided with his time with x on tuesday nights. he complains that as the mother would not agree to change his time with x and due to the limited availability of face to face courses he instead completed an online course.[50] (k) the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   the father alleges that the mother does not encourage his facetime/telephone time with x. he states that he has requested the mother to switch off technology and minimise distractions during this time with x but she has not done so.[49] (j) the father submitted that he attempted to enrol in a face to face anger management course but it coincided with his time with x on tuesday nights. he complains that as the mother would not agree to change his time with x and due to the limited availability of face to face courses he instead completed an online course.[50] (k) the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   the father submitted that he attempted to enrol in a face to face anger management course but it coincided with his time with x on tuesday nights. he complains that as the mother would not agree to change his time with x and due to the limited availability of face to face courses he instead completed an online course.[50] (k) the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   the father alleges that it was not uncommon for the mother to make unilateral decisions about x without informing him.[51] (l) the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]   the father contends that the mother is often not alert to protecting x from physical harm. he recalls an occasion where the parties were having lunch and the mother left x’s side to attend to the parties’ dogs. x stood up and fell out of his high chair, hitting his head on the ground. the father states that he was too far away to prevent the incident from occurring. on another occasion, the father says he “admonished” x not to play on the bench seat at the museum. the mother was standing near x when he fell backwards from the bench onto the floor.[52]
112 the father’s propensity to make critical comments about the mother or blame her for events was observed by ms n and by the court.[53]
113 the mother alleges that she suffers from anxiety and her levels of anxiety are heightened by her dealings with the father.
114 the mother’s level of anxiety in close proximity to the father was clearly observed during the hearing. ms n observed something similar under cross-examination saying “ms andrews ...when i saw her that day in my office, she was almost frozen with anxiety about the fact that the father was there and so close, and it wasn’t just going to be a fleeting thing.”[54]
115 the mother alleges that her anxiety has been further heightened because the father has “stalked her” and has engaged in controlling behaviour as recently as some months prior to the hearing.   she alleges that on 12 march 2020 and again on 11 february 2021 the father followed her on his motorbike. she states that she recognised his number plate.[55] (b) she alleges that on 13 august 2020 the father entered her home without her permission and subsequently noticed tools missing from the garage that the father had asked for. the mother’s neighbours told the mother that they “saw mr nicholson parked in a driveway in [the] street whilst you weren’t home.”[56] (c) she states that on 5 may 2021 she received a text message from the father saying “[a]nd how was sports this morning? was is raining on the water?” she contends that she had not told the father she had begun sports again.[57] his evidence on this issue under cross-examination was puzzling. he justified his text message to the mother on the basis that he was concerned that she might get wet during sports. he then gave evidence that x had mentioned that his neighbour babysat him on wednesday morning and then he happened to see the mother’s car parked in a sports club when he was riding past on his bike. he admitted that it was unusual for him to exchange messages of that nature with the mother. (d) it is noted at this point that the mother has well documented anxiety issues that are triggered by coming into physical contact with the father. these difficulties are set out in her affidavit where she reports being “panicky” and “shaking” and “physically ill” at the prospect of coming into direct contact with the father.[58] under cross-examination the father accepted that his physical presence has an impact on the mother.   she alleges that on 13 august 2020 the father entered her home without her permission and subsequently noticed tools missing from the garage that the father had asked for. the mother’s neighbours told the mother that they “saw mr nicholson parked in a driveway in [the] street whilst you weren’t home.”[56] (c) she states that on 5 may 2021 she received a text message from the father saying “[a]nd how was sports this morning? was is raining on the water?” she contends that she had not told the father she had begun sports again.[57] his evidence on this issue under cross-examination was puzzling. he justified his text message to the mother on the basis that he was concerned that she might get wet during sports. he then gave evidence that x had mentioned that his neighbour babysat him on wednesday morning and then he happened to see the mother’s car parked in a sports club when he was riding past on his bike. he admitted that it was unusual for him to exchange messages of that nature with the mother. (d) it is noted at this point that the mother has well documented anxiety issues that are triggered by coming into physical contact with the father. these difficulties are set out in her affidavit where she reports being “panicky” and “shaking” and “physically ill” at the prospect of coming into direct contact with the father.[58] under cross-examination the father accepted that his physical presence has an impact on the mother.   she states that on 5 may 2021 she received a text message from the father saying “[a]nd how was sports this morning? was is raining on the water?” she contends that she had not told the father she had begun sports again.[57] his evidence on this issue under cross-examination was puzzling. he justified his text message to the mother on the basis that he was concerned that she might get wet during sports. he then gave evidence that x had mentioned that his neighbour babysat him on wednesday morning and then he happened to see the mother’s car parked in a sports club when he was riding past on his bike. he admitted that it was unusual for him to exchange messages of that nature with the mother. (d) it is noted at this point that the mother has well documented anxiety issues that are triggered by coming into physical contact with the father. these difficulties are set out in her affidavit where she reports being “panicky” and “shaking” and “physically ill” at the prospect of coming into direct contact with the father.[58] under cross-examination the father accepted that his physical presence has an impact on the mother.   it is noted at this point that the mother has well documented anxiety issues that are triggered by coming into physical contact with the father. these difficulties are set out in her affidavit where she reports being “panicky” and “shaking” and “physically ill” at the prospect of coming into direct contact with the father.[58] under cross-examination the father accepted that his physical presence has an impact on the mother.
116 the mother alleges that the father has exposed x to their conflict.  the mother states that x has made comments to her such as “daddy hates you”[59], “daddy was hitting mummy”[60] and “dad said i can’t move to tasmania and i need to stay in sydney...”[61] (b) ms n also observed that x was acutely aware of the antipathy between the parents, as outlined earlier. she labelled the conflict with video calls between x and the father as “troubling”.[62] she concluded “it begs the question as to what extent mr nicholson is cognisant of the need to protect x, from adult conflict.”[63] (c) the father did not address these allegations in his affidavit material but under cross-examination denied that he had communicated his dislike for the mother to x. (d) when asked what steps he would take to improve this aspect of their parenting, he said he was “going to” work on improving it but ultimately laid responsibility for the difficulties on the mother due to “the significant control exerted over me”[64] and because “access to my son that is limited severely. depends on me having to, you know, suck it up and deal with it”.[65] he was given another opportunity to tell the court how he might promote the relationship between x and the mother at the end of giving his evidence:   ms n also observed that x was acutely aware of the antipathy between the parents, as outlined earlier. she labelled the conflict with video calls between x and the father as “troubling”.[62] she concluded “it begs the question as to what extent mr nicholson is cognisant of the need to protect x, from adult conflict.”[63] (c) the father did not address these allegations in his affidavit material but under cross-examination denied that he had communicated his dislike for the mother to x. (d) when asked what steps he would take to improve this aspect of their parenting, he said he was “going to” work on improving it but ultimately laid responsibility for the difficulties on the mother due to “the significant control exerted over me”[64] and because “access to my son that is limited severely. depends on me having to, you know, suck it up and deal with it”.[65] he was given another opportunity to tell the court how he might promote the relationship between x and the mother at the end of giving his evidence:   the father did not address these allegations in his affidavit material but under cross-examination denied that he had communicated his dislike for the mother to x. (d) when asked what steps he would take to improve this aspect of their parenting, he said he was “going to” work on improving it but ultimately laid responsibility for the difficulties on the mother due to “the significant control exerted over me”[64] and because “access to my son that is limited severely. depends on me having to, you know, suck it up and deal with it”.[65] he was given another opportunity to tell the court how he might promote the relationship between x and the mother at the end of giving his evidence:   when asked what steps he would take to improve this aspect of their parenting, he said he was “going to” work on improving it but ultimately laid responsibility for the difficulties on the mother due to “the significant control exerted over me”[64] and because “access to my son that is limited severely. depends on me having to, you know, suck it up and deal with it”.[65] he was given another opportunity to tell the court how he might promote the relationship between x and the mother at the end of giving his evidence:  r honour]: are there things you think you could do with x to improve his perception of your relationship with his mother? [the father]: perception of the relationship. i’m guessing so. our only interaction is during the handover exchange, so working forwards and working through that, you know, would be, you know, one vital thing to say that i don’t – you know, i’m not angry at her, i’m not showing hatred. i can’t say that i love her anymore, but i certainly – you know, those sort of interactions would be the only case where – like, he doesn’t see text messages, he doesn’t, so – not text messages, whatsapp messages. you know, i’ve never expressed those things anyway, so i don’t – that’s about the only way i can think of, other than saying that, you know – and i don’t want to brainwash him, like i – just in general. and it’s – that has got to only be those handover times.[66]   the response perhaps indicates the father’s inability to provide any meaningful solutions to a problem that poses significant potential to harm x.
117 the mother is concerned that the father exhibits what she describes as “angry behaviour”, often publicly and in x’s presence.  the mother alleges that x has commented to her that “daddy was ‘so angry’ and that he ‘couldn’t love daddy as daddy was so angry’”.[67] (b) on 18 december 2018 the mother received a call about an incident at x’s swimming school. the father sent a text message to the mother about the incident stating “i had words to the stupid indian woman. her kid is a shit and disrupts the lesson continuously, i don’t know. probably because the filthy indian went and complained.”[68] x was present during the incident. (c) ms n who observed the father’s response to the late start of the individual interviews for her report corroborated the mother’s concerns. [69]   on 18 december 2018 the mother received a call about an incident at x’s swimming school. the father sent a text message to the mother about the incident stating “i had words to the stupid indian woman. her kid is a shit and disrupts the lesson continuously, i don’t know. probably because the filthy indian went and complained.”[68] x was present during the incident. (c) ms n who observed the father’s response to the late start of the individual interviews for her report corroborated the mother’s concerns. [69]   ms n who observed the father’s response to the late start of the individual interviews for her report corroborated the mother’s concerns. [69]
118 a further concern for the mother is that the father has failed to engage with any mental health professionals or other services to address or improve “anger management” issues, despite the court making such an order on 23 september 2019.  the mother notes that the interim consent orders made on 23 september 2019 require the father to attend both an anger management and circle of security course in person with a certificate of completion to be provided. the mother submits that she has not received a certificate of completion for an anger management course and is unsure whether the father has completed such course. (b) the father emailed the mother shortly before separation in 2018 and admitted that he had anger issues that cause him to raise his voice. he ended the email with the words “i am constantly bubbling away... i have stress, i have ptsd, i have depression.”[70] he explained that it was a stressful time for him and that he has since taken courses and met with a registered psychologist, ms r (“ms r”). under cross-examination about this email he said that he was “constantly bullied and harassed whilst i was at work” by the mother and that he “blame[d] her for the email [he] wrote.”[71] (c) on 14 november and 21 november 2019 the father consulted with ms r. she recorded that his stated reasons for consultation were:   the father emailed the mother shortly before separation in 2018 and admitted that he had anger issues that cause him to raise his voice. he ended the email with the words “i am constantly bubbling away... i have stress, i have ptsd, i have depression.”[70] he explained that it was a stressful time for him and that he has since taken courses and met with a registered psychologist, ms r (“ms r”). under cross-examination about this email he said that he was “constantly bullied and harassed whilst i was at work” by the mother and that he “blame[d] her for the email [he] wrote.”[71] (c) on 14 november and 21 november 2019 the father consulted with ms r. she recorded that his stated reasons for consultation were:   on 14 november and 21 november 2019 the father consulted with ms r. she recorded that his stated reasons for consultation were:
he claimed his former wife believes he has a problem with anger management. he disputes this claim. he hastened to add that since his marital separation in january 2019 he has not experienced problematic anger expression. he acknowledged some frustration associated with his former wife. however during his second consultation he informed me he would like to work towards frustration management to reduce the likelihood of bringing pre-existing frustration into future relationships.[72]   ms r recommended 10 treatment interventions including:
cognitive behaviour therapy to assist with understanding unhelpful behaviour, cognitive restructuring to address and deconstruct pre-existing unhelpful thinking, solution-focused therapeutic approaches which will assist in increasing empowerment...controlled breathing...to address continuing anxiety and stress management, and mindfulness techniques to assist with troublesome emotions management.[73]   the father reported to ms n that he saw ms r to “see if i had an anger management problem or an ex-wife problem. and it was the latter.”[74] under cross-examination the father stated that he “went and saw ms r because [he] was directed to by this court to go and attend an anger management course which [he] was unable to attend, and in lieu of attending that, [he] saw a psychologist.”[75] (f) the father states that he and his lawyers attempted to enrol him in an anger management course but could not do so as they were either full or not continuing. (g) on 30 april 2021 at 7.32 am the father completed an on-line psychoeducational course on “impulsive, destructive and explosive management” and “psychology of self-control” offered by impulsivity.com.au (h) the father blames the mother for his failure to complete an anger management course. he says his chosen course, which was to commence on 11 february 2020, coincided with his tuesday time with x. the suggestion was that as the mother would not change his time with x to another evening, she was preventing him from complying with the court orders. (i) under cross-examination the mother agreed that she did not facilitate the father attending the program he had proposed by changing the night he spent with x. (j) under cross-examination the father confirmed that he does not believe that he has anger issues.   the father states that he and his lawyers attempted to enrol him in an anger management course but could not do so as they were either full or not continuing. (g) on 30 april 2021 at 7.32 am the father completed an on-line psychoeducational course on “impulsive, destructive and explosive management” and “psychology of self-control” offered by impulsivity.com.au (h) the father blames the mother for his failure to complete an anger management course. he says his chosen course, which was to commence on 11 february 2020, coincided with his tuesday time with x. the suggestion was that as the mother would not change his time with x to another evening, she was preventing him from complying with the court orders. (i) under cross-examination the mother agreed that she did not facilitate the father attending the program he had proposed by changing the night he spent with x. (j) under cross-examination the father confirmed that he does not believe that he has anger issues.   on 30 april 2021 at 7.32 am the father completed an on-line psychoeducational course on “impulsive, destructive and explosive management” and “psychology of self-control” offered by impulsivity.com.au (h) the father blames the mother for his failure to complete an anger management course. he says his chosen course, which was to commence on 11 february 2020, coincided with his tuesday time with x. the suggestion was that as the mother would not change his time with x to another evening, she was preventing him from complying with the court orders. (i) under cross-examination the mother agreed that she did not facilitate the father attending the program he had proposed by changing the night he spent with x. (j) under cross-examination the father confirmed that he does not believe that he has anger issues.   the father blames the mother for his failure to complete an anger management course. he says his chosen course, which was to commence on 11 february 2020, coincided with his tuesday time with x. the suggestion was that as the mother would not change his time with x to another evening, she was preventing him from complying with the court orders. (i) under cross-examination the mother agreed that she did not facilitate the father attending the program he had proposed by changing the night he spent with x. (j) under cross-examination the father confirmed that he does not believe that he has anger issues.   under cross-examination the mother agreed that she did not facilitate the father attending the program he had proposed by changing the night he spent with x. (j) under cross-examination the father confirmed that he does not believe that he has anger issues.   under cross-examination the father confirmed that he does not believe that he has anger issues.
conclusion on allegations of risk
119 neither party argued that there was an unacceptable risk of harm for x in the care of either parent. the mother though maintains her concerns that x will continue to be exposed by the father to their conflict. she also maintains her concern that the father has unaddressed anger management issues which have the potential to impact x if this occurs in his presence.
120 i do not find that the mother engaged in family violence during the relationship. nor do i find that her behaviour towards the father was controlling in nature. it is entirely normal in relationships for each party to take responsibility for an aspect of their life be that managing the finances, the domestic responsibilities, the garden or otherwise. simply because the mother (who has professional qualifications as a finance professional) had primary responsibility for the financial affairs of the household does not demonstrate controlling behaviour.
121 the father has alleged a fear of the mother. he articulated this concern throughout his cross-examination. for example he said “i have no trust that whatever happens would be construed in a way that is truthful.”[76] i find that his fear of the mother did not arise from or because of controlling behaviour on her part, but rather his (understandable) anxiety about the court proceedings and the risk that his behaviour, or exposure to direct contact with the mother, might jeopardise his success in these proceedings.
122 i find that there were occasional acts of physical and verbal violence by the father during the relationship and there was an act of physical violence at the time of separation but it was not a feature of the relationship and does not present an ongoing risk of harm to x.
123 i am concerned by the father’s conduct towards the mother and x following separation. particularly the mother’s allegations that the father followed and/or stalked her on several occasions two to three years after separation, which caused her to feel anxious. the recent allegation made by the mother about the father gaining knowledge about her sports activities concerned me because:  this incident took place less that one month before the final hearing and three years after the parties separated. the mother’s account of the incident is consistent with other unexplained and coincidental encounters she alleges she has had with the father post separation on 12 march 2020 and 11 february 2021. (b) in his affidavit he indicated that on 28 april 2021 he went to the mother’s home at 5.20 am to “drop off a lunchbox” x had left at his house the day before. he did not message the mother in advance about this or give her notice that he would be doing so. he says that at 5.30 am, presumably on his bicycle, he was able to observe that the mother’s car was not there. (c) sydney is a large city with many sports centres located between the parent’s residences. the s sports club is around 13 kilometres away. the sports centre was “off course” for the father but he said co-incidentally on this day he took a different route due to “road works.” (d) even if the father had co-incidentally seen the mother’s car in the carpark as he cycled by at speed, he gave no plausible explanation for why he saw it necessary to send her a text message about it. they were not in the habit of exchanging messages of a personal nature. his suggestion that it was sent “out of concern” because she might be getting wet in the water was ridiculous. (e) he acknowledged that he was upset that the mother had taken up an activity that required another adult to supervise x when he was available to do so. however, in his own account of the incident this was not cited as a reason for sending the message. (f) the father was aware of the anxiety that the mother says she experiences from contact with him. the father was aware of the mother’s previous complaints that he “stalked her.” he must have foreseen that she would not respond well to his message. yet he was unable to regulate his response, in circumstances where he would have had an awareness of the impact of the message on her anxiety.   in his affidavit he indicated that on 28 april 2021 he went to the mother’s home at 5.20 am to “drop off a lunchbox” x had left at his house the day before. he did not message the mother in advance about this or give her notice that he would be doing so. he says that at 5.30 am, presumably on his bicycle, he was able to observe that the mother’s car was not there. (c) sydney is a large city with many sports centres located between the parent’s residences. the s sports club is around 13 kilometres away. the sports centre was “off course” for the father but he said co-incidentally on this day he took a different route due to “road works.” (d) even if the father had co-incidentally seen the mother’s car in the carpark as he cycled by at speed, he gave no plausible explanation for why he saw it necessary to send her a text message about it. they were not in the habit of exchanging messages of a personal nature. his suggestion that it was sent “out of concern” because she might be getting wet in the water was ridiculous. (e) he acknowledged that he was upset that the mother had taken up an activity that required another adult to supervise x when he was available to do so. however, in his own account of the incident this was not cited as a reason for sending the message. (f) the father was aware of the anxiety that the mother says she experiences from contact with him. the father was aware of the mother’s previous complaints that he “stalked her.” he must have foreseen that she would not respond well to his message. yet he was unable to regulate his response, in circumstances where he would have had an awareness of the impact of the message on her anxiety.   sydney is a large city with many sports centres located between the parent’s residences. the s sports club is around 13 kilometres away. the sports centre was “off course” for the father but he said co-incidentally on this day he took a different route due to “road works.” (d) even if the father had co-incidentally seen the mother’s car in the carpark as he cycled by at speed, he gave no plausible explanation for why he saw it necessary to send her a text message about it. they were not in the habit of exchanging messages of a personal nature. his suggestion that it was sent “out of concern” because she might be getting wet in the water was ridiculous. (e) he acknowledged that he was upset that the mother had taken up an activity that required another adult to supervise x when he was available to do so. however, in his own account of the incident this was not cited as a reason for sending the message. (f) the father was aware of the anxiety that the mother says she experiences from contact with him. the father was aware of the mother’s previous complaints that he “stalked her.” he must have foreseen that she would not respond well to his message. yet he was unable to regulate his response, in circumstances where he would have had an awareness of the impact of the message on her anxiety.   even if the father had co-incidentally seen the mother’s car in the carpark as he cycled by at speed, he gave no plausible explanation for why he saw it necessary to send her a text message about it. they were not in the habit of exchanging messages of a personal nature. his suggestion that it was sent “out of concern” because she might be getting wet in the water was ridiculous. (e) he acknowledged that he was upset that the mother had taken up an activity that required another adult to supervise x when he was available to do so. however, in his own account of the incident this was not cited as a reason for sending the message. (f) the father was aware of the anxiety that the mother says she experiences from contact with him. the father was aware of the mother’s previous complaints that he “stalked her.” he must have foreseen that she would not respond well to his message. yet he was unable to regulate his response, in circumstances where he would have had an awareness of the impact of the message on her anxiety.   he acknowledged that he was upset that the mother had taken up an activity that required another adult to supervise x when he was available to do so. however, in his own account of the incident this was not cited as a reason for sending the message. (f) the father was aware of the anxiety that the mother says she experiences from contact with him. the father was aware of the mother’s previous complaints that he “stalked her.” he must have foreseen that she would not respond well to his message. yet he was unable to regulate his response, in circumstances where he would have had an awareness of the impact of the message on her anxiety.   the father was aware of the anxiety that the mother says she experiences from contact with him. the father was aware of the mother’s previous complaints that he “stalked her.” he must have foreseen that she would not respond well to his message. yet he was unable to regulate his response, in circumstances where he would have had an awareness of the impact of the message on her anxiety.
124 it is well accepted that domestic and family violence behaviours that involve a person following, harassing or monitoring the victim are forms of stalking designed to deprive the victim of privacy, autonomy and a sense of safety.[77] the father’s use of the information gained from his “accidental encounter” with the mother’s car at a sports centre, is a form of intimidation and control, whether he intended it to be or not. importantly, it needs to be viewed in the context of the mother’s mental health condition and her likely response.
125 whether the father’s conduct is labelled coercive and controlling conduct or not, a key component of the father’s behaviour is the pattern of unexplained appearances, at the mother’s home or when she was out, which induced in her a fear. the father admitted that he was aware that this would be a consequence of his behaviour, yet he chose to persist. ms n was taken to paragraphs 92 through to 97 of the mother’s affidavit where the mother set out a range of unplanned interactions and sightings of the father. she observed:
i think those paragraphs indicate that the mother – where the contact with the father is planned and anticipated and is as part of orders or part of a structure, she’s fine. but those paragraphs, to me, indicate that she is still at that sort of – that hyperalert phase of her anxiety. again, not necessarily that the father is doing anything, you know, with intent...to cause her anxiety or to cause her harm, but she’s responding to it as if – as if he is ...if that is happening on a regular basis, then certainly being, you know, two hours – a two-hour 30 flight away removes that anxiety altogether and – and i think – given what i understand of the mother’s mental health, i think that would be of benefit to her.[78]
126 nothing the father did or said at the hearing left me satisfied that he will not continue to monitor the movements of the mother or x in the future and be critical of their decisions and conduct. any orders made will need to consider how this risk can best be mitigated.
127 i find that the father has exposed x to the conflict between the parties. i also find that in all likelihood this behaviour will continue as the father was unable to accept any responsibility for the conduct or the impact it might have on x. nor was the father able to offer any coherent strategies for how he might improve his relationship with the mother.
128 i find that the father has difficulties regulating his emotions and anger and that he did not display good insight into the impact of this on his family. a good example of this was his evidence about the threats he made to harm x’s pet rabbit by putting it in the oven and breaking its neck. in cross-examination the father said he was “merely frustrated.”[79] he demonstrated a lack of insight into the impact of his threat on x when it was put to him by counsel for the mother:[80]  unsel for the mother]: ...does the simple fact not occur to you that your threat to kill your three year old child’s pet would have frightened the daylight out of him? [the father]: no.
129 i accept that the father had no intention of harming x when he spoke the words he did about his pet rabbit. i accept too that he is a man brought up in the country, and it did not occur to him that such a comment might be viewed critically.
130 the swimming pool incident and ms n’s observations of the father’s response to the family report interviews provide other examples of his failure to regulate his behaviour appropriately.
131 ultimately when viewed together these examples highlight the benefit that might come from counselling or therapy to address his interpersonal skills and responses as ms r had suggested. i do not accept the father’s evidence that ms r confirmed that he did not need assistance. her report clearly makes recommendations for a range of treatment interventions. he did not take responsibility for the impact of his behaviour on those around him or the need for any self-improvement on his part. he ignored the recommendations of a registered psychologist and instead chose to blame the mother for his failure to complete a program. he also failed to take responsibility by labelling the issue an “ex-wife issue.” and as already outlined, in all of the incidents that were raised, he always attributed blame to another person. as a result, there is a risk that x will continue to be exposed to acts of anger and volatile outbursts whilst in his care and any orders made will need to consider how this risk can best be mitigated.
additional considerations
nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and other persons
132 ms n observed that x enjoys a close and loving relationship with his mother, which is unsurprising as she is his primary attachment figure.
133 the father’s relationship with x is also a close and loving one. since september 2019 the father has been an active participant in x’s life and he and x look forward to their time together.
134 the father’s hostility towards the mother and inability to regulate his emotions, in x’s presence, is of concern. the father’s tendency to focus on his grievances with the mother and his “entitlements” as a father (evidenced by his application for an equal time arrangement) are not child focussed. some of the potential direct impacts on x are that he may not be an appropriate role model and x may grow to fear him or worse, that x is turned against the mother. i am relieved that none of the evidence to date has suggested that these possibilities have been realised.
135 x is fortunate to have an extended family who love him and would like to continue to have him in their lives.
136 the maternal grandparents live in hobart. the maternal grandfather gave evidence that they have had an active involvement in x’s life and will support the mother and x in the event of their relocation. the mother’s brother mr l lives in city t with his family. he gave evidence and he impressed as a person who would also provide great support to the mother and x.
137 the mother also has family in sydney including her sister who supported her at the hearing.
138 under cross-examination the maternal grandfather and uncle were tested on their views about the father and the mother’s express views about the father, and could not be criticised. the court is confident that the maternal family will not act to undermine the father’s relationship with x.
139 the paternal grandparents live in town u in the region v area of new south wales. it is about six hours from sydney. the paternal grandmother gave evidence about her involvement with x until the date of separation and her regular trips to sydney to support the parties. she shared a close relationship with the mother until the relationship became more distant arising from events post separation. the paternal grandmother wishes to continue to enjoy a close relationship with x and is concerned that she may not be able to do so if he lives in tasmania.
140 the father also has siblings in sydney and canberra who x is reported to enjoy a close relationship with.
141 the mother after separation donated eggs to the wife of the father’s brother. ultimately, this enabled the sister-in-law to give birth to a baby daughter. of this, ms n observed:
...this was an extraordinarily generous gesture on ms andrews part. she reported maintaining a positive and active involvement with the paternal extended family (other than the paternal grandmother) and this augurs well for x’s continuing connectedness to the paternal side of his family.[81]
142 the mother acknowledged the positive relationships that x has with his paternal family. the court is confident that she will continue to be proactive in encouraging and maintaining relationships with his paternal family regardless of which state she lives in.
extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunities to participate in making decisions to spend time with and to communicate with the child
143 much time at the hearing was devoted to the father’s lack of interaction and indeed distance from x post separation. ms n commented that his behaviour and actions were disproportionate to any risk associated with it. i accept that he was confused about the parties’ relationship and intent on avoiding further conflict.
144 the parties have a poor relationship and experience difficulties communicating with each other. but they have managed to reach decisions about x, such as his schooling, without the assistance of third parties. they come before the court in good faith and because they genuinely wish to participate in all aspects of x’s life.
145 i accept that the father has sought to have a greater involvement in x’s life since these proceedings were commenced. i find that the mother has shown inflexibility when faced with a request from the father to vary the orders or have additional time with x, such as the proposed holiday to perth. however, i view her inflexibility as both protective in circumstances where the father was building up his relationship with x, and at other times arising in the context of her desire to limit her engagement with the father and stick to the certainty of the court orders.
the extent to which each of the child’s parents fulfilled or failed to fulfil the parents obligations to maintain the child
146 the father has been paying child support for x as assessed by the child support agency. i find that he will continue to fulfil his obligation to maintain x.
the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including likely effect on the child of any separation from either parent or any other child or other person
147 the father’s time with x has increased gradually since these proceedings commenced. x has settled well into the parenting arrangements and the parties report no significant challenges with moving between households. the parties support a progression of time.
148 if the mother is permitted to relocate to tasmania with x significant changes will occur in x circumstances, including a new house, a new school, and a long distance between him and the life he has grown up with in sydney. most importantly, x will not be in a position to spend time with his father on a weekly basis, or perhaps see his paternal family as regularly as he is now enjoying. alternately, should he remain in sydney, life will remain relatively unchanged for x except that he might increase the time he spends with his father. to arrive at a determination the court must balance (amongst other things) what impact this will have on x.
practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relationships and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
149 the parties presently live in close proximity to each other. they jointly selected a school for x that was convenient to both households. currently there is no practical difficulty with the arrangements for x and these arrangements allow him to maintain personal relationships and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.
150 if the mother is permitted to relocate to tasmania, the father intends to remain living in sydney. there will be both practical difficulties and expenses associated with x’s right to maintain personal relationships and direct contact with his father.
151 the expense associated with the father spending time with x is an obvious consequence of the mother’s proposal. the father argued that he could not afford the costs associated with x’s travel. the mother argues that flights can cost as little as $110 each way and she is prepared to contribute $1,000 per annum towards the costs of x’s travel after which time the parties would share this expense. she also proposes to meet the costs of an adult accompanying x when he travels to and from sydney.
152 in the father’s affidavit, he sets out his weekly expenses, which leave him around $265 per week for discretionary expenditure. in his affidavit he calculates the monthly costs associated with x visiting sydney on one occasion each month and the father visiting him in tasmania once each month. adding in the costs of rental cars, petrol and flights, he believes he will have a shortfall of approximately $13,207 per year.
153 the mother argues that the travel time between sydney and hobart is approximately two hours in duration and therefore quite manageable for a child of x’s age. she says that she and x have regularly travelled to tasmania and he travels well. the father does not dispute x’s ability to travel, but is not certain that his employer will provide him with the flexibility to depart sydney for tasmania at around lunchtime to travel to tasmania.
154 the father is most concerned that his relationship with x will deteriorate if x relocates to tasmania with the mother. he raises this concern for a number of reasons. he says it will lead to a reduction of regular weekly time and he will be unable to participate in x’s day to day activities to the maximum extent possible. he is concerned that if x travels to tasmania he will not be able to participate in his extracurricular activities in any meaningful way and that it might place restrictions on x’s involvement in extracurricular activities. he is also concerned that the mother will not encourage their relationship.
155 the father is also concerned that to date the use of electronic communications between the father and x have been challenging. the father argues that the mother does not support his electronic time with x by minimising the distractions around him ensuring that he is seated and focused. the mother argues that x is a young child who is unable to concentrate for long periods of time. ms n concurred with the mother’s view. she recommended that:
for calls like this to be successful, flexibility and forbearance is required from parents – the notion of a ‘successful’ call is not about how long the call lasted for, or how still the child sat, or how absorbedly they conversed – but about whether they saw you, engaged emotionally with you and had a brief chat... anything of a higher order than this particularly for very young children is more about the parents need for connection.[82]
156 the ongoing need for parents to communicate about travel arrangements was also a concern for the icl who was of the view that coordinating the travel arrangements would require extensive communication and cooperation as opposed to the more limited communication that arises if changeovers take place at school.
capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the child
157 the mother’s psychologist, ms m has provided counselling to her on over 30 occasions since may 2015. she describes the recent sessions as “focussed primarily on ms andrews’ anxiety in the context of having interface with mr nicholson and natural anxiety with legal proceedings and the uncertainty this brings...”[83]
158 since 2015 the mother has consulted with her psychiatrist, dr o every three months and she is prescribed antidepressant medication. of her current and future prognosis dr o says “ms andrews is mentally stable. in view of her good response to treatment and lack of relapse into a further depressive illness her prognosis is good.”[84] she does raise concerns about the ongoing impact on her anxiety as a result of her interactions with the father.
159 there is no suggestion that the mother’s parenting capacity is impaired by her mental health condition. her psychiatrist observed that she is a caring mother and she had no concerns of her ability to care for x. she did however caution that “ms andrews, may experience a downturn in her most stable psychiatric condition if her former partner is not cooperative or displays further aggressive behaviour.”[85]
160 the mother has been in a relationship with mr d since christmas 2018. he lives in the city e area and shares the care of his children w (aged 12) and y (aged 7). notwithstanding interruptions and difficulties occasioned by covid-19 the relationship is ongoing. however, there was some uncertainty as to what the future holds. mr d gave evidence. there was no suggestion that there were any concerns about his appropriateness to provide for the needs of x if they resided in the same household.
161 the father remains in a relationship with ms g who is 35 years old. they do not live together. she has known x since he was three years old and participated in the single expert report process. no criticisms were raised of ms g and her ability to provide for the needs of x.
162 given that no issues have been raised this is not a consideration that is relevant to the final determination of the current proceedings.
attitude to the child and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
163 the father is most critical of some aspects of the mother’s care of x. some of his concerns are that:  the mother leaves x in the care of other people. for example, he is concerned that she went overseas in 2019 and left x with her parents. he is also critical of her decision to begin sports again. (b) she has not facilitated additional time with x beyond what was provided in the orders. (c) she has been inflexible when he is asked for changes to the orders. (d) she has shown no interest in extracurricular activities that he has proposed for x while not allowing him to be involved in some of x’s activities. (e) she does not encourage x’s participation in facetime with him, allowing him to become distracted.   she has not facilitated additional time with x beyond what was provided in the orders. (c) she has been inflexible when he is asked for changes to the orders. (d) she has shown no interest in extracurricular activities that he has proposed for x while not allowing him to be involved in some of x’s activities. (e) she does not encourage x’s participation in facetime with him, allowing him to become distracted.   she has been inflexible when he is asked for changes to the orders. (d) she has shown no interest in extracurricular activities that he has proposed for x while not allowing him to be involved in some of x’s activities. (e) she does not encourage x’s participation in facetime with him, allowing him to become distracted.   she has shown no interest in extracurricular activities that he has proposed for x while not allowing him to be involved in some of x’s activities. (e) she does not encourage x’s participation in facetime with him, allowing him to become distracted.   she does not encourage x’s participation in facetime with him, allowing him to become distracted.
164 i find that the mother has shown a lack of preparedness to deviate from the court orders on occasions. however, this alone does not ground a case of “irresponsibility” and needs to be viewed in the context of her desire to limit her engagement with the father and stick to the certainty of the court orders. having considered the evidence of ms n, carefully observed, and listened to the evidence the mother gave under cross-examination, i find that she has demonstrated a responsible attitude to parenthood, and a capacity to meet the needs of x.
165 the mother argues there is considerable uncertainty as to the father’s capacity to provide for x’s needs. she cites the following matters as concerns for her:  the father’s threats to hurt the mother. (b) the father’s threats to harm x’s pet rabbit by putting it in the oven and breaking its neck. (c) the father’s anger management issues. (d) the father’s inappropriate attitudes and propensity for conflict, especially when angry.   the father’s threats to harm x’s pet rabbit by putting it in the oven and breaking its neck. (c) the father’s anger management issues. (d) the father’s inappropriate attitudes and propensity for conflict, especially when angry.   the father’s anger management issues. (d) the father’s inappropriate attitudes and propensity for conflict, especially when angry.   the father’s inappropriate attitudes and propensity for conflict, especially when angry.
166 the icl argued that the mother may not promote the relationship between the father and x. he referred to paragraphs 69, 74, 76, 77, 78 and 79 of her affidavit to evidence this. in those paragraphs the mother set out her concerns about the father’s conduct which can be summarised as follows:  when the father admitted he was having an affair, x climbed on the father and the father yelled at the mother “if he hurts himself i’ll fucking hurt you.”[86] (b) that x was visibly upset when his father threatened to break his pet rabbit’s neck. (c) that she is concerned about the impact the exposure to conflict has had on x. (d) that the father often exhibits very angry behaviour and that this was demonstrated by instances of violence and inappropriate use of language and yelling at x for relatively small accidents. she believes the father has an anger management issue. (e) that the father has not sought treatment for his ptsd diagnosis and if he is to be a positive influence on x he should seek that assistance. (f) she is concerned about how the father behaves when he loses his temper.   that x was visibly upset when his father threatened to break his pet rabbit’s neck. (c) that she is concerned about the impact the exposure to conflict has had on x. (d) that the father often exhibits very angry behaviour and that this was demonstrated by instances of violence and inappropriate use of language and yelling at x for relatively small accidents. she believes the father has an anger management issue. (e) that the father has not sought treatment for his ptsd diagnosis and if he is to be a positive influence on x he should seek that assistance. (f) she is concerned about how the father behaves when he loses his temper.   that she is concerned about the impact the exposure to conflict has had on x. (d) that the father often exhibits very angry behaviour and that this was demonstrated by instances of violence and inappropriate use of language and yelling at x for relatively small accidents. she believes the father has an anger management issue. (e) that the father has not sought treatment for his ptsd diagnosis and if he is to be a positive influence on x he should seek that assistance. (f) she is concerned about how the father behaves when he loses his temper.   that the father often exhibits very angry behaviour and that this was demonstrated by instances of violence and inappropriate use of language and yelling at x for relatively small accidents. she believes the father has an anger management issue. (e) that the father has not sought treatment for his ptsd diagnosis and if he is to be a positive influence on x he should seek that assistance. (f) she is concerned about how the father behaves when he loses his temper.   that the father has not sought treatment for his ptsd diagnosis and if he is to be a positive influence on x he should seek that assistance. (f) she is concerned about how the father behaves when he loses his temper.   she is concerned about how the father behaves when he loses his temper.
167 the father was dismissive of the incidents of concern raised by the mother indicating there was no “malicious intention.” similarly, when cross-examined about his threat to x to kill his rabbit, he showed little insight into the impact this would have on a young child.
168 i am troubled by this submission by the icl. the mother’s concerns about the father’s parenting capacity are understandable, especially in light of his failure to address his responses in conflictual situations. i make no criticism of the mother for raising with the court her concerns about the capacity of the father to regulate his emotional responses in stressful situations. there is an expectation that she will articulate her concerns about risks to x and provide examples to corroborate those concerns. regardless of whether i make findings of fact about the incidents she has raised in those paragraphs, i do not accept that they evidence her inability to promote the relationship between the father and x. her response appropriately reflects a prioritisation of x’s safety.
169 having made that observation it should be noted that articulating concerns does not necessarily equate with actions. as ms n observed, the mother “did not express anywhere near the palpable contempt towards mr nicholson that he did in reverse...”[87]
family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family
170 the family violence present in the relationship and its impact has been considered earlier and it remains a relevant consideration to the current proceedings.
whether it would be preferable to make the orders that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings
171 as the parties have not raised issues, i find that this consideration is not relevant to the current proceedings and that this matter would benefit from final orders.
parental responsibility
172 i find that pursuant to section 61da of the act the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility applies and it is in the best interests of x that i make such an order with the consent of the parties.
should an order be made for equal time or substantial and significant time?
173 the court needs to determine whether it would be in x’s best interests or reasonably practicable for him to spend equal time with each of his parents.
174 should the court make an order allowing the mother to relocate to tasmania with x, it would not be reasonably practicable for him to spend equal time with each of his parents.
175 accordingly, i will now consider whether x should be permitted to relocate to tasmania.
should the child be permitted to relocate to tasmania?
176 the overall findings as to the primary and secondary considerations are not alone determinative of whether the mother be permitted to relocate with x to tasmania. the findings are such that it is in the best interests of x to spend time with the father and that can occur in nsw and tasmania.
177 the authorities establish that the child’s best interests, whilst a consideration in a relocation case, is also not the sole consideration.
178 before analysing the positions, it is necessary to set out the mother’s proposals for x should they be permitted to relocate:  they will live with the maternal grandparents in their four-bedroom home in hobart. she ultimately proposes buying a home for her and x to live in. she says this will be significantly cheaper than real estate in sydney. i accept that she has the financial capacity to purchase an appropriate home whether in tasmania or sydney. (b) the mother proposes that x attend z school, which is the public school local to her parent’s home. (c) the mother proposes to take long service leave to assist x in settling into school in tasmania and her employer will permit her to work remotely from tasmania as a trial. if she does so, she will be required to travel to sydney for meetings from time to time. she proposes that those occasions correspond with the times x will spend with his father during school holiday periods. (d) the mother is confident of her ability to find employment in tasmania in her field if this is necessary. (e) the maternal grandparents will be available to assist with x’s care and support including dropping him off and picking him up from school and other extracurricular activities. (f) the mother looks forward to living closer to her partner mr d who resides in city e, as well as her brother and his family who reside in city t. ultimately, her parents may retire to the city t/city e area. as the mother’s partner also resides there, it is conceivable that the mother and x might also move into that area. (g) in terms of the arrangements for the father to spend time with x: (i) he will spend time with his father on the first weekend of each month in sydney with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. in addition, the father may travel to tasmania and spend one weekend each month with x in tasmania. the mother offers him access to a motor vehicle while he is in tasmania. (ii) he will also spend seven consecutive days during the term one, two and three school holiday periods with the father and a longer period with him in the january school holiday period with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. (iii) the mother will contribute the first $1,000 towards x’s travel costs and after that has been spent, the parties will share the costs of x’s travel and each meet their own (or their nominees) travel costs.   the mother proposes that x attend z school, which is the public school local to her parent’s home. (c) the mother proposes to take long service leave to assist x in settling into school in tasmania and her employer will permit her to work remotely from tasmania as a trial. if she does so, she will be required to travel to sydney for meetings from time to time. she proposes that those occasions correspond with the times x will spend with his father during school holiday periods. (d) the mother is confident of her ability to find employment in tasmania in her field if this is necessary. (e) the maternal grandparents will be available to assist with x’s care and support including dropping him off and picking him up from school and other extracurricular activities. (f) the mother looks forward to living closer to her partner mr d who resides in city e, as well as her brother and his family who reside in city t. ultimately, her parents may retire to the city t/city e area. as the mother’s partner also resides there, it is conceivable that the mother and x might also move into that area. (g) in terms of the arrangements for the father to spend time with x: (i) he will spend time with his father on the first weekend of each month in sydney with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. in addition, the father may travel to tasmania and spend one weekend each month with x in tasmania. the mother offers him access to a motor vehicle while he is in tasmania. (ii) he will also spend seven consecutive days during the term one, two and three school holiday periods with the father and a longer period with him in the january school holiday period with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. (iii) the mother will contribute the first $1,000 towards x’s travel costs and after that has been spent, the parties will share the costs of x’s travel and each meet their own (or their nominees) travel costs.   the mother proposes to take long service leave to assist x in settling into school in tasmania and her employer will permit her to work remotely from tasmania as a trial. if she does so, she will be required to travel to sydney for meetings from time to time. she proposes that those occasions correspond with the times x will spend with his father during school holiday periods. (d) the mother is confident of her ability to find employment in tasmania in her field if this is necessary. (e) the maternal grandparents will be available to assist with x’s care and support including dropping him off and picking him up from school and other extracurricular activities. (f) the mother looks forward to living closer to her partner mr d who resides in city e, as well as her brother and his family who reside in city t. ultimately, her parents may retire to the city t/city e area. as the mother’s partner also resides there, it is conceivable that the mother and x might also move into that area. (g) in terms of the arrangements for the father to spend time with x: (i) he will spend time with his father on the first weekend of each month in sydney with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. in addition, the father may travel to tasmania and spend one weekend each month with x in tasmania. the mother offers him access to a motor vehicle while he is in tasmania. (ii) he will also spend seven consecutive days during the term one, two and three school holiday periods with the father and a longer period with him in the january school holiday period with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. (iii) the mother will contribute the first $1,000 towards x’s travel costs and after that has been spent, the parties will share the costs of x’s travel and each meet their own (or their nominees) travel costs.   the mother is confident of her ability to find employment in tasmania in her field if this is necessary. (e) the maternal grandparents will be available to assist with x’s care and support including dropping him off and picking him up from school and other extracurricular activities. (f) the mother looks forward to living closer to her partner mr d who resides in city e, as well as her brother and his family who reside in city t. ultimately, her parents may retire to the city t/city e area. as the mother’s partner also resides there, it is conceivable that the mother and x might also move into that area. (g) in terms of the arrangements for the father to spend time with x: (i) he will spend time with his father on the first weekend of each month in sydney with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. in addition, the father may travel to tasmania and spend one weekend each month with x in tasmania. the mother offers him access to a motor vehicle while he is in tasmania. (ii) he will also spend seven consecutive days during the term one, two and three school holiday periods with the father and a longer period with him in the january school holiday period with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. (iii) the mother will contribute the first $1,000 towards x’s travel costs and after that has been spent, the parties will share the costs of x’s travel and each meet their own (or their nominees) travel costs.   the maternal grandparents will be available to assist with x’s care and support including dropping him off and picking him up from school and other extracurricular activities. (f) the mother looks forward to living closer to her partner mr d who resides in city e, as well as her brother and his family who reside in city t. ultimately, her parents may retire to the city t/city e area. as the mother’s partner also resides there, it is conceivable that the mother and x might also move into that area. (g) in terms of the arrangements for the father to spend time with x: (i) he will spend time with his father on the first weekend of each month in sydney with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. in addition, the father may travel to tasmania and spend one weekend each month with x in tasmania. the mother offers him access to a motor vehicle while he is in tasmania. (ii) he will also spend seven consecutive days during the term one, two and three school holiday periods with the father and a longer period with him in the january school holiday period with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. (iii) the mother will contribute the first $1,000 towards x’s travel costs and after that has been spent, the parties will share the costs of x’s travel and each meet their own (or their nominees) travel costs.   the mother looks forward to living closer to her partner mr d who resides in city e, as well as her brother and his family who reside in city t. ultimately, her parents may retire to the city t/city e area. as the mother’s partner also resides there, it is conceivable that the mother and x might also move into that area. (g) in terms of the arrangements for the father to spend time with x: (i) he will spend time with his father on the first weekend of each month in sydney with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. in addition, the father may travel to tasmania and spend one weekend each month with x in tasmania. the mother offers him access to a motor vehicle while he is in tasmania. (ii) he will also spend seven consecutive days during the term one, two and three school holiday periods with the father and a longer period with him in the january school holiday period with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. (iii) the mother will contribute the first $1,000 towards x’s travel costs and after that has been spent, the parties will share the costs of x’s travel and each meet their own (or their nominees) travel costs.   in terms of the arrangements for the father to spend time with x: (i) he will spend time with his father on the first weekend of each month in sydney with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. in addition, the father may travel to tasmania and spend one weekend each month with x in tasmania. the mother offers him access to a motor vehicle while he is in tasmania. (ii) he will also spend seven consecutive days during the term one, two and three school holiday periods with the father and a longer period with him in the january school holiday period with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. (iii) the mother will contribute the first $1,000 towards x’s travel costs and after that has been spent, the parties will share the costs of x’s travel and each meet their own (or their nominees) travel costs.   he will spend time with his father on the first weekend of each month in sydney with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. in addition, the father may travel to tasmania and spend one weekend each month with x in tasmania. the mother offers him access to a motor vehicle while he is in tasmania. (ii) he will also spend seven consecutive days during the term one, two and three school holiday periods with the father and a longer period with him in the january school holiday period with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. (iii) the mother will contribute the first $1,000 towards x’s travel costs and after that has been spent, the parties will share the costs of x’s travel and each meet their own (or their nominees) travel costs.  ) he will also spend seven consecutive days during the term one, two and three school holiday periods with the father and a longer period with him in the january school holiday period with the mother delivering x to sydney airport. (iii) the mother will contribute the first $1,000 towards x’s travel costs and after that has been spent, the parties will share the costs of x’s travel and each meet their own (or their nominees) travel costs.  i) the mother will contribute the first $1,000 towards x’s travel costs and after that has been spent, the parties will share the costs of x’s travel and each meet their own (or their nominees) travel costs.
179 it is now necessary to balance and weigh the child’s best interests with the right of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement.
180 in order to do so, it is necessary to capture why the mother wishes to relocate x and why the father is opposed to such a relocation.
181 the basis upon which the mother seeks to relocate x to tasmania are that she:  would like to move closer to her parents, and her brother mr l and his family. (b) has been in a long distance relationship with mr d who lives in city e since late 2018. it would make her much happier if she could live closer to him. (c) has been parenting x in sydney with limited family support. she plans to move in with her parents in hobart who will assist with the care of x on a day to day basis. she observes that “[t]his is a support that i currently do not have and has an impact on the hours i am able to work.”[88] (d) she believes it is in x’s best interests to be removed from the frequent exposure he has to the ongoing parental conflict. (e) she hopes it will improve her mental health by removing herself from the regular interaction that she has with the father in sydney. she says this continues to cause her significant stress and anxiety. she believes there would be more predictability in her interactions with the father if she were in tasmania. she believes that the move to tasmania would have a positive impact on her mental health and “the ability and capacity for me to be the best mother to x that i can be.”[89] she says: “i find that when i am in tasmania i am less stressed and anxious. i am happier, more content and able to be a more confident mother.”[90]   has been in a long distance relationship with mr d who lives in city e since late 2018. it would make her much happier if she could live closer to him. (c) has been parenting x in sydney with limited family support. she plans to move in with her parents in hobart who will assist with the care of x on a day to day basis. she observes that “[t]his is a support that i currently do not have and has an impact on the hours i am able to work.”[88] (d) she believes it is in x’s best interests to be removed from the frequent exposure he has to the ongoing parental conflict. (e) she hopes it will improve her mental health by removing herself from the regular interaction that she has with the father in sydney. she says this continues to cause her significant stress and anxiety. she believes there would be more predictability in her interactions with the father if she were in tasmania. she believes that the move to tasmania would have a positive impact on her mental health and “the ability and capacity for me to be the best mother to x that i can be.”[89] she says: “i find that when i am in tasmania i am less stressed and anxious. i am happier, more content and able to be a more confident mother.”[90]   has been parenting x in sydney with limited family support. she plans to move in with her parents in hobart who will assist with the care of x on a day to day basis. she observes that “[t]his is a support that i currently do not have and has an impact on the hours i am able to work.”[88] (d) she believes it is in x’s best interests to be removed from the frequent exposure he has to the ongoing parental conflict. (e) she hopes it will improve her mental health by removing herself from the regular interaction that she has with the father in sydney. she says this continues to cause her significant stress and anxiety. she believes there would be more predictability in her interactions with the father if she were in tasmania. she believes that the move to tasmania would have a positive impact on her mental health and “the ability and capacity for me to be the best mother to x that i can be.”[89] she says: “i find that when i am in tasmania i am less stressed and anxious. i am happier, more content and able to be a more confident mother.”[90]   she believes it is in x’s best interests to be removed from the frequent exposure he has to the ongoing parental conflict. (e) she hopes it will improve her mental health by removing herself from the regular interaction that she has with the father in sydney. she says this continues to cause her significant stress and anxiety. she believes there would be more predictability in her interactions with the father if she were in tasmania. she believes that the move to tasmania would have a positive impact on her mental health and “the ability and capacity for me to be the best mother to x that i can be.”[89] she says: “i find that when i am in tasmania i am less stressed and anxious. i am happier, more content and able to be a more confident mother.”[90]   she hopes it will improve her mental health by removing herself from the regular interaction that she has with the father in sydney. she says this continues to cause her significant stress and anxiety. she believes there would be more predictability in her interactions with the father if she were in tasmania. she believes that the move to tasmania would have a positive impact on her mental health and “the ability and capacity for me to be the best mother to x that i can be.”[89] she says: “i find that when i am in tasmania i am less stressed and anxious. i am happier, more content and able to be a more confident mother.”[90]
182 the basis upon which the father opposes her relocation are:  the mother’s proposal for his time with x does not fall within the “rubric of substantial and significant” time, nor does it allow for a progression to equal time. (b) the father would be deprived of the opportunity to take part in the regular and more mundane aspects of x’s life such as schooling, extracurricular activities and daily routine. further, x’s involvement in special events, whether birthdays or otherwise, would be restricted in the context of x being so far away. (c) the lack of clarity around the mother’s relocation to tasmania (for example whether she would live in hobart or city e). (d) it does not facilitate the significant involvement of the paternal grandparents in x’s life. (e) he fears that a relocation would remove x from his life. ms n reported that the father:   the father would be deprived of the opportunity to take part in the regular and more mundane aspects of x’s life such as schooling, extracurricular activities and daily routine. further, x’s involvement in special events, whether birthdays or otherwise, would be restricted in the context of x being so far away. (c) the lack of clarity around the mother’s relocation to tasmania (for example whether she would live in hobart or city e). (d) it does not facilitate the significant involvement of the paternal grandparents in x’s life. (e) he fears that a relocation would remove x from his life. ms n reported that the father:   the lack of clarity around the mother’s relocation to tasmania (for example whether she would live in hobart or city e). (d) it does not facilitate the significant involvement of the paternal grandparents in x’s life. (e) he fears that a relocation would remove x from his life. ms n reported that the father:   it does not facilitate the significant involvement of the paternal grandparents in x’s life. (e) he fears that a relocation would remove x from his life. ms n reported that the father:   he fears that a relocation would remove x from his life. ms n reported that the father:
expressed the belief that ms andrews’ application to relocate to tasmania is a means of (eventually) exorcising him from x’s life. his view is that ms andrews has wilfully obstructed his relationship with x from the time of separation and she would therefore be unlikely to encourage x to continue his relationship with him once she moved away.[91]
183 the icl indicated that it was a finely balanced case. he acknowledged that the mother’s reasons for seeking to relocate “are quite credible and quite reasonable.” but in recommending orders for x to remain in nsw with the mother he was influenced by:   evidence indicating that the mother’s anxiety is caused by regular interactions with the father could be attributed to electronic type communication as much as face-to-face communication. he argued that a move to tasmania would not address her anxiety as they would all be more reliant on “electronic type communication” whether for contact between x and the father or for the purposes of communicating about the spend time with arrangements. for example, in circumstances where there were flight delays or other travel complications. (b) the mother’s proposal potentially involved much more face-to-face contact between the mother and the father because changeovers would not take place at school. he argued that this would not cure her anxieties, and possibly increase them. (c) the mother had failed to give evidence about her ongoing mental health treatment in tasmania, and he was concerned that tasmania was seen as the “medicine” for her anxiety. no questions were put to the mother on this issue and there was no evidence to suggest that she would not take necessary steps. (d) conversely, he argued the court could not make a finding that an order for the mother to remain in sydney would adversely affect the mother’s mental health as there was no evidence to support this finding. (e) there is uncertainty about the city she will ultimately live in. (f) the mother having family support in sydney already.   the mother’s proposal potentially involved much more face-to-face contact between the mother and the father because changeovers would not take place at school. he argued that this would not cure her anxieties, and possibly increase them. (c) the mother had failed to give evidence about her ongoing mental health treatment in tasmania, and he was concerned that tasmania was seen as the “medicine” for her anxiety. no questions were put to the mother on this issue and there was no evidence to suggest that she would not take necessary steps. (d) conversely, he argued the court could not make a finding that an order for the mother to remain in sydney would adversely affect the mother’s mental health as there was no evidence to support this finding. (e) there is uncertainty about the city she will ultimately live in. (f) the mother having family support in sydney already.   the mother had failed to give evidence about her ongoing mental health treatment in tasmania, and he was concerned that tasmania was seen as the “medicine” for her anxiety. no questions were put to the mother on this issue and there was no evidence to suggest that she would not take necessary steps. (d) conversely, he argued the court could not make a finding that an order for the mother to remain in sydney would adversely affect the mother’s mental health as there was no evidence to support this finding. (e) there is uncertainty about the city she will ultimately live in. (f) the mother having family support in sydney already.   conversely, he argued the court could not make a finding that an order for the mother to remain in sydney would adversely affect the mother’s mental health as there was no evidence to support this finding. (e) there is uncertainty about the city she will ultimately live in. (f) the mother having family support in sydney already.   there is uncertainty about the city she will ultimately live in. (f) the mother having family support in sydney already.   the mother having family support in sydney already.
184 to assist us in considering this task of balance and weight it is necessary to capture the benefits and detriments involved for x should relocation occur or not occur.
185 if the child is permitted to relocate to tasmania the benefits would be that:  x may be less likely to be exposed to the antipathy, hostility and anxiety between the parents on a weekly basis. (b) the father will have less opportunity to monitor the mother’s day to day life and criticise the decisions she makes. this will have a positive effect on her mental health. (c) the mother will enjoy excellent family support and will be able to pursue her personal relationship. this would make her a more cheerful, positive and happier parent to x. (d) x will enjoy a closer relationship with his maternal grandparents, who will provide x with plenty of support while they settle into their new lives in tasmania. this appears to be an improvement on the current support the mother enjoys.[92] (e) x will continue to enjoy extracurricular activities such as playing sports, attending swim class and music. x appears to be a well-adjusted and resilient boy and there was no suggestion that he would struggle to make new friends or settle into a new environment. (f) x will see his cousins in city t on a more frequent basis will likely develop a deeper relationship with them.   the father will have less opportunity to monitor the mother’s day to day life and criticise the decisions she makes. this will have a positive effect on her mental health. (c) the mother will enjoy excellent family support and will be able to pursue her personal relationship. this would make her a more cheerful, positive and happier parent to x. (d) x will enjoy a closer relationship with his maternal grandparents, who will provide x with plenty of support while they settle into their new lives in tasmania. this appears to be an improvement on the current support the mother enjoys.[92] (e) x will continue to enjoy extracurricular activities such as playing sports, attending swim class and music. x appears to be a well-adjusted and resilient boy and there was no suggestion that he would struggle to make new friends or settle into a new environment. (f) x will see his cousins in city t on a more frequent basis will likely develop a deeper relationship with them.   the mother will enjoy excellent family support and will be able to pursue her personal relationship. this would make her a more cheerful, positive and happier parent to x. (d) x will enjoy a closer relationship with his maternal grandparents, who will provide x with plenty of support while they settle into their new lives in tasmania. this appears to be an improvement on the current support the mother enjoys.[92] (e) x will continue to enjoy extracurricular activities such as playing sports, attending swim class and music. x appears to be a well-adjusted and resilient boy and there was no suggestion that he would struggle to make new friends or settle into a new environment. (f) x will see his cousins in city t on a more frequent basis will likely develop a deeper relationship with them.   x will enjoy a closer relationship with his maternal grandparents, who will provide x with plenty of support while they settle into their new lives in tasmania. this appears to be an improvement on the current support the mother enjoys.[92] (e) x will continue to enjoy extracurricular activities such as playing sports, attending swim class and music. x appears to be a well-adjusted and resilient boy and there was no suggestion that he would struggle to make new friends or settle into a new environment. (f) x will see his cousins in city t on a more frequent basis will likely develop a deeper relationship with them.   x will continue to enjoy extracurricular activities such as playing sports, attending swim class and music. x appears to be a well-adjusted and resilient boy and there was no suggestion that he would struggle to make new friends or settle into a new environment. (f) x will see his cousins in city t on a more frequent basis will likely develop a deeper relationship with them.   x will see his cousins in city t on a more frequent basis will likely develop a deeper relationship with them.
186 if the child is permitted to relocate to tasmania the detriments would be that:  the parties will have to share the expense associated with x’s right to maintain personal relationships and direct contact with his father. for the father, this will mean that he has to use more of his savings and discretionary income to spend time with x. (b) the ongoing exposure of x to the conflict between his parents will not cease by virtue of the physical relocation. for example, ms m when cross-examined by the icl was asked “...the remedy of relocation for – to tasmania is not really an answer in the context of if mr nicholson is being abusive in this way towards x and his mother?”[93] she was of the view that this is a form of emotional abuse and conceded that it might not stop, whether the mother physically relocated or not.[94] (c) practically, the relocation will result in x travelling to sydney on a regular basis. this will interrupt his day to day activities in tasmania. for example, his participation in weekend sports or social events. x may grow to resent the travel and its impact on his day to day life. (d) it may have a detrimental impact on the relationship that the father has with x because: (i) there is a risk that the mother will not promote a relationship between the father and x. (ii) the father is seeking that x remain in sydney and that his time with x build up to an equal time arrangement. this could not happen if x were permitted to relocate to tasmania. (iii) the icl was concerned that the father “might give up” once the proceedings were at an end because travel to tasmania to see x and maintain a relationship with him would be difficult. that outcome, he argued, would not be in x’s best interests. no evidence suggested that the father would behave so. (e) the relocation may not improve the mother’s level of anxiety because the father may come face to face with her far more frequently than he currently does. for example, the father’s time with x via electronic mediums such as facetime has caused difficulties between the parties. in addition, x’s school in sydney is currently used as a changeover venue, which minimises contact between the parties, but this would not be possible if the relocation took place. (f) there would be an ongoing need for the parents to communicate about travel arrangements as opposed to the more limited communication that arises if changeovers take place at school. this is in light of the evidence heard about the father’s rigidity, and the potential for him to become upset if things do not go to plan. (g) the complexity of travel and changeover arrangements would be challenging in any circumstance but it was argued that the demonstrated lack of flexibility on the part of the mother will make the arrangements for the father even more difficult. (h) the inability of the paternal family to spend as much time with x, and participate in his more mundane and day to day activities such as swimming classes, sports matches and school events.   the ongoing exposure of x to the conflict between his parents will not cease by virtue of the physical relocation. for example, ms m when cross-examined by the icl was asked “...the remedy of relocation for – to tasmania is not really an answer in the context of if mr nicholson is being abusive in this way towards x and his mother?”[93] she was of the view that this is a form of emotional abuse and conceded that it might not stop, whether the mother physically relocated or not.[94] (c) practically, the relocation will result in x travelling to sydney on a regular basis. this will interrupt his day to day activities in tasmania. for example, his participation in weekend sports or social events. x may grow to resent the travel and its impact on his day to day life. (d) it may have a detrimental impact on the relationship that the father has with x because: (i) there is a risk that the mother will not promote a relationship between the father and x. (ii) the father is seeking that x remain in sydney and that his time with x build up to an equal time arrangement. this could not happen if x were permitted to relocate to tasmania. (iii) the icl was concerned that the father “might give up” once the proceedings were at an end because travel to tasmania to see x and maintain a relationship with him would be difficult. that outcome, he argued, would not be in x’s best interests. no evidence suggested that the father would behave so. (e) the relocation may not improve the mother’s level of anxiety because the father may come face to face with her far more frequently than he currently does. for example, the father’s time with x via electronic mediums such as facetime has caused difficulties between the parties. in addition, x’s school in sydney is currently used as a changeover venue, which minimises contact between the parties, but this would not be possible if the relocation took place. (f) there would be an ongoing need for the parents to communicate about travel arrangements as opposed to the more limited communication that arises if changeovers take place at school. this is in light of the evidence heard about the father’s rigidity, and the potential for him to become upset if things do not go to plan. (g) the complexity of travel and changeover arrangements would be challenging in any circumstance but it was argued that the demonstrated lack of flexibility on the part of the mother will make the arrangements for the father even more difficult. (h) the inability of the paternal family to spend as much time with x, and participate in his more mundane and day to day activities such as swimming classes, sports matches and school events.   practically, the relocation will result in x travelling to sydney on a regular basis. this will interrupt his day to day activities in tasmania. for example, his participation in weekend sports or social events. x may grow to resent the travel and its impact on his day to day life. (d) it may have a detrimental impact on the relationship that the father has with x because: (i) there is a risk that the mother will not promote a relationship between the father and x. (ii) the father is seeking that x remain in sydney and that his time with x build up to an equal time arrangement. this could not happen if x were permitted to relocate to tasmania. (iii) the icl was concerned that the father “might give up” once the proceedings were at an end because travel to tasmania to see x and maintain a relationship with him would be difficult. that outcome, he argued, would not be in x’s best interests. no evidence suggested that the father would behave so. (e) the relocation may not improve the mother’s level of anxiety because the father may come face to face with her far more frequently than he currently does. for example, the father’s time with x via electronic mediums such as facetime has caused difficulties between the parties. in addition, x’s school in sydney is currently used as a changeover venue, which minimises contact between the parties, but this would not be possible if the relocation took place. (f) there would be an ongoing need for the parents to communicate about travel arrangements as opposed to the more limited communication that arises if changeovers take place at school. this is in light of the evidence heard about the father’s rigidity, and the potential for him to become upset if things do not go to plan. (g) the complexity of travel and changeover arrangements would be challenging in any circumstance but it was argued that the demonstrated lack of flexibility on the part of the mother will make the arrangements for the father even more difficult. (h) the inability of the paternal family to spend as much time with x, and participate in his more mundane and day to day activities such as swimming classes, sports matches and school events.   it may have a detrimental impact on the relationship that the father has with x because: (i) there is a risk that the mother will not promote a relationship between the father and x. (ii) the father is seeking that x remain in sydney and that his time with x build up to an equal time arrangement. this could not happen if x were permitted to relocate to tasmania. (iii) the icl was concerned that the father “might give up” once the proceedings were at an end because travel to tasmania to see x and maintain a relationship with him would be difficult. that outcome, he argued, would not be in x’s best interests. no evidence suggested that the father would behave so. (e) the relocation may not improve the mother’s level of anxiety because the father may come face to face with her far more frequently than he currently does. for example, the father’s time with x via electronic mediums such as facetime has caused difficulties between the parties. in addition, x’s school in sydney is currently used as a changeover venue, which minimises contact between the parties, but this would not be possible if the relocation took place. (f) there would be an ongoing need for the parents to communicate about travel arrangements as opposed to the more limited communication that arises if changeovers take place at school. this is in light of the evidence heard about the father’s rigidity, and the potential for him to become upset if things do not go to plan. (g) the complexity of travel and changeover arrangements would be challenging in any circumstance but it was argued that the demonstrated lack of flexibility on the part of the mother will make the arrangements for the father even more difficult. (h) the inability of the paternal family to spend as much time with x, and participate in his more mundane and day to day activities such as swimming classes, sports matches and school events.   there is a risk that the mother will not promote a relationship between the father and x. (ii) the father is seeking that x remain in sydney and that his time with x build up to an equal time arrangement. this could not happen if x were permitted to relocate to tasmania. (iii) the icl was concerned that the father “might give up” once the proceedings were at an end because travel to tasmania to see x and maintain a relationship with him would be difficult. that outcome, he argued, would not be in x’s best interests. no evidence suggested that the father would behave so.  ) the father is seeking that x remain in sydney and that his time with x build up to an equal time arrangement. this could not happen if x were permitted to relocate to tasmania. (iii) the icl was concerned that the father “might give up” once the proceedings were at an end because travel to tasmania to see x and maintain a relationship with him would be difficult. that outcome, he argued, would not be in x’s best interests. no evidence suggested that the father would behave so.  i) the icl was concerned that the father “might give up” once the proceedings were at an end because travel to tasmania to see x and maintain a relationship with him would be difficult. that outcome, he argued, would not be in x’s best interests. no evidence suggested that the father would behave so.   the relocation may not improve the mother’s level of anxiety because the father may come face to face with her far more frequently than he currently does. for example, the father’s time with x via electronic mediums such as facetime has caused difficulties between the parties. in addition, x’s school in sydney is currently used as a changeover venue, which minimises contact between the parties, but this would not be possible if the relocation took place. (f) there would be an ongoing need for the parents to communicate about travel arrangements as opposed to the more limited communication that arises if changeovers take place at school. this is in light of the evidence heard about the father’s rigidity, and the potential for him to become upset if things do not go to plan. (g) the complexity of travel and changeover arrangements would be challenging in any circumstance but it was argued that the demonstrated lack of flexibility on the part of the mother will make the arrangements for the father even more difficult. (h) the inability of the paternal family to spend as much time with x, and participate in his more mundane and day to day activities such as swimming classes, sports matches and school events.   there would be an ongoing need for the parents to communicate about travel arrangements as opposed to the more limited communication that arises if changeovers take place at school. this is in light of the evidence heard about the father’s rigidity, and the potential for him to become upset if things do not go to plan. (g) the complexity of travel and changeover arrangements would be challenging in any circumstance but it was argued that the demonstrated lack of flexibility on the part of the mother will make the arrangements for the father even more difficult. (h) the inability of the paternal family to spend as much time with x, and participate in his more mundane and day to day activities such as swimming classes, sports matches and school events.   the complexity of travel and changeover arrangements would be challenging in any circumstance but it was argued that the demonstrated lack of flexibility on the part of the mother will make the arrangements for the father even more difficult. (h) the inability of the paternal family to spend as much time with x, and participate in his more mundane and day to day activities such as swimming classes, sports matches and school events.   the inability of the paternal family to spend as much time with x, and participate in his more mundane and day to day activities such as swimming classes, sports matches and school events.
187 if the child is not permitted to relocate to tasmania the benefits would be that:  the parties live 10 minutes from each other. their current arrangements are both workable and manageable as evidenced by the lack of conflict over compliance with the orders. x has settled well into the current parenting arrangements and the parties report no significant challenges with him moving between households. an order for him to remain here would preserve this stability. (b) x will continue to thrive. he will continue his current extracurricular activities such as playing sports, attending swim class and music. he will not be separated from his friends and classmates. (c) it would allow the father to be involved in the more mundane aspects of life. it would also allow the paternal family to visit the father and spend time with x on a more regular basis.   x will continue to thrive. he will continue his current extracurricular activities such as playing sports, attending swim class and music. he will not be separated from his friends and classmates. (c) it would allow the father to be involved in the more mundane aspects of life. it would also allow the paternal family to visit the father and spend time with x on a more regular basis.   it would allow the father to be involved in the more mundane aspects of life. it would also allow the paternal family to visit the father and spend time with x on a more regular basis.
188 if the child is not permitted to relocate to tasmania the detriments would be that:  nothing changes from the current situation and as a result: (i) x continues to be exposed to the parental conflict and this begins to have a negative impact on his own mental health and wellbeing, and he is exposed to poor role modelling by his parents. (ii) the father is in a position to more closely observe and scrutinise the mother’s life. (iii) x will continue to observe the father’s criticisms and “contempt” and hostility for the mother on a regular basis and the father may become more critical of x. (iv) the time x spends with the father may increase to an equal time arrangement in which case x may be exposed on a more regular basis to the father’s angry outbursts and aggressive responses to some situations. (v) the mother will almost inevitably face the end of what has been a supportive and fulfilling relationship with mr d. (vi) x may live with an unhappy mother who feels trapped and resentful of the father who has denied her the freedom to return to her home state and be close to her aging parents and new partner. (vii) there might be a downturn in the mother’s mental health which will impact on her capacity to care for x.   x continues to be exposed to the parental conflict and this begins to have a negative impact on his own mental health and wellbeing, and he is exposed to poor role modelling by his parents. (ii) the father is in a position to more closely observe and scrutinise the mother’s life. (iii) x will continue to observe the father’s criticisms and “contempt” and hostility for the mother on a regular basis and the father may become more critical of x. (iv) the time x spends with the father may increase to an equal time arrangement in which case x may be exposed on a more regular basis to the father’s angry outbursts and aggressive responses to some situations. (v) the mother will almost inevitably face the end of what has been a supportive and fulfilling relationship with mr d. (vi) x may live with an unhappy mother who feels trapped and resentful of the father who has denied her the freedom to return to her home state and be close to her aging parents and new partner. (vii) there might be a downturn in the mother’s mental health which will impact on her capacity to care for x.  ) the father is in a position to more closely observe and scrutinise the mother’s life. (iii) x will continue to observe the father’s criticisms and “contempt” and hostility for the mother on a regular basis and the father may become more critical of x. (iv) the time x spends with the father may increase to an equal time arrangement in which case x may be exposed on a more regular basis to the father’s angry outbursts and aggressive responses to some situations. (v) the mother will almost inevitably face the end of what has been a supportive and fulfilling relationship with mr d. (vi) x may live with an unhappy mother who feels trapped and resentful of the father who has denied her the freedom to return to her home state and be close to her aging parents and new partner. (vii) there might be a downturn in the mother’s mental health which will impact on her capacity to care for x.  i) x will continue to observe the father’s criticisms and “contempt” and hostility for the mother on a regular basis and the father may become more critical of x. (iv) the time x spends with the father may increase to an equal time arrangement in which case x may be exposed on a more regular basis to the father’s angry outbursts and aggressive responses to some situations. (v) the mother will almost inevitably face the end of what has been a supportive and fulfilling relationship with mr d. (vi) x may live with an unhappy mother who feels trapped and resentful of the father who has denied her the freedom to return to her home state and be close to her aging parents and new partner. (vii) there might be a downturn in the mother’s mental health which will impact on her capacity to care for x.  ) the time x spends with the father may increase to an equal time arrangement in which case x may be exposed on a more regular basis to the father’s angry outbursts and aggressive responses to some situations. (v) the mother will almost inevitably face the end of what has been a supportive and fulfilling relationship with mr d. (vi) x may live with an unhappy mother who feels trapped and resentful of the father who has denied her the freedom to return to her home state and be close to her aging parents and new partner. (vii) there might be a downturn in the mother’s mental health which will impact on her capacity to care for x.   the mother will almost inevitably face the end of what has been a supportive and fulfilling relationship with mr d. (vi) x may live with an unhappy mother who feels trapped and resentful of the father who has denied her the freedom to return to her home state and be close to her aging parents and new partner. (vii) there might be a downturn in the mother’s mental health which will impact on her capacity to care for x.  ) x may live with an unhappy mother who feels trapped and resentful of the father who has denied her the freedom to return to her home state and be close to her aging parents and new partner. (vii) there might be a downturn in the mother’s mental health which will impact on her capacity to care for x.  i) there might be a downturn in the mother’s mental health which will impact on her capacity to care for x.
189 this is a finely balanced case as the icl identified and a difficult one to decide. both parties have articulated very strong and persuasive reasons for and against the mother’s relocation. it is necessary to assess them all to arrive at a determination.
190 x has settled well into life at school in sydney. he is involved in a range of extracurricular activities. he is only young. there was no evidence that suggested that a change of school or a move away from friendship groups at this stage of his life would lead to unforeseen problems.
191 the expense associated with the father spending time with x is an obvious consequence of the mother’s proposal. the father set out in his affidavit his weekly income and expenditure. his evidence is that he was left with $13,780 per annum unallocated. the mother proposes that each party pay their own costs and that she contribute $1,000 per annum towards x’s travel costs. the parties were at odds about the cost of flights. the father estimated that they could be $520 return due to the specific flights required. the mother argued that they would agree upon a timetable for travel each year and take advantage of the cheapest flights possible. the mother annexed to her affidavit a search of airfares undertaken in february 2022, which indicated for travel on friday and sunday a low of $109 and a high of $204 one way. she therefore estimated an average cost of $220 return. assuming that x flies to sydney return on 12 occasions each year, the costs associated with his travel were estimated to be around the halfway point of the mother’s searches, it is reasonable to expect that a return ticket would cost $300. after the mother’s contribution of $1,000 there would still be an amount of around $2,600 for the parties to share ($1,300 each). the father’s analysis of his own income and expenditure indicates that this is within his means.
192 in addition, there are costs associated with the father’s travel to tasmania. if he were to avail himself of the opportunity to travel to tasmania each month where there was no school holiday period (6 in total) he would incur costs of at least $678 per trip, his own air travel costs ($300 per trip) as well as accommodation (he estimated $378). the other costs he attributed in his affidavit have been disregarded because they are the same costs that he would incur if he spent time with x in sydney (food, entertainment, parking). the mother also offered a car with a full tank of petrol. the estimated cost of these trips of $4,068 is also within the father’s capacity. i appreciate that it is still an expense for the father, and one that he would not have to bear if x remained in sydney. but it is not an expense that would prevent him from taking up the opportunity to visit his son.
193 the care, love and commitment shown for x by so many family members was impressive. he will be loved and supported by his extended family wherever he lives.
194 the mother acknowledged the positive relationships that x has with his paternal family. an inevitable consequence of the mother’s relocation is that it will prevent the father and paternal family from having an involvement in x’s day to day events on a regular basis. however, should he relocate, x will still spend significant periods of time with the father at a place of his choosing during school holiday periods and during monthly visits. in addition, the mother offered for the father and members of the paternal family to visit him in tasmania regularly. the court is confident that the mother will continue to be proactive in encouraging and maintaining relationships with the paternal family regardless of the state he lives in.
195 the mother currently receives emotional and practical support to raise x from a range of friends and family members who live near or in sydney. certainly, her parents and brother do have the capacity to visit her in sydney. but the mother feels that she would be better supported and happier in tasmania. additional support also comes from her relationship with mr d. they have been in a relationship since late 2018 and it has been conducted by distance and with significant barriers brought about by covid-19 travel restrictions. i found mr d to be a frank and honest witness. when asked about how quickly they intended to share a home together in city e he said:
i can’t remember if we’ve actually had proper – like, we were talking about, you know, looking at places around here. but i don’t think i’ve – i can’t think off the top of my head an – an actual discussion.[95]
196 while i have no reason to doubt the strength of the relationship, and the mutual intent of the parties for the relationship to grow in the event the mother relocates, there was insufficient evidence before me to ground a finding that there exists a level of commitment to a shared life together. the relationship with mr d does however provide an additional level of incentive for the mother to relocate because he offers a further layer of emotional support that she does not currently enjoy in nsw. as was observed by ms n:
...she also has a partner, as i understand it, in tasmania. so it’s not just her family. it’s her partner. and, in my experience, you know, people with high conflict – high conflict co-parenting relationships need as much support from their family and friends as they can. so i think that’s what she was getting at, and that – as i said, that’s one factor, in my – in my reasoning, in terms of.....my feeling about the mother’s possible move to tasmania.[96]
197 the complexity of travel and changeover arrangements would be challenging in any circumstances but it was argued that the demonstrated lack of flexibility on the part of the mother will make the arrangements for the father even more difficult. the same criticism has been levelled at the father who will inevitably seek a variation to the orders from time to time.
198 the mother said she would also make x available to spend time with paternal family members visiting tasmania and i accept that she would do so. while the paternal grandmother was critical of the mother and her communications with her, i am confident that the mother would facilitate additional time in the event of visits by the paternal family.
199 the evidence of the mother led me to conclude that she will also continue to encourage a relationship between the father and x, even if she is in tasmania. i am not however as confident that the mother will allow the father the flexibility he may demand and expect. this could be addressed by allowing the father the opportunity on one occasion each school term to visit x for a longer period of time on giving of notice to the mother.
200 it was argued that x is currently enjoying a stable arrangement between his parents who live in close proximity to each other and he moves between households relatively effortlessly. a focus on this alone overlooks two significant considerations: (1) the state of the mother’s mental health and how that impacts her parenting of x into the future. (2) the long term impact of x’s exposure to the parental conflict.   the state of the mother’s mental health and how that impacts her parenting of x into the future. (2) the long term impact of x’s exposure to the parental conflict.   the long term impact of x’s exposure to the parental conflict.
201 ultimately the significant determinative factors in this case are the findings i make about the mother’s anxiety and x’s exposure to the parental conflict, and the impact that a relocation to tasmania will have on them.
202 the parties separated three years ago. the father has been aware of the mother’s mental health difficulties since 2015. he accompanied the mother to appointments with the mother’s psychologist on several occasions. he has had the opportunity to read the reports filed by both her psychiatrist (while not relied upon) and her psychologist. by the time of the hearing 12 months had elapsed since ms n’s report was released to the parties. eighteen months had also elapsed since the father consulted with ms r who made 10 treatment recommendations. the court is satisfied that the father has not changed his conduct or approach to the mother, nor has he implemented any steps that have been recommended.
203 viewed as a whole, it leaves me concerned that if the mother were to remain in sydney, there would be no material change to the father’s conduct towards her nor his ability to manage difficult situations. she would continue to face criticism from him, their conflict would continue and x would continue to be exposed to it with potential consequences that have been outlined. ms m cautioned that “ms andrews, may experience a downturn in her most stable psychiatric condition if her former partner is not cooperative or displays further aggressive behaviour.”[97]
204 but the court must consider whether a relocation to tasmania would bring any positive benefits to the mother and x.
205 i have found that the father has difficulties regulating his emotions and anger and that he did not display good insight into the impact of this on his family. he now seeks that his time incrementally increase to equal time. i cannot conclude that it would be in x’s best interests for that to happen. there is a risk that x will in the future be exposed to acts of anger and volatile outbursts whilst in the father’s care. this risk is not so unacceptable that it would lead to a court making an order for no time. however, the risks can best be mitigated by orders that do not allow for a move to x spending time with the father on a weekly basis or an equal time arrangement.
206 x is less likely to be exposed to the antipathy, hostility and anxiety between the parents on a weekly basis if he moves to tasmania. however, there were conflicting points of view on whether the move will make a material difference because x will continue to be exposed to the conflict between the parties. the father was unable to offer any coherent strategies for how he might improve his relationship with the mother. while in ms n’s view, regardless of where each of the parents live their co-parenting relationship will be minimal, and x will remain likely to be aware of the antipathy between them.
207 the father’s hostility towards the mother and inability to regulate his emotions, in x’s presence, is of concern. the father’s tendency to focus on his grievances with the mother and his “entitlements” as a father (evidenced by his application for an equal time arrangement) are not child focussed. some of the potential direct impacts on x are that he may not be an appropriate role model and x may grow to fear him or worse, that x is turned against the mother. ultimately the conclusion i reach is that a move to tasmania will remove x from the potential of exposure to the parental conflict on a regular basis.
208 should x remain in sydney the father would continue to be critical of the mother’s day to day decisions regarding x’s care. by removing x from the situation there is a chance that both distance and the father’s more limited involvement will protect him from exposure to this conflict. whilst i appreciate the father will argue that more time and more meaningful involvement is better for x, on the evidence before me i am not satisfied that this is the case.
209 a return to tasmania for the mother has a simple comfort. she would be returning to her home state, to a place where she feels secure, to a state where she will have good family support and nurturing personal relationships. but i have had to consider the possibility that the proposed relocation will result in the parties coming face to face more often via electronic communications, airport changeovers and an increase in the time the father has with x. there would be an ongoing need for the parents to communicate about travel arrangements as opposed to the more limited communication that arises if changeovers take place at school. this will induce anxiety in the mother and may not provide the respite she is hoping for.
210 the mother gave evidence that she finds the prospect of interactions with the father anxiety provoking – she reported to ms n that having the support of her parents would help to reduce the anxiety she feels about having this contact with the father and would contribute to more successful video calls.
211 allowing the mother to relocate to tasmania with x would remove the mother from the father’s monitoring of her, his criticism and the fear that this invokes in her. the mother gave evidence that she did not have the same anxiety levels when her dealings with the father were planned, scheduled or controlled. ms n observed:
...the mother – where the contact with the father is planned and anticipated and is as part of orders or part of a structure, she’s fine. but ... she is still at that sort of – that hyperalert phase of her anxiety. again, not necessarily that the father is doing anything, you know, with intent...to cause her anxiety or to cause her harm, but she’s responding to it as ... if that is happening on a regular basis, then certainly being, you know, two hours – a two-hour flight away removes that anxiety altogether and – and i think – given what i understand of the mother’s mental health, i think that would be of benefit to her.[98]
212 there was also a valid concern raised that the father will become frustrated by travel arrangements, particularly if unexpected disruptions occur. i accept that this is likely. ms n was of the view that his frustration might be managed if the parties agreed upon a yearly schedule of visits. she also suggested that the parties discuss in advance what happens if a flight is cancelled or running late:
...[y]ou have it as clearly laid out as possible how things will run...when things do go wrong there is a backup plan, and i think the father would appreciate that because that’s a very military thing as well, that, you know, you always have a plan b.[99]
conclusion
213 i find having considered, weighed and assessed the evidence and taking into account the balancing of the matters, and in particular, the best interests of the child with that of the mother’s freedom of movement that the child be permitted to relocate to tasmania.
214 i note that there was a lack of clarity around the mother’s ultimate residential location in tasmania. to avoid the prospect of further proceedings, these orders are made on the basis that hobart is the changeover location but the mother may nominate for city e to be the nominated changeover location when the parties settle on the annual schedule of visits.
215 i will make orders for x to spend time with the father in accordance with the mother’s proposal but with some minor variations which are:  the father be permitted to visit x in tasmania on one occasion each month provided it is not a month during which the tasmanian school holidays fall. this will allow x to spend time with his father on two occasions each month. it provides x with some consistency around the frequency of visits. (b) as proposed, the father may extend the tasmanian weekend time on one occasion each school term so that it commences after school thursday until before school tuesday provided he provides the mother with 21 days’ notice in writing. (c) as proposed, the mother will contribute $1,000 per annum towards the costs of x’s travel and then after that amount has been spent, the parties will share the costs equally. (d) as proposed, the mother will ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle when he is in tasmania. (e) i will include an order that the mother use her best endeavours to facilitate x spending time with paternal family members in the event that they visit tasmania, including facilitating their attendance at any extracurricular and school activities in which he is engaged. (f) the orders will require the parties to agree upon the schedule of visits for x annually, as recommended by ms n.   as proposed, the father may extend the tasmanian weekend time on one occasion each school term so that it commences after school thursday until before school tuesday provided he provides the mother with 21 days’ notice in writing. (c) as proposed, the mother will contribute $1,000 per annum towards the costs of x’s travel and then after that amount has been spent, the parties will share the costs equally. (d) as proposed, the mother will ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle when he is in tasmania. (e) i will include an order that the mother use her best endeavours to facilitate x spending time with paternal family members in the event that they visit tasmania, including facilitating their attendance at any extracurricular and school activities in which he is engaged. (f) the orders will require the parties to agree upon the schedule of visits for x annually, as recommended by ms n.   as proposed, the mother will contribute $1,000 per annum towards the costs of x’s travel and then after that amount has been spent, the parties will share the costs equally. (d) as proposed, the mother will ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle when he is in tasmania. (e) i will include an order that the mother use her best endeavours to facilitate x spending time with paternal family members in the event that they visit tasmania, including facilitating their attendance at any extracurricular and school activities in which he is engaged. (f) the orders will require the parties to agree upon the schedule of visits for x annually, as recommended by ms n.   as proposed, the mother will ensure that the father is given access to a registered motor vehicle when he is in tasmania. (e) i will include an order that the mother use her best endeavours to facilitate x spending time with paternal family members in the event that they visit tasmania, including facilitating their attendance at any extracurricular and school activities in which he is engaged. (f) the orders will require the parties to agree upon the schedule of visits for x annually, as recommended by ms n.   i will include an order that the mother use her best endeavours to facilitate x spending time with paternal family members in the event that they visit tasmania, including facilitating their attendance at any extracurricular and school activities in which he is engaged. (f) the orders will require the parties to agree upon the schedule of visits for x annually, as recommended by ms n.   the orders will require the parties to agree upon the schedule of visits for x annually, as recommended by ms n.
216 the father sought orders for a passport to issue for x and for overseas travel with x to be permitted. the icl and the mother did not propose an equivalent order. they did not consent to the order sought by the father. as no evidence was led on the issue and no submissions made, i decline to make the orders sought. that is not to say that the mother and/or the father cannot travel internationally with x in the future. simply, they will need to reach agreement on the issue.
217 the orders that i propose to make are contained at annexure d. before pronouncing the orders, i will allow the parties the opportunity to negotiate any aspect of these orders for the next 48 hours to ensure they have covered the matters contemplated. any changes can be made by consent.
218 the icl has sought an order that the parties meet the costs of the icl. there was no cost notice provided to me. there was however enough evidence put forward to show that the parties are in a financial position to afford to meet the icl’s costs.
219 an independent children’s lawyer is appointed because the court has found it is in the best interests of the child or children the subject of the proceedings, that they be independently represented (s 68l(2) of the act).
220 section 117(4)(b) confers the statutory power not to make a costs order under s 117(2) against a party if the court considers that such party would suffer financial hardship.
221 the icl has been brought into this litigation by court order and the icl had undertaken substantial activities leading to the resolution of the parenting issues. in my view it is appropriate to recognise that the costs and disbursements rendered by the icl should be met in this case in the manner contemplated by s 117(3).
222 however, the matter was before the court as a result of the mother’s application to relocate, and the father will need all available funds in order to fund his travel to tasmania. he would suffer a financial hardship if he were to not only fund his legal costs but those of the icl and then meet the costs of his and x’s travel. accordingly, i will make an order for the mother to meet the full costs of the icl. the mother should approach legal aid nsw directly in the event that she seeks a waiver or payment arrangement.
223 i make an order for the discharge of the icl.
224 relocation cases are inherently difficult because ultimately one party will feel aggrieved by the decision and feel that some of their fundamental rights are compromised. this is certainly the situation here for x’s parents. the reflections of mcguire fm (as he was then known) in hildebrand & mathisen [2012] fmcafam 1127 at [20] are worth including here:
...proposals of the parents are often finely balanced and see two otherwise good parents unable to negotiate and compromise what can be a life-changing issue for them and their child. changes in the practical nature of relationships between children and parents will inevitably result from a relocation. one parent will assume a more primary role and time with a remaining parent becomes less frequent if a relocation takes place. matters of communication, cooperation and sharing and travel come to the fore...whatever determination a court ultimately makes will almost certainly leave one of the parents... aggrieved. if a relocation of a child takes place, then the remaining parent will suffer feelings of loss and perhaps bitterness. there will need to be a significant adjustment in that parent’s own life. on the other hand, an order which effectively prevents a parent from relocating with the child will similarly cause grief, unhappiness and adjustment.
225 to the father, while i appreciate that this outcome will be bitterly disappointing for you, it does not end your relationship with x, nor the relationships he has with your family. x is blessed to have a group of adults in his life who support and love him. i am confident your bond will remain strong whether he lives in tasmania or nsw.
226 i wish x the very best for the future and thank you all for taking the time to ensure that the orders made by this court best support him and your relationships with him.
dated: 2 february 2022
annexure a
minute of orders sought by the father
parenting that in relation to the child, x born in 2015 (“presently aged 5 years and 8 months”) (the child):- parenting responsibility 1. that the parties shall have equal shared parental responsibility for making decisions in respect of the major long-term issues affecting the child. 2. that the parties shall be responsible for the day to day decisions for the child, when he is living with or spending time with that parent. time 3. that the child shall live with the respondent mother (“mother”) in sydney, nsw, 4. that the child shall spend time with the applicant father (“father”) as follows: for the first three months from the date of these orders: each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm until monday before school or 9:00am, in the intervening week on tuesday from after school or 3pm until before school or 9:00am the following day, that from one year from the date of these orders: each alternate weekend from after school friday or 3:00pm until before school thursday or 9:00am, in the intervening week after school tuesday or 3:00pm until before school thursday or 9:00am, that from the date child commences year 2 at school, the child shall spend time with each parent as follows: week about, from monday to monday in week 1 with the applicant father and monday to monday in week 2 with the respondent mother, and alternating each week thereafter, with drop off and collection to be from school on a monday afternoon (or 3pm), on the father’s day weekend, each year from after day care and/or school friday until monday before school (or 9am), 5. that order 4 be suspended on the following special occasions when the child is spending time with his mother: on the mother’s day weekend each year from friday after school (or 5pm) until monday before school (or 9am). changeover 6. if the changeover occurs at school, the parent who is to spend time with the child is to collect and drop off the child to and from school. 7. if the changeover does not occur at school the parent who is to spend time with the child shall collect the child from the other parent’s resident at the commencement of their time, with the parent dropping off the child to remain outside the residence. telephone and facetime orders 8. that each parent shall be permitted to contact the child by telephone or facetime at all reasonable times, and the other parent shall use their best endeavours to facilitate the telephone of facetime call including keeping their phone charged. 9. for the purposes of order 8, the parent who the child is living with or spending time with shall use their best endeavours to remove any multimedia or other distractions during the telephone or facetime call. additional time with maternal family 10. on one weekend each nsw school term when the child would otherwise be spending time with the father pursuant to order 4 herein, provided that: the mother gives the father 21 days’ written notice, and that the father has not made alternative arrangements for the dates requested by the mother, that the maternal grandparents, siblings, and/or the mother’s partner are travelling from tasmania to sydney, nsw to spend time with the child, then the father shall allow the child to spend time with the mother in lieu of his weekend, and order 4 is otherwise suspended for the relevant weekend. 11. in the event that the father has made alternate arrangements as contemplated by order 10(b) herein, then the father shall propose an alternate weekend. school holidays terms 1 and 2 12. from the commencement of the 2022 nsw school year, the child shall spend the term 1 and 2 school holiday period with the mother, provided that: the mother is travelling with the child to tasmania, the mother provides the father with no less than 21 days’ written notice of her intention to take the child to tasmania. 13. in the event that the mother does not travel to tasmania during the term 1 and 2 nsw school holidays, then the child shall spend equal time with the parties during the nsw school holiday period: in odd numbered years, the first half with the father and the second half with the mother, and in even numbered years for the first half with the mother and the second half with the father. term 3 14. during the term 3 nsw school holidays, the child shall spend equal time with the parties as follows: in odd numbered years, the first half with the father and the second half with the mother, and in even numbered years for the first half with the mother and the second half with the father. christmas school holiday period 15. that the child shall spend time with the parties as follows: for the 2021 christmas period and continuing each odd numbered year thereafter, for half of the school holidays with each parent by agreement, and failing agreement, for the first half with the father and the second half with the mother. for the 2022 christmas period and continuing each even numbered year thereafter for half of the school holidays with each parent by agreement, and failing agreement, for the first half with the mother and the second half with the father. information orders 16. that each party shall promptly inform the other of any serious illness or injury suffered by the child whilst in the care of the party, or any attendance upon a medical professional for serious illness/injury, including providing particulars of any treatment given or medication prescribed to the child. 17. that each party shall provide to the other with their current email address, telephone number and address within seven days from the date of these orders, and keep each other informed within 48 hours of any change to their current email address, telephone number and address. 18. that each party shall authorise the child’s school to provide to the other party copies of all notices, newsletter and letters as mainly forwarded by the school from time to time. passport and overseas 19. that each party should do all acts and things and sign all documents required to enable the issuing of a passport for the child within 14 days of receipt of the request from the other party, and the parties must ensure the passport is kept current including doing all things and signing all documents to renew the passport prior to six (“6”) months from the expiry date and meeting one half of the cost of the same. 20. that from when the child is 7 years old, each party shall be and hereby is permitted to travel with the child, outside of the commonwealth of australia (and provided that such time falls during the child’s time with that parent pursuant to these orders unless otherwise agreed in writing) on the condition that the party taking the child outside of the commonwealth of australia (“the travelling party”) provides the non-travelling party: no less than two (2) months’ notice in writing of the travelling party’s intention to take the child out of the commonwealth of australia, the following information in writing at least (3) weeks before the proposed departure date, a copy of the child’s itinerary, including departure and return information, the country or countries the travelling party and the child will be travelling to, certificate of travel insurance, the approximate days of which the child will arrive and depart each country, and telephone numbers and addresses of all proposed accommodation. the travelling party shall facilitate the child communicating by telephone and/or facetime with the non-travelling party and all reasonable times. 21. that by way of implementation of the child overseas travel: the child’s respective passport shall be held by the mother, and shall be released to the father to facilitate any booking and participate in any overseas travel including obtaining travel tickets and visas and be provided to the father either 7 days after his request in writing to the mother, or at least seven days prior to his departure with the child, and the passport shall be returned to the mother at the next changeover event immediately following the child’s return from overseas. 22. that each of the parties shall be permitted to attend at the child’s school at all times at which parents are permitted to attend, including events such as school sports days, parent-teacher interviews and alike or at any extracurricular activity which the child participates in. 23. each party shall be and hereby are restrained from doing or saying anything derogatory in the hearing or presence of the child regarding the other party or detrimental to the relationship each party each has with the child. (as per the original)
annexure b
minute of orders sought by the mother
1. that the parents shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, x born in 2015. 2. that the mother has responsibility for making decisions for the day-to-day care of the child when the child is in her care. 3. that the father has responsibility for making decisions for the day-to-day care of the child when the child is in his care. 4. that the child shall live with the mother and the mother be and is permitted to relocate the child to live in tasmania. 5. unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties, the child shall spend time with the father prior to the mother’s move to tasmania as follows: during school term time, each alternate weekend from after school on friday until the commencement of school on monday or tuesday if the monday selected is a public holiday or a pupil free day. the father is to collect the child from school on fridays and deliver the child to school on mondays or tuesdays in the case of the monday being a public holiday or pupil free day. on each tuesday from after school until 7pm. during term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday time, for one block period of six (6) nights by agreement but failing agreement from 9am the first saturday after school concludes until 5pm the following friday. 6. that, prior to the mother’s move to tasmania, changeover shall be as follows: if the time coincides with time that child is at school, then at the school, otherwise, the mother shall deliver the child to the father’s home at the commencement of his time with the child, and the father shall return the child to the mother’s home at the conclusion of his time with the child. this order (order 6) will not apply if and when the mother moves to tasmania. 7. unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties, the child shall spend time with the father following the mother’s move to tasmania as follows: during school term time, on the first weekend of each month in sydney from friday evening until the 5pm on sunday or 5pm monday if the monday selected is a public holiday or a pupil free day. with changeovers to take place at an agreed location and failing agreement at sydney domestic airport. on one further occasion each month in tasmania from after school on friday until 5pm on sunday and such time shall not occur on a consecutive weekend to the time provided for in order 7a. during term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday time, for one block period of seven (7) nights by agreement but failing agreement from the first saturday after school concludes until 5pm the following saturday. during the january school holiday time, for two separate non-consecutive periods: in 2021, from 1.00pm on the 23rd of december for seven (7) nights and another seven (7) night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1pm 10 january until 3pm on 17 january. in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00pm on the 29th of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1pm on 15 january until 3pm on 27 january. in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00pm on the 23rd of december for 12 nights and another 12 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1pm 13 january until 3pm on 25 january. for these particular periods of time spent with the father, the mother shall deliver the child to the father at the agreed location, failing agreement at sydney domestic airport, at 1.00pm on the specified day and the father shall return the child to the agreed location, failing agreement at sydney domestic airport at 3.00pm on the specified day, and dependent upon the reasonably available flights. that if changeover does not occur at school in tasmania, then changeover is to occur at the front of the hobart domestic airport or such other location as agreed between the parties in writing. 8. that for the purposes of travel costs: the cost of the child’s airfares be shared equally between the parties with the mother to make travel arrangements and advise the father of cost of the airfares and the amount to be reimbursed to the mother. reimbursement of the costs is to be made within 14 days of the request being made by the mother to the father. the costs of the father’s travel shall be borne solely by the father. the costs of the mother’s travel shall be borne solely by the mother. the costs of the mother’s nominee or delegate be borne solely by the mother. 9. at other times as agreed between the parties. 10. that on the mother’s day weekend the father’s time with the child shall be suspended. 11. if the father decides to live in tasmania, then instead of the spend time arrangements set out above the child shall spend time with the father as follows:- during school term time, pursuant to a fortnightly cycle as follows: in week 1, from tuesday from after school until before school wednesday. the father is to collect the child from after school on this tuesday and deliver the child before school commences on this wednesday. in week 2, from after school on friday until the commencement of school on monday or tuesday if the monday selected is a public holiday or a pupil free day. the father is to collect the child from school on fridays and deliver the child to school on mondays or tuesdays in the case of the monday being a public holiday or pupil free day. during term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday time, for one block period of seven (7) nights by agreement but failing agreement from 9am the first saturday after school concludes until 5pm the following saturday: during the january school holiday time, for two separate non-consecutive periods: in 2021, from 1.00pm on the 23rd of december for seven (7) nights and another seven (7) night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1pm 10 january until 3pm on 17 january. in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1pm on the 29th of december for 10 nights and another 10 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1pm on 15 january until 1pm on 25 january. in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1pm on the 23rd of december for 10 nights and another 10 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1pm 13 january until 1pm on 23 january. that changeover shall be as follows: if the time coincides with time that child is at school, then at the school, otherwise, the mother shall deliver the child to the father’s home at the commencement of his time with the child, and the father shall return the child to the mother’s home at the conclusion of his time with the child. 12. if the mother is not permitted to relocate to tasmania, the child shall spend time with the father as follows:- during school term time, pursuant to a fortnightly cycle as follows: in week 1, from tuesday from after school until before school wednesday. the father is to collect the child from after school on this tuesday and deliver the child before school commences on this wednesday. in week 2, from after school on friday until the commencement of school on monday or tuesday if the monday selected is a public holiday or a pupil free day. the father is to collect the child from school on fridays and deliver the child to school on mondays or tuesdays in the case of the monday being a public holiday or pupil free day. during term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday time, for one block period of seven (7) nights by agreement but failing agreement from 9am the first saturday after school concludes until 5pm the following saturday. during the january school holiday time, for two separate non-consecutive periods: in 2021, from 1.00pm on the 23rd of december for seven (7) nights and another seven (7) night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1pm on 10 january until 1pm on 17 january. in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00pm on the 29th of december for 10 nights and another 10 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1pm on 15 january until 1pm on 25 january. in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 1.00pm on the 23rd of december for 10 nights and another 10 night period by agreement. failing agreement from 1pm 13 january until 1pm on 23 january. that changeover shall be as follows: if the time coincides with time that child is at school, then at the school, otherwise, the mother shall deliver the child to the father’s home at the commencement of his time with the child, and the father shall return the child to the mother’s home at the conclusion of his time with the child. 13. that where the time arrangements with the father require flights to occur, the father shall provide notice two months notice of the second weekend of time with the child pursuant to order 7b. the parties shall allow for one to two hour difference in the commencement or conclusion of time, to allow for flight schedule and possible flight delays and the parties shall keep one another informed as to same. that within seven (7) days of such time occurring, the parties shall provide the relevant flight itinerary to the other party. 14. that the mother be at liberty to have a delegate or nominee attend changeover and/or travel interstate with the child and that the child shall be able to travel as an unaccompanied minor when he reaches high school, or such earlier time as agreed between the parties in writing. 15. that if the parties are residing within the same city, on the child’s birthday and the party’s birthdays as follows: if the child is in the care of the father, the mother is to spend time with the child for two hours on that day at a time agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 5.00pm until 7.00pm, if the child is in the care of the mother, the father is to spend time with the child for two hours on that day at a time agreed between the parties and failing agreement from 5.00pm until 7.00pm, the child shall spend time with the mother on the mother’s birthday, for a period of at least 2 (two) hours, if the child is not spending time with the mother. the child shall spend time with the father on the father’s birthday, for a period of at least 2 (two) hours, if the child is not spending time with the father. 16. the child communicate with the non-resident parent via telephone/video call:- at least two times a week on days and times to be agreed by the parties, on their birthdays at 5.00pm with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call, on christmas day at 10.00am with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call, on easter sunday at 10.00am with the non-resident parent to initiate the call and the other parent to facilitate the call, on father’s day, if the child is not already spending time with the father (and the father shall be entitled to change a weekend time to ensure that the child is with him on that weekend), at 10.00am with the mother to initiate the call, on the father’s birthday at 5.00pm with the mother to initiate the call, and on the mother’s birthday at 5.00pm with the father to initiate the call. 17. that neither parent shall threaten, harass, abuse, assault or denigrate the other parent or members of their family, nor allow the child to remain in the presence or hearing or a third party who is threatening, harassing, abusing, assaulting or denigrating the other parent or members of their family. 18. if the child is involved in any medical emergency the parent who has care of the child shall notify the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable. 19. that each party shall ensure the other party is kept informed as soon as is reasonably practicable of: any medical problems or illness suffered by the child whilst in their care, any medication that has been prescribed or otherwise given for the child, any specialist medical appointments with any medical doctor, psychiatrist, psychologist, counsellor or therapist regarding the child, any social, school or religious functions which the child is to attend, the telephone contact number, residential address and email address of either party, and any other matter relevant to the welfare of the child. 20. that each party is at liberty to attend at the child’s school and sporting and extra curricular events for the purposes of any function or activity normally attended by parents. 21. that each of the parents shall authorise and direct any medical practitioner, psychologist, counsellor or therapist who has consulted with or treated the child to provide both parents with any and all information. 22. that each of the parents is restrained from requesting or directing the child to convey any information or request to the other parent and shall unless in the case of an emergency communicate with the other parent by way of what’s app messaging service (as per the original)
annexure c
minute of orders sought by the independent children’s lawyer
parenting responsibility 1. that the parent/parties shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, x born in 2015 (the child). live with 2. that the child shall live with the respondent mother (“mother”), whereupon the child’s residence shall be within the sydney metropolitan area school term – spend time 3. that the child shall spend time with the applicant father (“father”) during school term as follows: for the first three months from the date of these orders: each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm until sunday at 5:00pm. thereafter for the next three months each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm until monday before school or 9:00am. thereafter from six months from the date of these orders: each alternative weekend from after school friday or 3:00pm until before school monday at 9:00am. in the intervening week after school tuesday or 3:00pm until before school wednesday at 9:00am on the father’s day weekend, each year from after day care and/or school friday until monday before school (or 9am), 4. that order 3 be suspended on the following special occasions when the child is spending time with the mother:- on the mother’s day weekend each year from friday after school (or 5pm) until monday before school (or 9am). school holidays spend time 5. that the child shall spend time with the father during school holiday periods as follows: during the shorter april, july, and september/october school holidays for eight (8) nights from the last friday of the proceedings school term immediately prior to the commencement of the school holidays, and concluding on the second saturday of such school holidays at 5pm during the summer december/january school holidays for the 2021/22 school holidays, 1. from 1pm on 23 december 2021 until 3pm on 31 december 2021 for eight successive nights, and, 2. from 1pm on 10 january 2022 until 3pm on 18 january 2022 for eight successive nights. for the 2022/23 school holidays, and each alternate summer school holidays thereafter: from 1pm on 27 december 2022 until 3pm on 17 january 2023 for twenty-one successive nights. for the 2023/24 school holidays, and each alternate summer school holidays thereafter: from 1pm on 23 december 2022 until 3pm on 13 january 2023 for twenty-one successive nights. changeover 6. if the changeover occurs at school, the parent who is to spend time with the child is to collect and drop off the child to and from school. 7. if the changeover does not occur at school the parent who is to spend time with the child shall collect the child from the other parent’s residence at the commencement of their time, with the parent dropping off the child to remain outside of the residence. telephone and facetime orders 8. that each parent shall be permitted to contact the child by telephone or facetime at all reasonable times, and the other parent shall use their best endeavours to facilitate the telephone or facetime call including keeping their phone charged. 9. for the purposes of order 8, the parent who the child is living with or spending time with shall use their best endeavours to remove any multimedia or other distractions during the telephone or facetime call. information orders 10. that each party shall promptly inform the other of any serious illness or injury suffered by the child whilst in the care of the party, or any attendance upon a medical professional for serious illness/injury, including providing particulars of any treatment given or medication prescribed to the child. 11. that each party shall provide to the other with their current email address, telephone number and address within seven days from the date of these orders, and keep each other informed within 48 hours of any change to their current email address, telephone number and address. 12. that each party shall authorise the child’s school to provide to the other party copies of all notices, newsletter and letters as mainly forwarded by the school from time to time. attendance of child’s school events 13. that each of the parties shall be permitted to attend at the child’s school at all times at which parents are permitted to attend, including events such as school sports days, parent-teacher interviews and alike or at any extracurricular activity which the child participates in. miscellaneous 14. each party shall be and hereby are restrained from doing or saying anything derogatory in the hearing or presence of the child regarding the other party or detrimental to the relationship each party each has with the child. costs 15. each party pay the costs of the independent children’s lawyer. (as per the original)
annexure d
final orders
[1] see adamson & adamson [2014] famcafc 232; (2014) flc 93-622 at 79,703.[2] transcript dated 10 june 2021, p.304, line 23.[3] transcript dated 8 june 2021, p.119, lines 16-30.[4] transcript dated 7 june 2021, pp. 53-54, lines 40 – 16.[5] at page 4 of the single expert report dated 15 june 2020 she identified it as one of the documents read by her.[6] single expert report dated 15 june 2020, paragraph 114 (“single expert report”).[7] transcript dated 7 june 2021, p.5, line 39.[8] single expert report, paragraph 23.[9] single expert report, paragraph 25.[10] affidavit of ms m filed 11 may 2021, annexure d (“affidavit of ms m”).[11] transcript dated 10 june 2021, p.328, lines 48-50.[12] transcript dated 9 june 2021, p.273 lines 31-32.[13] single expert report, paragraph 100. [14] single expert report, paragraph 101.[15] single expert report, paragraph 101.[16] single expert report, paragraph 122.[17] single expert report, paragraph 122.[18] single expert report, paragraph 102.[19] single expert report, paragraph 109.[20] single expert report, paragraph 109.[21] single expert report, paragraph 117.[22] single expert report, paragraph 121.[23] murphy j in harris & caker [2010] famca 1046 at [48].[24] affidavit of ms andrews filed 10 may 2021, paragraph 85 (“mother’s affidavit”).[25] affidavit of mr nicholson filed 6 may 2021, paragraph 33 (“father’s affidavit”).[26] father’s affidavit, paragraphs 36 and 37.[27] father’s affidavit, paragraph 50.[28] father’s affidavit, paragraphs 55 and 56.[29] father’s affidavit, paragraph 68.[30] father’s affidavit, paragraph 72.[31] father’s affidavit, paragraph 164.[32] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 84.[33] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 68.[34] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 69.[35] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 70.[36] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 72.[37] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 73.[38] father’s affidavit, paragraphs 251 and 252.[39] affidavit of ms m, annexure b.[40] father’s affidavit, paragraph 8.[41] father’s affidavit, paragraph 10.[42] father’s affidavit, paragraphs 12, 13 and 14.[43] father’s affidavit, paragraphs 24 and 25.[44] father’s affidavit, paragraphs 39 to 43.[45] father’s affidavit, paragraphs 46 and 47.[46] father’s affidavit, paragraph 52.[47] father’s affidavit, paragraph 58.[48] father’s affidavit, paragraph 96.[49] father’s affidavit, paragraph 135.[50] father’s affidavit, paragraph 202.[51] father’s affidavit, paragraph 227.[52] father’s affidavit, paragraphs 230 and 231.[53] single expert report, paragraph 25.[54] transcript dated 9 june 2021, p.286 lines 36 -38.[55] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 91.[56] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 92.[57] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 97.[58] mother’s affidavit at paragraphs 94 to 97[59] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 66.[60] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 76.[61] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 82.[62] single expert report, paragraph 123.[63] single expert report, paragraph 123.[64] transcript dated 7 june 2021, p.66 lines 37-38.[65] transcript dated 7 june 2021, p.66 lines 38-39. [66] transcript dated 8 june 2021, p.145 lines 36-46.[67] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 77.[68] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 79.[69] single expert report, paragraph 23.[70] exhibit stmi p.196.[71] transcript dated 8 june 2021, p.119 lines 20-24.[72] exhibit stmi p.196.[73] exhibit stmi p.173.[74] single expert report, paragraph 38.[75] transcript dated 7 june 2021, p.33 lines 11-14.[76] transcript dated 7 june 2021, p.69 lines 37-38. [77] see national domestic and family violence benchbook.[78] transcript dated 9 june 2021, p.287 lines 21-31.[79] transcript dated 7 june 2021, p.52 line 42.[80] transcript dated 7 june 2021, p.50 lines 37-38.[81] single expert report, paragraph 119.[82] single expert report, paragraph 124.[83] affidavit of ms m, annexure d.[84] affidavit of ms m, annexure b.[85] affidavit of ms m, annexure b.[86] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 69.[87] single expert report, paragraph 118.[88] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 149.[89] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 156.[90] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 157.[91] single expert report, paragraph 120.[92] although as the icl submitted she can rely upon the father, her friends and family in sydney.[93] transcript dated 10 june 2021, p.329 lines 40-42.[94] transcript dated 10 june 2021, p.329.[95] transcript dated 10 june 2021, p.334 lines 9-12.[96] transcript dated 9 june 2021, p.248 lines 11-16.[97] affidavit of ms m, annexure b.[98] transcript dated 9 june 2021, p.287 lines 22-32.[99] transcript dated 9 june 2021, pp. 285-286 lines 47-49.