last updated: 21 april 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
paolo & malena [2022] fedcfamc2f 81
orders
federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2)
the court orders that:
1. the applicant father has sole parental responsibility for the children: x born in 2012, and y born in 2015.
2. notwithstanding order 1, the applicant father will notify the respondent mother of any major long-term decisions which he is proposing to make for the children or either of them with as much notice as practicable, will invite and consider any response received from her in a timely fashion, and will notify her of the decision which he makes.
3. the parents will notify each other as soon as practicable of any medical emergency, diagnosis or treatment involving the children or either of them.
4. the applicant father will authorise any relevant medical practitioner to communicate with the respondent mother in relation to the children's medical matters.
5. the applicant father will authorise any school, pre-school or day care facility which the children or either of them attends to communicate with the respondent mother in relation to the children, and will authorise and direct any such school, pre-school or day care facility to provide to the respondent mother any report, photograph or other like communication, and this order is authority to any such school, pre-school or day care facility to do the things provided for in this order.
live with and spend time with arrangements during school terms
6. the children will live with the applicant father and spend time with the respondent mother during school terms on a monthly basis as follows: in each week except the week commencing the first saturday of the month, from after school/pre-school/3pm on monday until 9am or before school/pre-school on wednesday, in the week commencing the first saturday of the month, from saturday after the children's sports matches until 9am or before school/pre-school on wednesday.
7. the respondent mother is at liberty to attend at any school events or extra-curricular activities for the children or either of them which parents are generally invited to attend.
school holidaysterm holidays
8. the children spend one half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays with their parents for half of all such holidays, commencing with the applicant father in the first half in all even-numbered years, and with the respondent mother in the first half in all odd-numbered years. for the purposes of this order, the first half of the school holidays commences after school on the last day of school, and concludes at 5pm on the middle saturday. the second half of the school holidays commences at 5pm on the middle saturday and concludes at school on the first day of school.
term 4/christmas holidays
9. during the term 4/december/january school holiday period in 2021 the children will live in a week about pattern, commencing with the mother in the first week, commencing the last day of the school term and concluding at 5pm on boxing day, and with changeover thereafter to occur at 5pm each sunday except for the last sunday in the school holiday period, when the children will remain with the parent in whose care they have been in that last week.
10. on christmas day 2021, the mother will facilitate a facetime/whatsapp call with the father at 10am.
11. from and including the term 4/december/january school holiday period commencing 2022, the children will spend time with their parents on a 2 week: 2 week: 1 week: 1 week basis, commencing with the father in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter and with the mother in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter.
12. for the purposes of order 11, the first two week block will commence on the last day of the school term, and changeover will thereafter occur on the day of the week which was the last day of the school term at 5pm, and if there are any additional days of school holidays after both parents have had a block of two weeks and a block of one week, the father shall have the remaining time on the first occasion and each alternate occasion after that, and the mother on the second occasion and each alternate occasion after that.
special occasions
13. for each of the children's and parents' birthdays each year, the parent who the children are living with or spending time with on the night of those respective birthdays will facilitate a facetime/whatsapp call with the other parent at 10am on a non-school day and at 4pm if it is a school day, on the child's or parent's birthday.
14. notwithstanding anything to the contrary in these orders: the children live with the respondent mother from 7pm on the saturday that falls immediately before each mother's day until 7pm on mother's day, and the children live with the applicant father from 7pm on the saturday that falls immediately before each father's day until 7pm on father's day.
15. notwithstanding anything to the contrary in these orders, the children will live with the applicant father from 9am on good friday until 4.30pm on easter monday in years ending in an odd number, and with the respondent mother from 9am on good friday until 4.30pm on easter monday in years ending in an even number.
changeover
16. for the purposes of these orders, and unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties, changeover shall occur at the children's school or day care centre when the children are attending school/day care and at store b in suburb c on all other occasions. in the event the respondent mother does not wish to attend a face-to-face changeover with the applicant father, the respondent mother will arrange for a third party to attend changeovers on her behalf. the applicant father is at liberty to arrange for a third party to attend changeovers on his behalf.
other
17. the parents will communicate with one another in writing via the talking parents app (including email and text message) in relation to the arrangements for the children, and their care, welfare and development.
18. the parties will respond to the communication sent in the talking parents app within 24 hours of the message being sent, and will answer any reasonable question posed by the other in an appropriately detailed and business-like way.
19. ms malena born in 1984, her servants and/or agents are hereby restrained by injunction from removing or attempting to remove or causing or permitting the removal of the said children x born in 2012 and y born in 2015 from the commonwealth of australia for a period of 5 years.
20. it is requested that the australian federal police give effect to this order by placing the names of the said children on the family law watch list in force at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia and maintain the children's names on the watch list for the said period, or until the court orders its removal.
21. neither party will denigrate the other, nor allow any other person to do so, in the presence of hearing of the children or either of them.
22. the applicant father is at liberty to enrol and/or maintain enrolment for the children in extra-curricular activities, and will provide the respondent mother with all relevant details in a timely fashion, and should those extra-curricular activities fall on days the children are due to be in the respondent mother's care, the respondent mother will ensure the children are taken to these extra-curricular events.
23. within 14 days of the date of these orders, or as soon as practicable thereafter, the respondent mother will attend upon a psychologist, and will: provide the psychologist with the family report of dr d, his honour's reasons for judgment, and a copy of the final orders made in this matter, continue to attend upon and comply with the recommendations of the psychologist- including any recommendation for attendance upon a psychiatrist- for as long as the psychologist recommends., upon making the initial appointment with the psychologist, notify the applicant father of the name and contact details for the psychologist, the respondent mother will authorise and direct the psychologist to provide to the father a letter indicating whether she has complied with the aspects of this order of which the psychologist has personal knowledge, within 3 months of the date of these orders, and each 6 months thereafter.
24. in the event the psychologist recommends that the respondent mother attend upon a psychiatrist, the mother will: attend as soon as practicable upon the psychiatrist, comply with the recommendations of the psychiatrist, upon making the initial appointment with the psychiatrist, notify the applicant father of the name and contact details for the psychiatrist, authorise and direct the psychiatrist to provide to the father a letter indicating whether or not she has complied with his or her recommendations, within 3 months of the date of her attending upon a psychiatrist, and each 6 months thereafter.
25. the contravention applications filed by the father on 4 february 2019 and 7 may 2019 are discontinued, without admissions and without prejudice to his ability to file a further contravention application based on the facts alleged there in the event he alleges that the mother is in any further breach of orders of this honourable court.
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville:
introduction & overview
1 the respondent mother in these parenting proceedings, which concern the two children of the relationship (nine year old x and six year old y, either “the boys” or “the children”), made (and continues to make) extremely grave allegations against the applicant father. summarised, the allegations are that, during the relationship, the father held (a) a shotgun to the mother’s head threatening to kill her, (b) a large kitchen knife to the mother’s throat also threatening to kill her, and (c) drove at approximately 200 kilometres per hour with the mother and the children in the car, threatening to kill the whole family.[1]
2 in the course of her oral evidence, the mother also claimed that during the relationship she had been raped by the father on more than one occasion.
3 the father denied all of the mother’s allegations.
4 curiously and unfortunately, the mother never reported or even mentioned any of these very serious allegations to any of the following: (a) her psychologist, (b) domestic violence crisis services, (c) the police, (d) the local magistrates court when applying for a family violence order, (e) her previous lawyers,[2] or (f) either of two independent experts (psychologist, dr e, in june 2018, and psychiatrist, dr d, in november 2019).[3] to some of the persons mentioned, the mother said that she did give information of the assaults and threats by the father to them but, for reasons unknown, no such grave matters were recorded. indeed, as noted below, a number of the reports of the experts (personal and independent) strongly refuted the mother’s accounts. the mother went so far as to contend that the experts were professionally negligent in not recording, and/or consistently mis-recording what she said in the course of her consultation with them.[4]
5 the mother said that she made notes of the incidents that gave rise to her allegations. unfortunately again, neither the diary in which she said she recorded the events in question, nor the separate electronic records that also had some accounts of the said events, could be found or recovered.[5]
6 the mother’s stance was perhaps neatly or conveniently recorded in the following exchange:[6]
his honour: but are you suggesting effectively that mr paolo was sort of like a jekyll and hyde character?‑‑‑pardon, sorry? are you suggesting that mr paolo is effectively a jekyll and hyde character? you know, that he appears of this kind, genial, jovial fellow in these circumstances but he completely changes character in other circumstances and that he becomes this dastardly, sinister, lethal fellow?‑‑‑yes, your honour. yes. would you accept, though, that there’s nothing, for example, in either dr e’s or dr d’s reports that would support such a diagnosis of almost like a schizophrenia, that he’s this character on some times and he’s this character – a completely different character – on others? would you accept that? that there’s nothing in either of those two expert reports that suggests that there’s any such character traits in mr paolo?‑‑‑from the reports? yes?‑‑‑yes, your honour.
7 a little later in her evidence on the second day of the trial, there was the following further exchange (emphasis added):[7]
your concerns that mr paolo wants to kill you and the kids?‑‑‑well, yes, that was right at the time. yes?‑‑‑yes. so what has happened between then and now to change your mind or do you still worry about that?‑‑‑well, mr paolo does still relay some very distressing messages through the children. so do you still worry that mr paolo wants to kill you and the kids?‑‑‑i think if mr paolo had the opportunity to come to me, yes, i think he would. he would kill you and he would kill the kids?‑‑‑yes. his honour: why would he do that?‑‑‑because there’s so much resentment and there’s so much anger and, obviously, from what has happened, i still believe that he is a danger to me. and the children?‑‑‑not so much the children but myself in particular, yes.
8 to the father, to the court experts noted, and to the independent children’s lawyer (“the icl”), the boys consistently expressed a strong desire to spend more time with the father. as noted later in these reasons, such enthusiasm was, and is, inconsistent with the trauma the mother alleges the children have suffered, and continue to suffer, as a result of the father’s actions towards her, some of which (on her evidence) was committed in front of at least the older child, x.
9 among many tragedies and serious anomalies in this matter was the mother’s evidence. the mother clearly believes that the father has perpetrated serious, indeed appalling, violence against her, and that he continues to pose a grave risk to her, and now to a lesser degree, to the children. apart from her own evidence, there is no other evidence to support her remarkable and troubling claims. indeed, there is very significant, independent evidence that disproves and dispels them. the mother presents (and has done so throughout the length of these long proceedings) as a smart, studied and finely-crafted attractive/engaging, intelligent and child-focussed person. yet her evidence in so many respects bordered completely on the surreal. she would have the court believe that (a) she alone knows the truth of the father’s character, and his malevolence (towards her and the children) and deadly intent, and (b) she alone has been the source of all light and truth in the relationship and continues to be so in relation to the children. yet not only has she never told experts and authorities over a very significant period of time what she has endured but also she has been assessed by two highly qualified and experienced experts that, for example, she is either disingenuous and or delusional in her appraisals, particularly of the father. were the mother’s accounts to be believed, it has meant that the father has been such a skilful actor over such a long period that he has beguiled and hood-winked two independent experts, the icl, and the court, into believing that (i) he is not a monster, (ii) he loves and cares for his children (and that the boys adore him – they love their mother also), (iii) he has their best interests at heart, and (iv) he poses no relevant threat either to the mother or to the children.
10 for my part, i do not accept the mother’s evidence primarily because of the very significant weight of evidence against it. moreover, her account of so many events was incredible – literally. her report of so many events would require the court to make astonishing findings against the father that were not, and are not, credibly open on any piece of evidence – individually or cumulatively. it would also require the court to find that the father’s presentation and consistent narrative – over a good many years – was so contrived and misleading that he should change careers and become an actor, so convincing was he as a witness. but the mother would not, on any aspect of the evidence, countenance that she could be wrong in any way. her infallibility was complete and resolute in every respect.[8]
11 in her typically thorough way, the icl set out summarily, but in appropriate detail, relevant evidence of the parties and the findings she urged on the court. in my view, her submissions were almost sufficient by themselves to determine the parenting issues that concern the children. subject only to what follows, i agree with, accept and adopt the submissions of the icl, which are somewhat mirrored by those filed on the father’s behalf, whose submissions i also accept.
12 indeed, while the icl’s and the father’s submissions addressed directly the mother’s evidence, unsurprisingly, they each did so in slightly different ways. for example, the father’s submissions went through specific documents contained in his tender bundle, which focussed particularly upon what i will call here the “threat allegations” by the mother against the father. these related in particular to allegations (already noted) of the threat to kill the mother with a shotgun, on another occasion with a knife, and thirdly, by driving at great speed with the mother and children in the car. the documents to which the mother was taken, in my view, highlight even more graphically, how improbable and deeply unfortunate the mother’s repeated accusations against the father are. as stated in the mother’s own submissions (par.4): “the court could not, on the evidence before it, make a finding that the family violence occurred.” that is certainly, and the least, the court could and should do here. the concession by the mother’s counsel regarding the extreme and diverse allegations of family violence was proper and appropriate.
13 in the light of what follows, i strongly prefer the father’s evidence to that of the mother whenever there is any inconsistency between them. as noted in the discussion of the parties’ evidence below, the long history of alleged severe family violence (including threats to kill the mother and the children) perpetrated by the father against the mother (and sometimes said to have been undertaken in front of the children) was never reported by the mother to police, to care and protection authorities, to her psychologist, to domestic violence services (“dvcs”), or to any close friend. the father denied any and all such allegations.
14 consistent with the father’s account and contrary to the mother’s, the children strongly want to spend more time with him. the children’s consistent disposition and reports to two highly experienced report writers support the father’s much more irenic account of his relationship with the children (and with the mother for the most part) and is completely inconsistent with the mother’s account of volatility and much else set out in detail below.
15 the mother is a significantly articulate and forceful personality. at times in the course of the litigation, she was self-represented. she firmly believes without the slightest doubt that the family violence she alleges actually occurred. in my view, the evidence available to the court strongly undermines the mother’s belief and position. on the evidence, there are clear mental health issues regarding the mother. for example, in her 28th november 2019 report, psychiatrist dr d stated (at pars.111, 400 and 402 respectively) that if the mother “truly believed these [certain accusations regarding the use of poison on the boys] to be true they constituted persecutory delusions”, and that the mother’s world view was “either delusional or disingenuous.”[9]
16 regrettably and concerningly, the mother consistently refused to acknowledge any such issues. she confirmed in her evidence that, even if the boys were stopped from spending any time with her until she obtained a mental health assessment, she said that she would refuse to undertake such an examination.
17 it follows from what has just been said, and what follows, that the orders sought by the father, with which the icl agrees, are in the best interests of the boys, pursuant to s.60ca of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”).
applicant’s orders sought
1. the applicant father has sole parental responsibility for the children: x born in 2012, and y born in 2015. 2. notwithstanding order 1 above, the applicant father will notify the respondent mother of any major long-term decisions which he is proposing to make for the children or either of them with as much notice as practicable, will invite and consider any response received from her in a timely fashion, and will notify her of the decision which he makes. 3. the parents will notify each other as soon as practicable of any medical emergency, diagnosis or treatment involving the children or either of them. 4. the applicant father will authorise any relevant medical practitioner to communicate with the respondent mother in relation to the children’s medical matters. 5. the applicant father will authorise any school, pre-school or daycare facility which the children or either of them attends to communicate with the respondent mother in relation to the children, and will authorise and direct any such school, pre-school or daycare facility to provide to the respondent mother any report, photograph or other like communication, and this order is authority to any such school, pre-school or daycare facility to do the things provided for in this order. live with and spend time with arrangements during school terms: 6. the children will live with the applicant father and spend time with the respondent mother during school terms on a monthly basis as follows: 7. in each week except the week commencing the first saturday of the month, from after school/pre-school/3pm on monday until 9am or before school/pre-school on wednesday, 8. in the week commencing the first saturday of the month, from saturday after the children’s sports matches until 9am or before school/pre-school on wednesday. 9. the respondent mother is at liberty to attend at any school events or extra-curricular activities for the children or either of them which parents are generally invited to attend. school holidays: term holidays 10. the children spend one half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays with their parents for half of all such holidays, commencing with the applicant father in the first half in all even-numbered years, and with the respondent mother in the first half in all odd-numbered years. for the purposes of this order, the first half of the school holidays commences after school on the last day of school, and concludes at 5pm on the middle saturday. the second half of the school holidays commences at 5pm on the middle saturday and concludes at school on the first day of school. term 4/christmas holidays 11. during the term 4/december/january school holiday period in 2021 the children will live in a week about pattern, commencing with the mother in the first week, commencing the last day of the school term and concluding at 5pm on boxing day, and with changeover thereafter to occur at 5pm each sunday except for the last sunday in the school holiday period, when the children will remain with the parent in whose care they have been in that last week. 12. on christmas day 2021, the mother will facilitate a facetime/whatsapp call with the father at 10am. 13. from and including the term 4/december/january school holiday period commencing 2022, the children will spend time with their parents on a 2 week: 2 week: 1 week: 1 week basis, commencing with the father in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter and with the mother in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. 14. for the purposes of order 11, the first two week block will commence on the last day of the school term, and changeover will thereafter occur on the day of the week which was the last day of the school term at 5pm, and if there are any additional days of school holidays after both parents have had a block of two weeks and a block of one week, the father shall have the remaining time on the first occasion and each alternate occasion after that, and the mother on the second occasion and each alternate occasion after that. special occasions: 15. for each of the children’s and parents’ birthdays each year, the parent who the children are living with or spending time with on the night of those respective birthdays will facilitate a facetime/whatsapp call with the other parent at 10am on a non-school day and at 4pm if it is a school day, on the child’s or parent’s birthday. 16. notwithstanding anything to the contrary in these orders:   the children live with the respondent mother from 7pm on the saturday that falls immediately before each mother’s day until 7pm on mother’s day, and (b) the children live with the applicant father from 7pm on the saturday that falls immediately before each father’s day until 7pm on father’s day. 17. notwithstanding anything to the contrary in these orders, the children will live with the applicant father from 9am on good friday until 4.30pm on easter monday in years ending in an odd number, and with the respondent mother from 9am on good friday until 4.30pm on easter monday in years ending in an even number.
changeover: 18. for the purposes of these orders, and unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties, changeover shall occur at the children’s school or day care centre when the children are attending school/day care and at store b in suburb c on all other occasions. in the event the respondent mother does not wish to attend a face-to-face changeover with the applicant father, the respondent mother will arrange for a third party to attend changeovers on her behalf. the applicant father is at liberty to arrange for a third party to attend changeovers on his behalf. other: 19. the parents will communicate with one another in writing via the talking parents app (including email and text message) in relation to the arrangements for the children, and their care, welfare and development. 20. the parties will respond to the communication sent in the talking parents app within 24 hours of the message being sent, and will answer any reasonable question posed by the other in an appropriately detailed and business-like way. 21. ms malena born in 1984, her servants and/or agents are hereby restrained by injunction from removing or attempting to remove or causing or permitting the removal of the said children x born in 2012 and y born in 2015 from the commonwealth of australia for a period of 5 years. and it is requested that the australian federal police give effect to this order by placing the names of the said children on the family law watch list in force at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia and maintain the children’s names on the watchlist for the said period, or until the court orders its removal. 22. neither party will denigrate the other, nor allow any other person to do so, in the presence of hearing of the children or either of them. 24. the applicant father is at liberty to enrol and/or maintain enrolment for the children in extra-curricular activities, and will provide the respondent mother with all relevant details in a timely fashion, and should those extra-curricular activities fall on days the children are due to be in the respondent mother’s care, the respondent mother will ensure the children are taken to these extra-curricular events. 25. within 14 days of the date of these orders, or as soon as practicable thereafter, the respondent mother will attend upon a psychologist, and will: a. provide the psychologist with the family report of dr d, his honour’s reasons for judgment, and a copy of the final orders made in this matter, b. continue to attend upon and comply with the recommendations of the psychologist- including any recommendation for attendance upon a psychiatrist- for as long as the psychologist recommends., c. upon making the initial appointment with the psychologist, notify the applicant father of the name and contact details for the psychologist, d. the respondent mother will authorise and direct the psychologist to provide to the father a letter indicating whether she has complied with the aspects of this order of which the psychologist has personal knowledge, within 3 months of the date of these orders, and each 6 months thereafter. 26. in the event the psychologist recommends that the respondent mother attend upon a psychiatrist, the mother will: a. attend as soon as practicable upon the psychiatrist, b. comply with the recommendations of the psychiatrist, c. upon making the initial appointment with the psychiatrist, notify the applicant father of the name and contact details for the psychiatrist, d. authorise and direct the psychiatrist to provide to the father a letter indicating whether or not she has complied with his or her recommendations, within 3 months of the date of her attending upon a psychiatrist, and each 6 months thereafter. 27. the contravention applications filed by the father on 4 february 2019 and 7 may 2019 are discontinued, without admissions and without prejudice to his ability to file a further contravention application based on the facts alleged there in the event he alleges that the mother is in any further breach of orders of this honourable court.
respondent’s orders sought
1. that the applicant father and the respondent mother shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, x born in 2012 and y born in 2015. care arrangements 2. that unless otherwise agreed in writing, the children shall live with the parties on a week about basis with changeovers at f contact centre on wednesdays. 3. that each parent shall facilitate a facetime call between the children and the non-resident parent, with the call to be initiated by the resident parent, on sundays at 6:00pm and as otherwise requested by the children. 4. that the parent with who the children are residing will facilitate a facetime call between the children and the other parent on christmas day at 9:00am. special occasions 5. that notwithstanding the above orders, the children shall spend time with the mother at christmas time in odd years and with the father in even years, and with the mother having the first half of the care of the children for the summer holidays in odd years starting from the end of term 4, and the father having the second half in even years. school and medical matters 6. each parent shall keep the other informed of: a. the name and contact details for each of the children's doctors, health care and other treatment providers, and b. any school, education facility or extra-curricular activity provider for the children. 7. the parties shall authorise any relevant medical practitioner to communicate with the other parent in relation to the children’s medical matters and this order authorises each parent to communicate with the children's medical practitioners in relation to the children’s medical matters. 8. the parents will notify each other as soon as practicable of any medical emergency, diagnosis or treatment involving the children or either of them. 9. the parents will authorise any school, pre-school or daycare facility which the children or either of them attends to communicate with the other parent in relation to the children, and each parent will authorise and direct any such school, pre-school or daycare facility to provide to the other parent any report, photograph or other like communication, and this order is authority to any such school, pre-school or daycare facility to do the things provided for in this order. 10. both parents are at liberty to attend at any school events for the children or either of them which parents are generally invited to attend and are permitted to be within 100m of each other during any such activity. 11. each parent will notify the other within 24 hours of the event if they intend to attend any school event. communication 12. the parents will communicate with one another in writing via the talking parents app (including email and text message) in relation to the arrangements for the children, and their care, welfare and development. 13. the parties shall respond to the communication sent in the talking parents app within 24 hours of the message being sent. 14. neither party will denigrate the other, nor allow any other person to do so, in the presence of hearing of the children or either of them. 15. that the parties shall be restrained by injunction from discussing the proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to or matters relating to allegations of family violence with or in the presence or hearing of the children or any of them and from permitting any other person to do so. 16. the parents are restrained from changing the children's school without written agreement from the other parent in the talking parents app. travel 17. that neither parent shall take the children overseas without an order of the court.
the applicant father’s evidence
18 the father’s oral evidence was relatively limited both in duration and scope of issues addressed. summarised, his evidence was as follows.
19 the father confirmed that since december 2019, the children have been living with the parents in a week-about arrangement. he confirmed also that his relationship with the children had continued to grow and improve over the period of time since the consent orders of 2019.[10] this was in circumstances where, as a result of the mother’s severe allegations against him, for some time, the father was spending only supervised time with the boys. the father confirmed that he was asking the court to change the current arrangements that had been in place for more than a year and a half at the time of the trial. he said that the boys still wanted to spend more time with him notwithstanding the week-about arrangement, which he also confirmed was going relatively well. he acknowledged that if the court acceded to his request for the boys to spend more time with him, and conversely less time with their mother, the children would likely miss their mother to some degree.[11]
20 the father said that one of the reasons he is seeking a significant change in the living/spend time with arrangements is because the parents, on his account, cannot effectively communicate. he said that it was pretty much a “one-way street” because the mother does not, or refuses to, engage with him regarding the welfare of the children. this is so notwithstanding the use of a “parenting app.” further, he confirmed that outside of his attempts to communicate with the mother via that app, he has no communication with her.
21 the father was shown a very significant number of printed out messages between the parties. some of the messages he was shown were replicated in the tender bundle.[12] in my view, they showed, over a reasonable period of time, quite reasonable communication between the parties. on the face of these alone, the father’s contention that the mother did not respond to inquiries by him was not supported. that said, some of the “responses” were simply or directly to the effect that his inquiry should be directed to her lawyers [at the time]. put another way, the communication evidenced by these “messages” taken from the parenting app was decidedly “spare.” thus:[13]
and so there’s no, actually, answer required because there’s nothing. you’re just providing her with information so she knows dates and times and things?‑‑‑yes. yes. so you’re sending her information and she’s acknowledging receipt of that information?‑‑‑yes. that’s a fair characterisation? and if this is the only method of communication that you have, if you don’t talk in person, you don’t send text messages, you don’t send emails – all of that’s correct, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes. no emails, no text messages, no in person. this is the method of communication?‑‑‑yes.
22 various other issues relating to “communication” were canvassed, such as the mother’s ongoing difficulties in getting information (on her account) from one or more of her various lawyers, or regarding the quality of sleep the boys were getting. respectfully, and with no criticism intended, not much was gained by traversing these and similar matters. perhaps this was simply a reflection that, as all knew at the trial (but never formally stated), the weight and moment of the evidence clearly indicated that the “main game”, so to speak, was patently on the mother’s evidence, as well as on the assessments of the experts.
23 the father maintained that he denied the mother’s allegations of family violence, including when she sought a family violence order in the local magistrates court, which was granted on a “without admissions” basis. the father consented to this order.[14] he was taken through a range of specific allegations. given the gravity of them, it is as well to set them out in full, thus:[15]
at various parts of your evidence, both in your affidavit and in what you told both of the different family reporters, so dr e and dr d, you have categorically denied that you’ve ever behaved violently towards ms malena or the children, that’s correct, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes, correct. yes. and you say that you’ve never acted in a way that’s controlling?‑‑‑no. right. so ms malena makes a number of allegations. i’m going to give you the opportunity just to quickly respond to each of them, because i ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ understand your overall position being that it just didn’t ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑didn’t happen. ‑ ‑ ‑ occur. have you ever locked her and the children in the laundry?‑‑‑never. have you ever threatened to drive into a pole?‑‑‑no. you ever told her that, if she left you, you would kill her and the children?‑‑‑no. you’ve never gone through her phone?‑‑‑no. have you ever gone through her phone bill to see who she had been calling?‑‑‑no. no – not even to see how much she had been spending?‑‑‑no. no. you’ve never asked her to tell you what she had been telling her psychologists?‑‑‑no. no? never threatened to kill her in her sleep?‑‑‑no. have you ever coerced her into performing oral sex on you?‑‑‑no. no? you say you didn’t throw a drink on her at the wedding in 2017?‑‑‑no. and you’ve never spoken to your parents after separation telling them how you wanted to kill her?‑‑‑no. so that’s primarily, as i understand it, the allegations that she made in relation to the family violence, except for there’s also an incident about a knife, so i will just ask you some slightly different questions about that. is it your understanding that, when ms malena says that – and i just want to understand this in relation to making sure i’ve got your evidence correctly – when ms malena says that you’ve threatened her with a knife, what type of knife do you understand that she is talking about, or do you not know?‑‑‑i do not know. she does make reference to a large kitchen knife. kitchen knife. there’s also a reference in the material to a stanley knife as well, isn’t there?‑‑‑yes. yes. do you carry a stanley knife for work?‑‑‑for work and it stays in the van. it stays in the van?‑‑‑yes. so the stanley knife never would have come into the house with you?‑‑‑not my work one. but yes, no. no. the mother says you’ve threatened her with a knife on multiple occasions in 2017, so it’s your evidence that that has never occurred?‑‑‑never occurred. yes?‑‑‑no. have you ever had an altercation, either verbal or physical, with anybody at your workplace?‑‑‑no. no? and you understand, don’t you, that the mother says you once threatened to throw an employee – and that employee is unnamed so i can’t give you that name – off the 10th floor of a work site, you understand that she has made that allegation?‑‑‑yes. yes. and you say that didn’t happen?‑‑‑no. right. you say you’ve never had a gun licence?‑‑‑never. is that correct?‑‑‑no. have you ever owned a gun?‑‑‑no. no? have you ever borrowed one from ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑no. ‑ ‑ ‑ someone else? and have you ever held a gun ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑no. ‑ ‑ ‑ mr paolo? never held a gun?‑‑‑no. have you ever threatened to say anything to her family or to have threatened her family if she left you?‑‑‑no. no. his honour: and you’ve never threatened that you would make her a pair of concrete boots?‑‑‑no. dr leslie: i’ve left that one out, your honour, thank you. so you make a submission at paragraph 17 of your affidavit that you believe that making what you say are untrue allegations against you – and this is your words – “impacts her ability to encourage my relationship with the children”, you recall putting that at paragraph 17 of your affidavit?‑‑‑yes.
24 as the above section from the transcript also makes clear, part of the father’s case was that the mother’s actions and attitude towards him undermined (or had either the object or potential) to undermine his relationships with the children. this was put to him directly:[16]
... you say there have been times that the children have said things to you that make you concerned that their mother is trying to undermine their relationship with you?‑‑‑yes. she makes the same allegations about you saying things to the children about her that are unpleasant, doesn’t she?‑‑‑yes. you don’t say there’s actually any problem with your relationship with the children, though, do you?‑‑‑no. and if she’s trying to undermine your relationship with the children, fundamentally, she’s just doing a very bad job, isn’t she?‑‑‑yes. and the mother has made similar allegations against you since separation, hasn’t she?‑‑‑yes. she has made them to the police?‑‑‑yes. she has made them to the magistrates court?‑‑‑yes. she has made them to this court?‑‑‑yes. she has made them again in a subsequent fvo to the magistrates court?‑‑‑yes. yes. and she has repeatedly made them in affidavits, including her most recent trial affidavit, hasn’t she?‑‑‑yes. yes. and you say these things just didn’t happen?‑‑‑yes.
25 it followed from this line of questioning that, be the allegations true or false, the mother plainly believes them to have occurred. the father accepted that it was a possibility that the mother fervently believed the incidents she detailed against the father actually occurred.[17]
26 the father confirmed that (a) he can only control the time with the boys when they are with him, and (b) it was (in my words) to minimise the risk to the children being exposed to the mother’s [ongoing] inaccurate if not delusional claims against the father that he sought their time with her to be reduced. in his words, “to lessen the blow”.
27 working with relatively little or modest material, the mother’s counsel pressed the father about the strength of the mother who continues to facilitate the children’s time with the man she believes to be something of a monster who has perpetrated gross acts of violence against her.[18] he readily agreed that the children loved their mother, that she loves and cares for them, and that they have a strong bond with her.[19]
28 the father confirmed that, thus far, there had been no discussion with the mother regarding what secondary school the boys would attend. this was in the context, among other things, where, on an earlier occasion the mother had unilaterally, and without prior notice to the father, changed x’s school. this occurred, the mother said, to deal with an issue of bullying about which the principal of the school at the time had no knowledge.
29 there was much discussion, rarely very productive, about issues concerning hand-over – who would/could attend and the like. i do not need to canvass this material save to note that there was – unsurprisingly – a difference in the views of the parents as to whether the children coped (or even liked) using the contact centre for changeovers. this issue and related matters were also traversed briefly with the icl – again which i need not detail further here.[20]
30 the father confirmed that the boys have a close and affectionate relationship with the paternal grandparents, which was recorded in the reports of dr e and dr d.[21]
31 mr paolo’s evidence was straight-forward and uncomplicated. he was a genial, under-stated witness with no discernible “agenda”. he was child-focussed. i have no reason to doubt his evidence. i accept his denials of the grave allegations levelled against him by the mother. among other things, his evidence was strongly supported by the reports from dr e and dr d.
the respondent mother’s evidence
32 the mother’s oral evidence was rather more complex, convoluted and relevantly more challenging than was the father’s. a regular feature in family law litigation readily on display here was a witness (here the mother most particularly) not answering the question asked and otherwise giving a response that simply confirmed her earlier affidavit evidence. as summarily as possible, it was as follows.
33 an early area of contest and general difficulty regarding the mother’s evidence concerned her allegation that the father had attempted (and or threatened) to kill her (on different occasions) with a shotgun, and at a different time, with a large kitchen knife. a couple of examples from her evidence is instructive on multiple levels, thus:[22]
... you wouldn’t be asking the court to make orders for equal shared parental responsibility and equal time if it was true that – and this is at paragraph 89(l) of the mother’s trial affidavit – it was true that mr paolo put a shotgun to your head and said, “i will kill you like a pig.” you wouldn’t be asking the court to make those orders if that was true, would you?‑‑‑yes. his honour: why?‑‑‑no. i’m sorry. no. sorry. sorry. you’re now saying no?‑‑‑sorry, can you re-ask the question? dr behrens: yes?‑‑‑sorry. you wouldn’t be asking the court to make orders for equal shared parental responsibility and equal time if it was true that mr paolo put a shotgun to your head and said, “i will kill you like a pig”?‑‑‑he did put a shotgun to my head. his honour: no, sorry, that’s not the question. just try and listen to the question and answer yes or no if you can. dr behrens: you wouldn’t be asking the court to make orders for equal shared parental responsibility and equal time if it was true that mr paolo put a shotgun to your head and said, “i will kill you like a pig”, would you?‑‑‑no. so are you saying that it’s not true now that mr paolo put a shotgun to your head and said, “i will kill you like a pig”?‑‑‑no. it’s true that he did put a shotgun to my head. well, so that bit is true, you’re saying?‑‑‑yes. and you’re also saying it’s true that you’re asking for an order for equal shared parental responsibility and equal time?‑‑‑yes. and i’m putting it to you quite directly that those two things are totally inconsistent. you agree or disagree?‑‑‑disagree. his honour: why?‑‑‑because the children have been spending time for the last year and a half in the separate care – the family violence was on myself and the children. now that we are separated, and even though it’s not the best of the situation, um that was the past and that happened to me. and just changing it now from what it has been is not going to alleviate the fact that that actually happened in our household. dr behrens: ms malena, if someone had done that to you or to any other person, that person should be in jail, do you agree?‑‑‑yes, of course. and that person should certainly not see their children, do you agree?‑‑‑yes. i do agree. and so by coming to this court and saying you want orders for equal time and equal shared parental responsibility, i put it to you that what flows from that is that you must not believe that mr paolo put a shotgun to your head and said, “i will kill you like a pig.” you must not believe that?‑‑‑no, i disagree. so you do believe that? you do believe that mr paolo put a shotgun to your head and said, “i will kill you like a pig”?‑‑‑yes, i do. yes. his honour: and you also heard the father’s evidence earlier today that he doesn’t own and has never owned a gun or pistol of any sort, yes?‑‑‑yes. but you say that he just happened to have a shotgun?‑‑‑yes. that he went and got it, did he, or did he just have it lying around or ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. he did. i didn’t know where it came from. all i know it was in my home. dr behrens: i’m going to be asking you in some detail about these allegations and what you have and haven’t reported and showing you various documents covering a period of time. just for the moment, though, i want to put three other propositions to you. you wouldn’t be asking the court to make these orders if mr paolo had raised a large kitchen knife to your throat on several occasions in the kitchen in front of the children saying, “it would be nice to slice you up, piece of shit.” that’s paragraph 97 of the mother’s trial affidavit, your honour. again, you wouldn’t be asking the court to make orders for equal shared parental responsibility and equal time if that was true, would you?‑‑‑mmm. no? is that what you said?‑‑‑can you ask the question again, please? it’s exactly the same as the last one, except i substituted the shotgun example with this example. mr paolo had raised a large kitchen knife to your throat on several occasions in the kitchen in front of the children, saying, “it would be nice to slice you up, you piece of shit.” paragraph 97 of your trial affidavit. if that was true, or if you believed it was true, you wouldn’t be seeking the orders you’re seeking now, would you? again, someone who did that should be in jail and they should never see their children, do you agree?‑‑‑yes, i do agree. and is that where you think mr paolo should be?‑‑‑i do think that’s where he should be.
34 there were similar exchanges regarding the mother’s allegation that the father drove at over 200 kilometres per hour with the children and her in the car while threatening to kill the whole family.[23]
35 the mother was asked about the matters set out in dr d’s report to the effect that the mother had a long history of mental health difficulties, and dr d’s assessment that the mother’s serious assertions about the father indicated that she was either disingenuous or delusional. the mother denied all of these matters.[24]
36 the mother was asked to explain how she could reconcile, on the one hand, the severe allegations against the father, which acts she remained adamant the father had actually committed against her, and on the other, still basically making the children available to spend time with the father. the mother’s responses were as follows (emphasis added):[25]
and, again, if those things actually happened, including some of them in your children’s presence or involving a threat to your children, how can you possibly contemplate an order for equal time or indeed any time for mr paolo with the children?‑‑‑because there was a period of time where there were supervised visits and time where it gradually obviously progressed. so, what, that means we forget about everything ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑no. ‑ ‑ ‑ all these terrible things he did?‑‑‑no. you say he did. no? well, can you explain it? because i’m sure his honour is baffled and i certainly am?‑‑‑well, unfortunately living in domestic violence, it’s actually hard when you’re isolated and scared for your life each and every day and you try to make things work and support each other. but obviously you’re scared for your life, that’s why. how does that explain why you’re seeking the orders that you’re seeking that you ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑well it’s not that i’m seeking – obviously as time has progressed and i have put submissions forward in regards to our parenting we’ve – for the last year or so, you know, the children have expressed that they want to spend equal time with each other. so, moving forward, obviously in the interests of the children and we’ve got – i’ve got my violence order in place that keeps the safety on myself. it’s just moving forward. it’s moving forward. and forgetting about or trying to put behind you that the father of your children put a shotgun to your head and said, “i will kill you, you pig”?‑‑‑it’s not forgetting. it’s moving forward. because i’m alive and i’m here and i got out when i could. and i saved myself and my children at that time. i might take you back because you said that you got some assistance just before you separated from mr paolo. some assistance to escape from the domestic violence, is that right?‑‑‑yes. that’s correct. and you went to – who did you get assistance from?‑‑‑it was one of the – obviously on the phone line. my psychologist actually referred me on due to the conversations that we had. and then it was the contact – the client contact when you ring through. so, what, was that the domestic violence crisis service?‑‑‑yes. yes. so you had a good relationship with your psychologist, you felt you could tell her things?‑‑‑yes.
37 the mother confirmed that her psychologist at this time was ms g, whom she trusted, and with whom she would have shared these terrible incidents. curiously and unfortunately, the psychologist recorded no such grave events. by reference to the psychologist’s clinical notes from the time, the following exchange should be noted (emphasis added):[26]
and you will see that she is talking with you about your family situation. you will see that you reported to her:
ms malena described a difficult family situation particularly involving her husband’s mother. she reported that after years of the mother-in-law being over-involved in their family life and taking no notice of ms malena’s preference in care for the two young children, particularly the oldest, disharmony has grown....
and then if you turn over the page, you were asked to talk about your intimate relationships:
things have deteriorated in the marriage because of the situation described above. she reported her husband as being saying ‘this is toxic, i can’t live with you anymore if you don’t change’. wants to know how to make it better.
and then summary of the case on the next page, so 258. can you look at the next page 258? this is where they seem to be summarising the situation:
problems with ms malena’s extended family of in-laws are creating difficulties in her relationship with her husband and to a lesser extent with her children, especially her oldest son.
okay. so you can see there that that’s your first session with the psychologist. and you haven’t said anything, have you, about any violence towards you by mr paolo, have you?‑‑‑we briefly spoke about it, i don’t know why it’s not in her notes. so you briefly spoke about having a shotgun put to your head, did you? did you tell her about that at the first appointment?‑‑‑no, that wasn’t at the first appointment. okay. when did you tell her about that? just have a look through the notes and see where you can find it? are you up to session 4? so session 4 is on page 262. can you see at the bottom of that page it says:
ms malena has made reports of a situation at home that she feels threatened although there never has been any actual physical violence towards her or the children.
remember saying that? session 5, nothing about a gun or anything else really significant there. can you see anything in the notes where you make reference to any one of those three allegations that i have referred to so far?‑‑‑in session 2. what do you say there?‑‑‑where she – that’s that i disagree with that comment where she says:
ms malena reported that she may be at risk of violence or harm, verbal and emotional, from her partner and his family. she denied any history ‑ ‑ ‑
any history of physical violence?‑‑‑
...violence. however reported that her partner sometimes stands over her and can be very verbally abusive at times.
well that’s ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑and she put me in touch with the domestic violence service ‑ ‑ ‑ yes, yes. we will talk ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. about them in a second. yes. so that doesn’t involve any disclosure of any of those things that i’ve put to you there, does it?‑‑‑no, she hasn’t disclosed that here. and that – and here she also we made contact with the domestic violence support and that’s where we also organised an emergency bag. so you’re saying, are you, do you seriously believe that if you had told ms g any of those three things that i put to you at the beginning, that she would have not written them down specifically?‑‑‑i can’t comment on her notes. so, what, you say you did tell her about those things?‑‑‑yes, i did tell her about those things. you told her – so you told her you had a shotgun held to your head, did you?‑‑‑yes, i did. you told her that mr paolo had raised a large kitchen knife to your throat in front of the children and said:
it will be nice to slice you up, you piece of shit.
?‑‑‑yes, i did. you told her that?‑‑‑yes. and you told her that once mr paolo had driven at over 200 kilometres an hour with you and the children in the car and said, “i will kill you all”, did you tell her that?‑‑‑yes, i did tell her that. and for some reason she just hasn’t written those things down?‑‑‑yes. did you get a visit from care and protection after that at any time?‑‑‑no, i didn’t. so we can assume then, i suppose, that ms g didn’t make any report to care and protection about issues of safety for the children? you didn’t hear anything about a care and protection ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑no, i didn’t hear anything about that, no. investigation?‑‑‑she was very frightened for me. she was very frightened for you, was she?‑‑‑yes.
38 there were similar discussions regarding other serious events not recorded by the mother’s psychologist at the time, which i do not need to detail.[27] likewise, the mother confirmed that when her psychologist, ms g, referred her to the domestic violence crisis service, whom she consulted just over the phone, those discussions included (a) the mother referring to the serious allegations against the father (e.g. threatening the mother with a shotgun, a large knife, and driving at very high speed), but (b) no such matters were recorded in the notes from that service.[28]
39 the mother agreed that she would have put such extreme events in her application for a family violence order (“fvo”) in early 2018, but no such events were recorded in that application. she said that she told her lawyer at the time about them.[29] the transcript from the proceeding for the fvo was available and sections of it were put to the mother. there was a reference to a gun in that matter but nothing relating to events of the kind alleged here.[30]
40 the mother was next taken to the original documents filed on her behalf in this court in the current proceeding, the notice of risk in particular. there was no reference to the three grave incidents (i.e shot gun, large knife, and excessive speed driving) in that notice of risk, which one should have reasonably expected to see recorded.[31] the first time there was any mention of these incidents was in submissions filed by the mother on 4th july 2018.
41 properly and fairly, the mother was confronted directly with the lack of record of her allegations by so many persons who would have, and should have, noted – indeed highlighted – the mother’s extreme claims:[32]
and i don’t know whether you’re lying or whether you really believe it and it’s going to be very hard for his honour to figure that out. but those documents simply do not support any of those three allegations. and, i would say, others that you have made. do you accept that?‑‑‑no.
42 the mother confirmed that she had no other person on affidavit to support her claims and contentions.[33]
43 the mother further contended that the so-called “nesting arrangement” for the children immediately post-separation (whereby the children remained in one residence and the parents moved in and out of it) was something that was forced upon her by the father. indeed, she said that she was “threatened” by the father into agreeing to it.[34]
44 again the mother was taken to a range of messages passing between the parents that were collected in the father’s tender bundle. on their face, those messages did not indicate any threats at all, and in fact, they were not only perfectly apposite but positively polite and engaging. the dissonance between the claims and the mother’s responses in court are clear from many places including the following:[35]
and will you agree with me that those text messages are totally inconsistent with your evidence that this was an arrangement you had been forced into against you will and in which you felt very unsafe? do you accept that from me?‑‑‑no, i don’t. okay. ..... his honour: so how are they not inconsistent? because the messages seem to be light, engaging, no obvious difficulties?‑‑‑they’re light but – well because obviously i was scared at that time and i didn’t know what way out i had and i was obviously trying to make things work for the children. dr behrens: so you were scared at that time but you left your tiny children, because they were pretty tiny then, with their father for a week at a time, including going to sydney, nonetheless, is that right?‑‑‑that was a special occasion because my cousins came from overseas. so you weren’t scared because it was a special occasion?‑‑‑i was scared. so you went to sydney but you were scared? were you scared that mr paolo would do something to the children? you’re either lying or you’re deluded, ms malena. and ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: sorry. was there an answer to the question that was posed? that you were scared but you still left the kids with their father?‑‑‑yes. you don’t see there’s any mutual inconsistency there?‑‑‑no, i don’t think so. why?‑‑‑why? yes?‑‑‑because at the time i was scared and i didn’t know what to do. the text messages don’t sound of someone who’s scared?‑‑‑well, because i was trying to diffuse the situation because things – there was a lot of animosity at the time between mr paolo and myself. but there’s no suggestion, is there, that he has ever harmed or ever – during the relationship or post the relationship – that he had ever hurt the children, is there? you say that the problems were basically just as between the parents, yes?‑‑‑yes, there was. and then also with the children when he would get extra aggressive, he would be aggressive towards the children. but i was usually the buffer in between. dr behrens: and in fact you also say that the children were there when he held the knife to your throat and that they were in the car when he drove 200 kilometres threatening to kill you. so you do say there was violence towards the children, don’t you?‑‑‑well, yes. i want to put this to you and i don’t know quite how you’re going to answer the question and it may involve perhaps you taking these text messages home with you overnight, or something like that, but if you read those text messages from 12 january 2017 until that begging message on 28 february 2018, i would suggest to you that they can be characterised by loving, considerate, kind messages both from you to mr paolo and from mr paolo to you. there is not a single swear word in there. just i don’t expect you to accept that without looking at them. but would that surprise you if that was the case, given how you have characterised the way he communicated with you?‑‑‑well, no, because he – behind closed doors that’s the way he communicated to me on the phone, not through writing obviously.
45 a number of the sms messages between the parents were read to the mother. all of them were very friendly, none of them were threatening. then followed this important series of responses from the mother, some of which were noted earlier in these reasons:[36]
i’m asking you about when you say he held a shotgun to your head. you said it was in may?‑‑‑yes. if you look at all those messages for may there’s not a single one that suggests anything other than a loving, supportive husband and a loving, supportive wife. do you agree with me?‑‑‑yes, i was a loving, supporting wife. his honour: but are you suggesting effectively that mr paolo was sort of like a jekyll and hyde character?‑‑‑pardon, sorry? are you suggesting that mr paolo is effectively a jekyll and hyde character? you know, that he appears of this kind, genial, jovial fellow in these circumstances but he completely changes character in other circumstances and that he becomes this dastardly, sinister, lethal fellow?‑‑‑yes, your honour. yes. would you accept, though, that there’s nothing, for example, in either dr e’s or dr d’s reports that would support such a diagnosis of almost like a schizophrenia, that he’s this character on some times and he’s this character – a completely different character – on others? would you accept that? that there’s nothing in either of those two expert reports that suggests that there’s any such character traits in mr paolo?‑‑‑from the reports? yes?‑‑‑yes, your honour.
46 the mother took home overnight during the trial the printed out copies of the sms messages about which she was questioned the previous day. she was resolute in her insistence that the messages did not indicate the true nature and character of the father. thus:[37]
and yesterday i put it to you that those text messages reflect nothing other than communications between a loving, caring and supportive wife and a lovely, caring and supportive husband. having had a look at the text messages, do you now agree with me?‑‑‑no, i don’t agree with you. okay. so can you tell his honour why not?‑‑‑because as i mentioned yesterday, i am supportive but during these toxic domestic violence relationships, obviously, there is an obligation and – to diffuse and to obviously respond in a certain way to satisfy the other person that is obviously demanding, that is demeaning, and that is obviously looking at every move you make and how you respond to them, to see whether or not you love them or care for them in that sense. so, yes, i am supportive. and i think you said that yesterday. yes, the text messages show you as a loving, caring, supportive wife. i put it to you now quite clearly that the text messages show that mr paolo was a loving, caring and supportive husband. the text messages?‑‑‑yes, via – yes, the text messages. so you can see that the text messages show that?‑‑‑but the actions speak differently. okay. but you say that something was going on behind the scenes that we can’t see in those text messages?‑‑‑yes, absolutely. and why would mr paolo – he was only communicating with you, wasn’t he? why would he have an interest in portraying himself in a way different from how he was in text messages with you?‑‑‑because that is the way mr paolo behaved. one minute it was loving and caring, the next minute it was aggravated and violent. it just depended on his mood. well, you didn’t really answer my question but i think you’ve agreed with me that the whole of those text messages – which are the text messages in 2016, up to the beginning of 2017 – in not one of those text messages do we see mr paolo being as you described him then. do you agree with that?‑‑‑i do agree with that but ‑ ‑ ‑ so ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ in the same ‑ ‑ ‑ so ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑but, no, no, in the same token ‑ ‑ ‑ no. no, you have answered my question. i will now ask you another question. so how can it possibly be the case that mr paolo is being this, if you like, jekyll and hyde character when every single text message shows that he is not?‑‑‑well, that’s just through text message. behind closed doors, it’s a different story, and that’s how ‑ ‑ ‑ so again ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ these narcissists generally operate. so you say mr paolo is a narcissist, do you?‑‑‑yes, i do. and you know that he has been assessed by dr e?‑‑‑yes. you know that he has been assessed by – she’s a psychologist. you know he has been assessed by dr d?‑‑‑yes. and you say that – and you know that they haven’t diagnosed him with any kind of personality disorder or unusual personality, don’t you?‑‑‑yes. and so do you say you know better than them mr paolo’s character?‑‑‑yes, i do because i lived behind those four walls. you heard mr paolo’s evidence yesterday, didn’t you?‑‑‑yes. you will agree with me that he presented as a gentle, concerned, child-focused father?‑‑‑no, i don’t agree. so what did he say yesterday that made you think that he was – or that you would say showed he was other than a gentle, child-focused, devoted father?‑‑‑well, in terms of the commentary regarding the children not liking to spend time with me, not wanting to speak to me, that there’s derogatory and profanities on a weekly – which i do not engage in at all. i actually encourage the relationship between mr paolo and the children. i don’t speak of any ill-mannered or derogatory comments in regards to anything between us. ms malena, you must have been in a different courtroom from me yesterday if that’s what you say mr paolo’s evidence reflected?‑‑‑well, to me that’s what it reflected.
47 the mother was insistent that the father’s evidence was [deliberately] misleading to the court.[38]
48 in addition to the multiple instances of the lack of recording by lawyers, a psychologist, a psychiatrist, and others, of the events alleged by the mother against the father, the court put to the mother the singular absence of any recorded trauma by the children about any of these events, and that they consistently seek to spend more time with the father. contrary to any such recording or assessment by multiple experts, the mother insisted that the boys, and x in particular, regularly exhibited signs of trauma from past and ongoing events.[39] see, for example, the following:[40]
his honour: so coming back to my question, would you accept, though, that in terms of the reports that i’ve referred to and in terms of the comments made by the icl in her dealings with the kids, that they’re bright, happy, enthusiastic and very keen to spend time with their dad? they say also in the reports that they’re very keen to spend more time with their dad, and there’s no indication anywhere of the trauma that you’re referring to. would you accept that that’s what the evidence from these sorts of reports – well, these two reports and the comments by the icl – suggest?‑‑‑i do accept that that’s what the reports relay but as i’ve said, when i see the children it’s – it’s quite different to what they relay to me. but you’re not suggesting, though, are you, that the children are either being coached or of their own volition that they’re adept at presenting two different characters? that there’s the character that they’re bright, bubbly, etcetera, with their dad but with you they’re these – i won’t ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑no, no. i won’t say quivering wrecks but they’re these traumatised little boys?‑‑‑well, i wouldn’t say that they’re – they have fun and they’re bright and they’re energetic, but also there is that – because i’m the mother, there is that side where they – for that security. so i would say they enjoy – to me, they like equal time with both of us. they enjoy seeing both of us equally each week. they look forward to seeing us both, is what i would say. yes, whether it’s coached or not, look, there have been comments made from the children but that’s – that’s not up to me whereas to how they feel. just that you keep referring to this trauma that either they have and/or that they keep presenting with, and i’m just looking for – or simply noting that in the evidence that’s before the court, apart from your evidence, there’s nothing from the experts and there’s nothing from the icl about the manifestations of any of that trauma?‑‑‑interestingly enough. sorry?‑‑‑i said interestingly enough. there’s more than a few interesting things in this one, indeed....
49 the mother confirmed that if the court required her to undergo a psychiatric assessment before she could spend any time with the children other than supervised she would refuse to undertake it. she was adamant that such an assessment was not necessary.[41]
50 not for the first time the court returned to the lack of recording by the mother’s psychologist, over quite a number of sessions, of her dramatic accounts of violence against her by the father (emphasis added):[42]
how would you reconcile a clinical psychologist, having been told, you say, about a threat to kill you and kill the children, and she says:
ms malena has some concerns around her husband and his family.
would you accept that there’s a fairly significant disconnect between what you say you told the psychologist and what’s recorded there?‑‑‑yes, but what i can say, your honour, is that was explicitly told to the psychologist ‑ ‑ ‑ no, i understand?‑‑‑yes. you know, that was your evidence yesterday, but here you had multiple sessions with a psychologist who is not recording any of these – what might be termed extreme risks. none of them are recorded. that would suggest, would it not, either that what you say you told the psychologist was not accurate or not completely accurate, or this psychologist has been completely negligent in not recording these extreme risks that you’ve told her?‑‑‑yes, and that’s what i think is the case and that’s what i have said because there’s also that sheet, that scoring sheet that she has not provided in the subpoenaed material. ... his honour: sorry. sorry, but this is over a significant number of sessions, yes?‑‑‑yes. and therefore she has been consistently negligent in not recording these extreme risks that you – you tell the court that you told her clearly?‑‑‑yes, your honour. hence why we’ve contacted the domestic violence service and she said that i – she would check in on me with, obviously, phoning them, and i would talk to her each session about these things, and that’s why in the notes a lot of the sessions and what we spoke about – i can’t comment on why it’s not written down as to – because that’s not my responsibility. i spoke to her in a session, whether or not it’s accurately reflected here is another thing. and in the dvcs documents – the domestic violence crisis service – were these extreme risks noted to them but again not recorded, correct?‑‑‑yes, because i did tell them that i feared for my safety and that i was ‑ ‑ ‑ no, no, these specific risks. did you tell them that you had received a threat or threats – and i don’t know whether or not you say it was one – whether it was a one-off occasion or whether it was over a period of time and regularly repeated. threats to kill you and to kill the children?‑‑‑yes. you told them that specifically?‑‑‑yes, and they advised at the time ‑ ‑ ‑ no, no, no. that’s not what i’m asking. you confirm that you told them these extreme risks, yes?‑‑‑yes. do you say that those threats were made to you on one occasion or multiple occasions?‑‑‑multiple occasions. right?‑‑‑especially during the nesting period because he was getting worried about me leaving and people – what they were going to think and what he was going to do. so he was becoming very, very controlling and very beside himself in regards to that. but in terms of record keeping, you’ve said that – you’ve agreed with my suggestion that the psychologist therefore was negligent in not recording these extreme risks, yes?‑‑‑yes. and the domestic violence crisis service was also negligent in not recording these extreme risks, yes.
51 further sms and similar messages from the parenting app were presented to the mother for comment. this led the court to put the following to her (emphasis added):[43]
that, i put to you, is an extraordinarily positive interaction between two parents who have just separated, do you agree?‑‑‑i agree and during a very toxic and very tense period, might i add. so not only is mr paolo presenting this kind of alternate persona, if you like, in the text messages, he’s also doing it in the talking parents app, is he?‑‑‑yes. his honour: so does this also mean, effectively, that both of you were play acting? you were pretending to be, you would say – these are my words, of course. you were being the supportive ex-spouse to keep up appearances for the benefit of the children, and you say also that mr paolo was this almost schizophrenic sort of character presenting as, you know, the genial, relaxed, happy dad in the text messages and talking parents app, and mostly for the kids but really there was this sinister, lurking character behind the scenes. this omnipresent threat in your life, yes?‑‑‑yes. okay. thank you. dr behrens: and just to be clear, you still think about him that way, don’t you?‑‑‑yes, i do.
52 the issue of the negligence of various professional persons and organisations was revisited after considering another incident alleged by the mother against the father during a wedding where she was a bridesmaid. the mother’s evidence was that she told her psychologist of the incident (which involved, on her account, some terrible name-calling and further death threats to the mother) but again it was not recorded either at all or accurately. nor would she countenance that her recollection of this event (or any others) was inaccurate.[44] the court then asked (emphasis added):[45]
his honour: but this is another instance, isn’t it, that in addition to the – what i call the extreme threats – kill, you know, gun, knife, driving – where things have not been recorded. this is another one where things have not been recorded accurately. so there’s this litany, on your evidence, of effectively professional negligence by the psychologist, dvcs, your lawyer in the magistrates court. there’s just this consistent litany of non-recording and non-reporting, correct?‑‑‑yes, that is correct.
53 a little later there was the following exchange (in my view, especially in a case of this kind, it is better that the actual words of the witness are used rather than a paraphrase or summary of them) (emphasis added):[46]
what has x said to you that has made you think that mr paolo has made some kind of threat to x?‑‑‑well, at the time in particular ‑ ‑ ‑ what time, sorry?‑‑‑during the nesting period. there was a comment made, which is why it was – he said, “daddy is going to trick you and he’s going to kill you. he’s going to take you away from me”. and he said to me, “which means he could take me away, mum, if he could do that to you”. okay. i don’t think i quite – so you’ve given this evidence and you’ve given this evidence in april of this year: x has said, “i’m scared that daddy will kill me”. do you remember putting that in your most recent affidavit?‑‑‑yes, i do. yes?‑‑‑on – on top of the other comment previously. so you thought it was important his honour knew that x had said that?‑‑‑yes, i do. if he had said it, it would be very important for his honour to know, wouldn’t it?‑‑‑yes. and if he had said that, you would be straight at the court seeking an order for mr paolo not to spend any time with x, wouldn’t you?‑‑‑yes. and yet here you are before the court saying, “i want an equal time order”?‑‑‑yes, which i’ve been ‑ ‑ ‑ how – how ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ previously advised by other lawyers ‑ ‑ ‑ well, don’t tell me about what advice you’ve had. so can i ask, though, are you saying that you don’t believe equal time is in the children’s best interests?‑‑‑no. well, if your son had said to you:
i’m scared that daddy will kill me.
i mean, first of all, when did he say that or has he said it lots of times?‑‑‑no, he hasn’t said it lots of times.
54 in a similar vein, there followed this:[47]
and if it was the case that you – that x had said to you, “daddy is going to kill you”, you would surely have telephoned the police, wouldn’t you?‑‑‑yes. and you would have complained that the family violence order had been breached, wouldn’t you?‑‑‑yes. and when did you do that?‑‑‑i didn’t do that. so, sorry, did you understand my question? i said surely you would call the police if that happened, wouldn’t you?‑‑‑surely. yes, i would. but you didn’t?‑‑‑no. so it didn’t happen?‑‑‑it did happen but i didn’t call the police. his honour: why?‑‑‑because as i said previously, there’s continually information and messages relayed that way. as the weight to it, on my side of things, that’s prevalent. in terms of the children, children say different things at different times. he was confused at the time also because he was relaying it from a period of time when we were living together. so as i said to you, he said, “if daddy says that to you, then daddy might kill me”. so in terms of that, this is – these are the compelling issues that i’m dealing with in terms of the commentary that the children are coming back to me with. could it in any way be that the kids are playing you?‑‑‑playing me? yes?‑‑‑in what regard, your honour? well, where they’re saying things that they might – even though that they’re a bit on the young side – that they think you might want to hear?‑‑‑no, i don’t – i don’t – well, who would want to hear that? well, that’s sort of partly behind my question because going back to some earlier questions this morning – could i suggest to you that most children, if they hear – as well as see but if they hear any threats to one or either of their parents, that’s likely to have some adverse impact upon their relationship with the person making the threats? would you accept that?‑‑‑yes, i would accept that. so you’re saying, though, that x is relaying these threats, either historically made or more recently made, and yet all the expert evidence – in which i include the comments by the icl from her meetings with the boys – is that their relationship with their father is not negatively impacted by any of these threats that you say occurred a while ago and, your understanding is, continue to occur. would you accept that?‑‑‑yes, i do accept that. i – i can’t – as i said, your honour, and as you can appreciate, living in that environment and obviously seeing that learnt behaviour, i can’t comment as to the way they behave or portray themselves in the week that they’re there and they see these experts, and the commentary or the way they relay themselves at that point in time. it’s different when they come and see me, is what i’m saying, so there’s a different ‑ ‑ ‑
55 the mother confirmed that she was sexually abused during the relationship. she also confirmed that she never reported this abuse. this was qualified somewhat:[48]
his honour: sorry, just on that score, do you likewise say that you nonetheless told the range of people that we’ve referred to – your psychologist, dvcs – that you told them about the sexual abuse as well or not?‑‑‑yes, i did about the sexual abuse. thank you. dr behrens: and did you really tell dr d that mr paolo forced you to have y? do you remember telling dr d that?‑‑‑that he forced me? yes. have a look at page 9 of dr d’s report?‑‑‑i don’t – sorry, i don’t have dr d’s report. no, i will get it to you. i will just start reading to you and then you can check it. so this is the third-last paragraph. can you see that?‑‑‑yes, i can. continuing:
i asked her about getting pregnant with y. she said, “he forced me into that as well”.
what did you mean by that?‑‑‑into the unprotected intercourse that took place. how did he force you into unprotected intercourse?‑‑‑well, he got on top of me, pinned me down, and obviously proceeded with intercourse. he raped you, did he? is that what you’re saying?‑‑‑i’m not saying he raped me. i am saying that he – i said no and he kept going. well, that’s rape, isn’t it?‑‑‑would you classify it rape if you’re married? are you serious? are you serious when you say that?‑‑‑no, i’m not serious. are you now saying – are you now adding another accusation in the witness box before his honour that mr paolo raped you and that resulted in the conception of y? is that what you’re saying?‑‑‑no, i’m not saying that he raped me. well, what you just described sounded very like a rape to me. what do you say about that?‑‑‑no comment. no comment. you don’t get to make no comment. ... you said to me when i asked you that mr paolo got on top of you, did what he did. you said no?‑‑‑yes, and that has happened before during oral sex and other incidents as well. okay. so that’s rape, isn’t it? all right. well, it’s a legal term. are you saying he had sexual intercourse with you without your consent?‑‑‑yes. and in the face of your active – your active no. is that what you’re saying?‑‑‑yes. well, you’re lying, aren’t you?‑‑‑no. or you’re deluded, aren’t you? so you say that your beautiful baby boy was conceived as a result of rape, do you? is that what you’re telling the court?‑‑‑i’m telling the court it was unprotected sex. we weren’t planning for him. he was unplanned. well, that’s not what you’ve just said. plenty of people have unplanned children. it doesn’t mean they were born as a result of rape, does it? that’s not what you just said. you’re just making things up, aren’t you? can you answer my question? are you just making things up?‑‑‑i’m not making things up. so that, i think, is a new accusation...
56 there were a number of other, much less dramatic and less critical matters (e.g. christmas arrangements) canvassed with the mother in her oral evidence. i need not traverse them further here save to note one rather curious matter.
57 in a sms message on 11th december 2020, the father advised the mother of medical treatment being arranged for x to deal with some warts on his feet. in the course of that message he referred to the mother and a person called “mr h” telling x that warts could be contagious. the mother referred to “mr h” as a “colleague.”[49] i have to confess that this passing reference to “mr h” rather piqued my interest, further questions were raised with the mother by me about his identity. in answer to them it turned out that (a) mr h was a regular visitor to the mother’s residence, (b) the regularity of those visits was in fact weekly, and (c) the mother finally conceded that she now lived with mr h. obviously, it followed from this that the boys lived with mr h when they were with their mother.[50] how and why she earlier described him as a colleague (she confirmed that she does not work with him) was never satisfactorily explained. none of these matters regarding mr h, the mother’s new partner of some six months or thereabouts, were ever disclosed by her in any affidavit or otherwise. she said that she did not consider it a relevant matter because the parenting issues were between her and the father. in my view, the mother was either ill-advised and or lacked quite some insight into what issues were relevant to the court’s consideration of parenting orders for the children, including who was in the household of each parent.
58 the mother further confirmed that when she moved residence recently, she and mr h moved into a completely new house rather than either of them move in with the other in their existing residence. she confirmed that there was nothing before the court about her relationship with mr h, or about her and the boys residing with him.[51] a little later, she confirmed that mr h provided her with a degree of support and comfort but, thus far, he has not been engaged in any changeovers with the children. she thought it unlikely that he would do so.[52]
59 the mother also confirmed that when she unilaterally changed x’s school, she provided no contact details to the school about the father.[53]
60 in answer to questions from the icl, the mother said that:[54]  she still believed that, if the chance presented itself, the father would kill her, (b) outside of school, only f contact centre [contact centre] was a suitable and sufficiently safe place for changeovers, (c) she said that the boys would be stressed if changeovers were not at f contact centre because of their concern about how the father would behave towards her, (d) her preference would be to have nothing to do with the father, (e) she acknowledged that there is no evidence that the children are terrified of their father, and in fact is contrary to her evidence in this regard,[55] (f) she did not put in her trial affidavit that there was a recent occasion when x said he did not want to go back to be with his father or to school, and (g) she also acknowledged that the children are in a conflicting situation, where their experience of one parent in one household is very different to the experience they are having with that parent in the other household.   outside of school, only f contact centre [contact centre] was a suitable and sufficiently safe place for changeovers, (c) she said that the boys would be stressed if changeovers were not at f contact centre because of their concern about how the father would behave towards her, (d) her preference would be to have nothing to do with the father, (e) she acknowledged that there is no evidence that the children are terrified of their father, and in fact is contrary to her evidence in this regard,[55] (f) she did not put in her trial affidavit that there was a recent occasion when x said he did not want to go back to be with his father or to school, and (g) she also acknowledged that the children are in a conflicting situation, where their experience of one parent in one household is very different to the experience they are having with that parent in the other household.   she said that the boys would be stressed if changeovers were not at f contact centre because of their concern about how the father would behave towards her, (d) her preference would be to have nothing to do with the father, (e) she acknowledged that there is no evidence that the children are terrified of their father, and in fact is contrary to her evidence in this regard,[55] (f) she did not put in her trial affidavit that there was a recent occasion when x said he did not want to go back to be with his father or to school, and (g) she also acknowledged that the children are in a conflicting situation, where their experience of one parent in one household is very different to the experience they are having with that parent in the other household.   her preference would be to have nothing to do with the father, (e) she acknowledged that there is no evidence that the children are terrified of their father, and in fact is contrary to her evidence in this regard,[55] (f) she did not put in her trial affidavit that there was a recent occasion when x said he did not want to go back to be with his father or to school, and (g) she also acknowledged that the children are in a conflicting situation, where their experience of one parent in one household is very different to the experience they are having with that parent in the other household.   she acknowledged that there is no evidence that the children are terrified of their father, and in fact is contrary to her evidence in this regard,[55] (f) she did not put in her trial affidavit that there was a recent occasion when x said he did not want to go back to be with his father or to school, and (g) she also acknowledged that the children are in a conflicting situation, where their experience of one parent in one household is very different to the experience they are having with that parent in the other household.   she did not put in her trial affidavit that there was a recent occasion when x said he did not want to go back to be with his father or to school, and (g) she also acknowledged that the children are in a conflicting situation, where their experience of one parent in one household is very different to the experience they are having with that parent in the other household.   she also acknowledged that the children are in a conflicting situation, where their experience of one parent in one household is very different to the experience they are having with that parent in the other household.
61 then followed some other, longer-term issues regarding the children, such as parental responsibility and related matters:[56]
his honour: would you accept, though, that listening to the evidence over the last couple of days, someone could take a view – i’m not saying that i do – where you’re the good parent and mr paolo is the sinister, bad parent. you know, that you do everything right and he does everything wrong. would that be too black and white a characterisation of your respective evidence?‑‑‑so – yes, so to speak, but as i said before, i do everything that i can ‑ ‑ ‑ yes. no?‑‑‑yes. no, i know?‑‑‑yes, and that’s why – look, i don’t want to characterise ‑ ‑ ‑ ... these are all the good things that you ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ do to defuse the situation, to tone it down, whatever, and things would be better if only mr paolo and his family, basically, got their act together. that’s ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑essentially, yes. that’s your line?‑‑‑yes.
62 then this:[57]
as your children get older, would you agree that it’s harder for them to accept what they’re being told in one household and what they’re experiencing in another household when it doesn’t match up because they have a greater understanding? you would agree with that, wouldn’t you?‑‑‑yes. there’s also a danger as they get older that if they are being told something negative in one household that is not what their experience is in the other household, they get tired of that. would you agree with me?‑‑‑yes, i would agree with that. do you think that there is a danger that if this whole situation doesn’t move, that is something that might happen for your children?‑‑‑yes. they will get tired of hearing something negative in a household that they’re not experiencing from their own experience, do you agree with that?‑‑‑sorry, can you repeat that? i will put it slightly differently?‑‑‑yes. if they form a view that they’re constantly hearing negative things or forming a negative view of the father in your household, that it is not what they are experiencing when they are with their father, they get very tired of that?‑‑‑yes, i would agree with that but that’s not what’s happening. no. as i said, as your children get older because they have a greater understanding?‑‑‑yes. so would you agree with me if things don’t change, if things can’t come more into line, there is a possibility that the children might be in a position where they just think, “i don’t want to put up with this anymore”?‑‑‑yes. are you willing to run that risk?‑‑‑no. so what do you think you can do to try and shift perspective moving forward?‑‑‑well, like, as i’ve said before, in terms of that side of things, i’m actively, and i always have been, enabling that. in terms of the changeovers, i know that – that long term but for now, i think that is appropriate as it’s coming. so that’s – that’s the only – the shift that you’re speaking about is in terms of the changeovers. well, it’s a bit more of a shift than that. it’s going to take – i will put to you, it is going to take, for example, that the children are not scared of their father. is that something that you can accept?‑‑‑yes. okay. so the – where you’ve said that in your affidavit that the children are scared of their father, would you accept that that’s probably not the case?‑‑‑no, that is the case.
63 the mother’s severe if not extreme response regarding the children meeting with the icl was challenged this way:[58]
and so when i requested to meet with the children, your response was that – the answer was no because you thought that they would be traumatised, is that correct?‑‑‑yes, that’s correct. and in fact more than that, you formed the view that:
they had been asked disgusting questions, that they are being constantly scarred, psychologically burdened, that they were traumatised, saddened, it took them a long time to recover. these methods of questioning of the children are frightening in nature and remind me of some of the communist bolshevik methods that they used at the time.
do you remember that email?‑‑‑yes, i do. do you not think that that is quite an extreme response to a simple request to just meet with the children?‑‑‑i do but considering the experience the children had last time, that’s where that has come from. and how long ago was that?‑‑‑well, that’s back in 2018. okay. and we’re now in 2021?‑‑‑yes, but you can – you can appreciate seeing dr d and all the other ones, that they don’t feel comfortable and they question why they have to speak to these people. but that wasn’t your response, was it? your response wasn’t, “well, but i have concerns. these children have spoken to a lot of people”?‑‑‑well, that’s ‑ ‑ ‑ “i’m a bit worried about them coming to see another person”?‑‑‑yes, but that was in particular ‑ ‑ ‑ that wasn’t your response, was it?‑‑‑no, that wasn’t because this was specifically in regards to the experience they had when they met ms j. but you knew it was not going to be ms j that they were meeting, didn’t you?‑‑‑yes. but you still provided that response?‑‑‑yes. did you advise x or y that you had said that, “it’s okay, i’ve told them that you don’t have to go”?‑‑‑no.
64 a degree of almost paranoia seemed to underlay so much of the mother’s responses, even to very basic issues such as changeover (emphasis added):[59]
his honour: what if changeover was at a park where you’re on one side of the park, mr paolo or somebody on his part is on the other side of the park, and the kids run between one to the other? it separates everyone?‑‑‑but how do we know that there aren’t people in the surroundings, parked somewhere else or – what about if the children have an extra long goodbye? how do i – how do we, obviously, make it a changeover where it’s seamless in that sense, if they’re at a park and there’s other people or ‑ ‑ ‑
65 in addition to all of the above, and although never formally set out in any of her material, the mother said that, in her view, the father regularly “gas-lighted” her.[60]
66 summarily, the mother’s evidence was very troubling. obviously, her very serious allegations against the father were (and remain) troubling. equally so the fact that over many meetings with so many relevant authorities and professionals, although claiming to have told each of them (including her lawyers) of the life-threatening events she declared, no one recorded them. this astonishing and regular “negligence” by these experts of all kinds was a complete mystery to the mother, and no less so to the court. there is little doubt that the mother strongly believes her account of each of the terrible events she recounted (i.e involving the shotgun, the large kitchen knife, excessive speed driving, sexual abuse, “gas-lighting” etc).
67 it is clearly true, as she said, that the court cannot and does not know what happened “behind closed doors.” in my view, two things plainly tell against the mother’s evidence. first, it is incomprehensible and inconceivable that so many experts (e.g. psychologist, psychiatrist, dvcs, the police, the local magistrates court, her lawyers), over so long a period of time, would have not recorded any of the events referred to by the mother. an occasional lapse in recording – perhaps. but not repeated acts of utter negligence, indeed tantamount to criminal negligence, by so many experts is so improbable as to undermine the mother’s accounts.
68 secondly, and equally importantly, as vehemently as the mother believes her narrative(s), which includes how traumatised the children are, on every piece of independent evidence before the court, the children are not relevantly traumatised. further, again contrary to the mother’s evidence, the boys have consistently expressed the view and confirmed how much they want to spend time with their father, how much they enjoy their time with him, and that they are not terrified of him at all.
69 for the reasons given, and also in the light of the reports of dr e and dr d, which were not formally challenged (albeit their slight, relative antiquity), i prefer and accept the father’s evidence to that of the mother whenever and wherever there is any inconsistency.
report of dr e’s
70 dr e’s report, dated 8th june 2018, became exhibit a. as already noted, [psychologist] dr e was not required for cross examination. the following parts from that report, albeit slightly dated, relevant to the ongoing matters before the court were as follows (emphasis added):
risk factors family violence and abuse 18. there have been allegations made that the mother has experienced family violence and abuse perpetrated by the father. child safety and wellbeing 19. there are concerns that the current care arrangements are highly distressing for the children and their emotional wellbeing is being negatively affected. 20. there have been allegations made that the children’s safety is at risk, it has been alleged that the father has threatened the children’s safety. alcohol and substance use 21. there are no concerns that parental alcohol or substance use compromises the children’s wellbeing. mental health 22. there are concerns that the mother may suffer from a mental illness that compromises her parental capacity. 23. there have been allegations made that the father may experience at-risk mental states that affect his parental capacity and put the children’s safety at risk. issues in dispute and issues identified during assessment 24. whether one parent should have primary parental responsibility or whether parental responsibility should be shared. 25. how much time with their father is in the children’s best interests. 26. where the children should spend time with their father for their optimal well-being and safety. 27. whether or not the children’s time with their father should be supervised. 28. how the children’s care should be changed over from one parent to the other. 29. whether there are issues of safety and well-being for the children in their mother’s care and how care arrangements can be put in place to maximise the children’s wellbeing. 30. the nature of the children’s relationship with their paternal grandmother and the extent to which supporting that relationship in the future is in the children’s best interests. ... 49. ms malena reported that the issues she considers to be relevant to the family report assessment process are twofold, firstly the safety of herself and the children and secondly the over involvement of the paternal grandmother in the nuclear family’s life. ms malena reported that the abuse and violence perpetrated by mr paolo towards herself and the children stemmed from the over involvement of the paternal grandmother in their family life. 50. ms malena alleged that mr paolo has perpetrated verbal, physical and sexual abuse towards her and was controlling of her behaviour through threats. she alleged that mr paolo was verbally abusive towards her early in their relationship and the abuse escalated to physical violence after x was born. ms malena gave examples of the physical violence, alleging that mr paolo backed her into corners, locked her in the laundry, forced her to have sex, threatened to kill her, called her names such as “piece of shit”, threw things around, tried to punch her and tried to prevent her and the children from seeking psychological support. she alleged that mr paolo held a knife to her throat and told her “it would be nice to poke you and no-one would know. you’re a slut.” she alleged that mr paolo tried to kill the entire family by driving 200km/hour in the car. .... ms malena (mother) ms malena’s subpoenaed medical records 71. ms malena’s subpoenaed medical records indicate that she has a long history of suffering from episodic periods of mental ill-health. 72. before the birth of her children, it appears she suffered from episodes of anxiety and depression and found counselling and antidepressant medication to be helpful. 73. when x was born, it appears ms malena suffered from a particularly severe form of post natal depression that included psychosis and paranoia (where she experienced hallucinations of voices in her head and experienced times of losing touch with reality). it appears that support from her gp, psychiatric care and anti-psychotic medication was helpful and she recovered over a period of approximately one to two years. 74. there is no evidence in the subpoena material of ms malena seeking help for a re-occurrence of post natal depression after the birth of y. she sought help from a psychologist in 2017, however the psychologist notes indicate that it is unlikely that she shared her history of suffering from psychosis and paranoia with the psychologist. mr paolo’s interview in relation to ms malena’s mental health 75. mr paolo reported that ms malena suffered from post natal depression after the birth of x. from his perspective, this was the first time he had experienced his wife suffer from an episode of mental illness. he reported that “she was in a dark place, she couldn’t function, she was very scared and didn’t want to be around x, she was worried she couldn’t be a good mum. she kept the house dark, she was scared people were watching her. i’d have to take x out to the sun as the doctor said he’s getting jaundice (as the house was too dark). i was working, trying to get home as quick as i could. it wasn’t really her, the person i married. it was a shock, i didn’t want to give up on her. i made sure x was getting to appointments for his needles and checkups. she was a shell of a person. she was well, confident and outgoing before”. 76. mr paolo reported that ms malena recovered from the episode of metal illness with the support of a psychologist and medication. he reported that “she slowly got out of it. we kept her parents away, that helped her feel better. she started slowly going back to work, socialising with people, she slowly came back to herself over one to two years”. 77. mr paolo reported that ms malena was in good mental health prior to the birth of y, he said “things were normal, back to what they were”. however, after y’s birth, mr paolo reported that ms malena’s mental health deteriorated, although the symptoms were different to what she had experienced after x’s birth. he alleged “she was highly strung, wanted to prove she could do it all by herself. she shut mum out a lot, mum stepped back. she had paranoia of people talking about her, it started three months after y was born. if people were laughing, they were laughing at her. she’d get upset and angry with me for not believing her. she was concerned everyone who knew what happened last time were critical of her this time. if someone said she was doing well, she would respond ‘why are they saying that?’ if we went somewhere (she thought) they were talking about her, undermining her. she was really clingy with y, it was hard for anyone to hold him. she would accuse my mum of doing things, she said ‘i went through the bin, i found a chocolate wrapper, your mum’s giving him chocolate’”. mr paolo explained that he checked with his mother who said she ate the chocolate herself but ms malena did not believe him and continued to be angry, believing that ms k gave x chocolate against her wishes. mr paolo reported “it got worse, the hatred for my family. the anger took over, it got worse and worse”. 78. in order to support his wife, mr paolo reported that he stopped his parents from visiting the family home and they did not visit for two yeas. he was under the impression that this helped their relationship and ms malena’s mental health was improving, until he received the shock of ms malena ending their relationship and applying for the interim family violence order. 79. in relation to the current period of time, mr paolo reported that he continues to have concerns for ms malena’s mental health. he reported, “i’m worried for her distance from reality. the stuff she’s saying i did, that never happened. ten years, the person i know wouldn’t do this. i don’t understand it – the knife – to think she’d think something like that happened, it scares me”. 80. mr paolo reported concerns for the children’s safety in relation to ms malena’s mental health. he reported that x told him “daddy, mummy told me you’re going to steal me and the police will come to lock you in jail”. mr paolo reported this is not true and he is concerned that ms malena is saying untrue things that are stressful and upsetting to the children. he described his concerns as “her mental health, it’s so hard to know, are the boys at risk? to hear my boys say stuff like that, it’s not a safe thing. we should keep kids away from it as much as possible, they shouldn’t hear it from me or her”. ms malena’s presentation at interview in respect to her mental health 90. ms malena spoke very briefly about her previous mental health difficulties and only when prompted to do so by the consultant. the history she gave at her interview was inconsistent with the subpoenaed medical notes. the medical notes document a significantly more extensive and severe history of mental illness than that described by ms malena. 91. during the interview, it was apparent that ms malena believed the topic of relevance to the interview to be exclusively her alleged experience of family violence being inflicted on her by mr paolo and his extended family. when other topics were introduced (such as the children’s care history or ms malena’s social support network) ms malena did not elaborate on them, rather, she took the initiative to repeatedly move the conversation back to her alleged experience of family violence. 92. ms malena’s proposed solutions to the current family situation appeared contradictory. the alleged violence perpetrated by mr paolo is very serious, for example, ms malena reported that she fears for her life and the children’s lives – she reportedly believes that mr paolo is capable of killing them. however, she proposed that when mr paolo has his own home, she would support the children sleeping at their father’s home. on the other hand, the violence alleged to have been perpetrated by ms k is limited to verbal abuse and does not include any threats to physically harm ms malena or the children. however, ms malena appeared to feel it was more concerning for the children to spend time with ms k than with their father. this is consistent with ms malena possibly suffering from paranoia, it may be that she feels a sense of persecution very strongly in relationship to ms k and her decision making is influenced by these feelings. 93. ms malena’s perception appears to be that people cannot be trusted (with some exceptions such as her immediate family and the domestic violence support service). she feels isolated from the people she previously relied on as friends and she believes they are talking about her in negative terms and mr paolo has turned them against her. she appears suspicious that parts of her records have been withheld by the police and the psychologist. children x 112. x is a five year old male. he willingly separated from his mother to attend the interview with his brother, y. during the interview he willingly spoke to the consultant and participated in the activities suggested. he appeared anxious during the interview, on at least three occasions he briefly opened the door, saying he wished to check on his mother and younger brother, before returning to the interview. 113. x drew a picture of his family. he spoke to the consultant as he drew, explaining “this is my mummy, i love my family”. he measured himself with his arms in order to scale himself in proportion to his mother in his family picture. in his picture, he drew his mother, his brother, himself, his father and his paternal grandfather. he placed his brother next to his mother and himself next to his father. 114. x and the consultant talked about some picture cards the consultant shared with x. x co-operated, but it appeared his mind was on his father’s upcoming visit to the clinic. x heard y crying outside the room and commented “when my dad comes my brother will be ok ‘cos he loves my dad”. 115. the consultant drew a pictorial representation of the time x currently spends with each parent (living with his mother and spending time once per fortnight with his father). she invited x to draw the picture himself, as he would like it to be. x coloured it to represent almost equal time with each parent and commented “i’d like to meet my dad seven (days) and my mum six times”. he thought about this and commented “maybe i do another pink” (pink being the colour he had chosen to represent time with his mother). 116. the consultant asked x what his wishes would be, if he had three wishes for anything in the world. his first wish was to see his dad “again and again”. his second wish was to see his mum “again and again”. his third wish was to “see my mum seven times and my dad eight times”. 117. the consultant introduced x to some cards depicting cartoon bears showing a variety of emotional expressions. x was invited to talk about his different feelings, as shown by the bears on the cards. the consultant particularly asked x about the times he has felt safe and the times he has felt unsafe. x commented “i miss my dad when i don’t get to see him. i feel safe when i see my dad and my mum. i don’t feel safe when i don’t get to see my dad and mum, i feel unsafe. this bear feels sad ‘cos he doesn’t have a dad”. 118. the consultant invited x to talk about angry feelings. he chose a bear that appeared angry and commented “he’s cross. mum and dad were arguing. they argue at night. my nanna said swear words to mum with her middle finger and now they’re not allowed to look after me. my dad was so angry he throwed a chair at my mum and its why he couldn’t live with us. i didn’t saw him, my mum told me. i wish i could stay with my dad”. 119. x took the initiative to pick up another piece of paper and re-draw his representation of when he would like to spend time with each of his parents. he again chose blue to represent his father and pink to represent his mother. he indicated he would like to spend eight consecutive days with his father and seven consecutive days with his mother. y 120. y happily separated from his mother to come into the interview room with the consultant and x. 121. y showed no interest in sitting with x and the consultant or participating in the drawing activity with them. he stayed on the other side of the room. he tried to talk to the consultant, but his speech could not be understood. 122. y actively explored the room, playing with the computer and the objects in the room. the consultant was not confident that she could effectively interview x and supervise y simultaneously. she asked ms malena to care for y outside the room to enable her to interview x. ms malena took y outside. y started to cry loudly and tantrum. his mother could be heard trying to calm him, but he remained distressed, crying hard throughout x’s interview. ms malena commented to x that y wanted to return to the interview to be with him, however this would have made x’s interview impossible. mental health evaluation ms malena 156. it appears that ms malena has a history of suffering from severe episodes of mental illness that are likely to have, in the past, disrupted her ability to safely care for the children. it appears she has had times when she has experienced voices in her head and believed they were her parents’ voices. it appears that she has become paranoid, believing the world to be a scary and unsafe place and feeling that others are looking at her and judging her. it appears this has been intensely distressing and led to ms malena doubting her ability to parent x. to cope, it appears that she isolated herself at home and cut off relationships that felt threatening to her. the diagnosis in her medical records, ‘post-natal psychosis with paranoia’ appears to accurately reflect the symptoms of her illness as described in her medical records and in the interviews of mr paolo and ms k. 157. whether or not ms malena is currently suffering from an episode of mental illness is uncertain. there are contradictory reports, ms malena reports that she is well and not suffering any emotional or other symptoms of mental health difficulties. however, her psychometric testing results indicated that she is highly defensive in relation to her mental health and her interview was similarly defensive. within mr paolo’s interview and ms k’s interview there were reported concerns for ms malena’s mental health. overall, there is concern that ms malena may suffering from an episode of mental illness currently. however, if this is the case, it does not appear to be at the level of severity it was following x’s birth. 158. the paternal family have some understanding of ms malena’s vulnerability to suffering episodes of mental illness, but they appear to underestimate the potential serious consequences of future relapses on the well-being of ms malena and the children. 159. ms malena is highly defensive in relation to her mental health. she is dismissive of her history of episodes of mental ill-health and dismissive of the consequences and future implications of her vulnerability to episodes of illness on her well-being and that of the children. it appears (based on her affidavit, interview and the psychometric test results) that ms malena is deliberately presenting an unrealistically positive image of herself and her mental health. however, it is possible that she also does not fully remember the experience of her episodes of illness and she may genuinely be lacking in insight into the extent of her future vulnerability and the possible consequences to the children of future relapses. 160. it is possible that ms malena is currently experiencing heightened paranoia as a result of an episode of mental illness. it is possible that she is experiencing interpersonal events as more dangerous and malevolent than they actually are. in the past, after x’s birth, it appears likely that she misinterpreted her parents’ motivations in this way (according to her medical records, mr paolo’s interview and ms k’s interview). after y’s birth, it appears likely that she has interpreted mr paolo and his family’s motivations in this way. 161. it is possible that ms malena would benefit from another trial of the medication seroquel. it appears (according to her medical records) that this medication helped her recovery a great deal in 2013 when it was prescribed by her gp. if she is suffering from an episode of paranoia currently, this medication is likely to be of help to regain her mental health. 162. it appears that ms malena’s day-to-day functioning and capacity to safely care for x was previously compromised by a severe episode of mental illness. it is possible that her ability to optimally parent the children is currently compromised due to an episode of mental illness. it is possible, in the future, her ability to function and care for the children could improve or could deteriorate. 163. there are current concerns in relation to how ms malena’s hypothesised mental illness may be negatively affecting her parenting. it is difficult to separate the underlying mechanism of her actions from being mental health affected as compared to being related to her personality and coping mechanisms. however, given her apparent history of responding well to treatment, and the current alignment between her presentation at the interviews and observations and the concerns reported from mr paolo and ms k, there is a reasonable chance that ms malena’s current actions are substantially affected by paranoia. 164. specifically, concerns related to ms malena’s parenting that may be mental illness related are:
a. it appears ms malena may be telling the children about previous incidents of family violence that were allegedly perpetrated by mr paolo towards her (such as mr paolo throwing a chair at her). whether or not the incidents of family violence occurred, it is distressing for the children to be told of them and to be informed that is the reason why they can no longer live with their father. it appears ms malena has been increasing the children’s distress by sharing such things with them, yet she appears to lack insight into this as a cause of the children’s increased distress. b. ms malena appears to be of the opinion that mr paolo and his mother have caused the children to suffer significant emotional stress and that x, in particular, is suffering as a result of witnessing the alleged family violence perpetrated by his father. however, the account of the children’s day-to-day behaviour by ms malena is inconsistent with the account given by the children’s school and day-care providers and what was observed at interview. according to ms malena’s interview, x is suffering significant mental health and behavioural problems. however, x’s teacher and father report his behaviour to be typical of a child of his age and his teacher reports that his behaviour has improved since the beginning of the school year. ms malena did not report concerns in relation to y’s well-being, however the day care provider reported major concerns in relation to his behaviour and emotional well-being. this mismatch between the children’s experience and ms malena’s understanding of their experience creates the concern that she is not accurately reading their emotional needs and therefore, is not able to sensitively help them with their emotional needs. this is consistent with the observations at the interview. y was clearly communicating distress in relation to being separated from his father. ms malena did not acknowledge this and help y with it, rather, she attributed his distress to being tired. c. ms malena appears to be making decisions about the children’s future care arrangements that do not align with the actual risks to the children. she appears, for example, adamant that it is not in the children’s best interests to have any contact with their paternal grandmother. yet (according to x’s comments during observations and the children’s care history) the children have formed a positive and connected bond with their paternal grandmother. whilst it appears that the relationship between ms malena and ms k is strained on both sides and ms malena alleges that ms k did not safely care for the children in the past, ms malena’s reaction still appears out of proportion. for example, x was sharing positive news about his grandmother making him favourite foods, and ms malena responded by reminding him that she is not allowed to see him and he needs to eat food from his lunch box. it is in the children’s best interests for their positive relationships with their extended family to be supported, insofar as they can be supported safely. it is possible that if ms malena is experiencing some paranoia, she may be unable to perceive paternal relationships as positive to the children and she may be sabotaging the children’s relationships in the belief she is protecting them. d. ms malena appears to be somewhat rigid in some of her beliefs about the children’s well-being. for example, in the adult interviews, there are incidences of conflict related to x’s diet, in particular, ms malena being strict about x following a healthy diet. there are also observations of ms malena and x’s behaviour that is consistent with this. whilst there is no doubt that a healthy diet will positively affect x’s development, ms malena’s rigidity is likely to be causing x anxiety, for example, he ensured he made his mother aware that he was telling his father about the need for him to only eat healthy food. this situation is likely to be too great a responsibility for x and y and it is likely to cause them stress and anxiety as they try to influence their father to please their mother. it is inevitable in the future that mr paolo will violate ms malena’s parenting preferences (in relation to issues such as diet). this is an inevitable part of separated parenting, that each parent has differing parental values that influence their choices as parents. it is likely that ms malena will have difficulty accepting others’ behaviour that conflicts with her values and it is likely to greatly distress her. she is likely to cope with her distress by becoming increasingly controlling of the children, which may increase their distress and anxiety.
terms of reference 1. following review of the documents and conducting meetings and assessments, the expert shall prepare a report in relation to the following matters:
a. whether the children are at risk of physical, psychological or other harm or abuse, including exposure to family violence if the children spend time with either parent or the paternal grandmother, there are complex issues of risk of harm to the children. if the mother is suffering from some degree of paranoia as part of her mental health condition, this presents risks that her parenting may be affected (see the mental health evaluation section of the report). whilst it does not appear that she is currently suffering an episode of mental ill-health to the degree she appeared to after x’s birth, she may suffer an equally severe or more debilitating episode in the future. if this were to occur in the future, she would be likely to become seriously incapacitated and unable to safely care for the children, they would be at significant risk of physical and psychological harm. if the mother’s allegations of the father’s perpetration of family violence are accurate, the children are at significant risk of physical harm if they spend unsupervised time with their father. if the father has, as alleged by the mother, held a knife to her throat and threatened to kill her and the children, there is the risk that he may, in the future, enact this threat. there are consistent independent reports (the current observations and the f contact centre observations) of the father interacting in supportive, appropriate and loving ways with the children and the children appear not to be scared of their father. this is inconsistent with the allegations of family violence alleged by the mother, but it does not guarantee that the incidents did not occur. likewise, it does not provide a guarantee that the father is not at risk of perpetrating family violence in the future. the mother has made allegations that ms k has not cared safely for the children. if these allegation are accurate, that ms k has acted in unsafe ways such as giving the children alcohol and allowing x to be repeatedly and significantly burned, then she is not a safe person to care for the children unsupervised, they would be at risk of physical harm in her unsupervised care. however, there is the possibility that the mother is suffering from a degree of paranoia that makes her unable to accurately assess ms k’s capacity to care for the children, the allegations may be based on unreliable evidence. b. the psychological health of each of the parents and the paternal grandmother and the impact of same on each of the parent’s and the paternal grandmother’s capacity to provide for the wellbeing of the children. see the mental health evaluation section in relation to the psychological health of the adults and the impact of the mother’s mental health on her capacity to provide for the well-being of the children. there are no concerns that the father or the paternal grandmother suffer from psychological health issues that affect their capacity to provide for the well-being of the children. c. the nature of the relationship and emotional attachment between the children and each parent and the paternal grandmother, the children have positive relationships and emotional attachments to each of their parents and to their paternal grandmother. d. each parent’s capacity to provide for the children’s physical, emotional, social and psychological needs, based on the paternal interview, subpoena material, observation sessions and the f contact centre observation reports, the father has a strong capacity to provide for the children’s needs across all domains. it appears that the children are in desperate need of substantial and regular time with their father. however, if the allegations of family violence perpetrated by the father are found to be true, this would compromise his ability to provide for the children’s needs across all domains. based on the information presented to the consultant, the mother is a caring and dedicated mother to her children. there are no concerns in relation to her ability to provide for the children’s physical needs. however, there are concerns that her behavior (which may be affected by a currently untreated mental health problem) is contributing to the children’s distress, stress and anxiety (see the mental health evaluation section of the report). this presents concerns that she may be unable to fully meet the children’s social, emotional and psychological needs. each parent’s attitude towards the other and the likely effect of that attitude, if any, on the children, the mother appears to be fearful of the father and of the belief that he is likely to try to kill her and the children. as a result, she is actively limiting the time the children can spend with their father and strongly advocating that the time be supervised. whilst this behavior is entirely appropriate if the children are genuinely at risk of being killed by their father, nevertheless, it is having a devastating impact on the children’s emotional well-being. the children are highly distressed by the separation from their father. the father appears to be in shock in respect to the mother’s behavior towards him. he is distressed and appears to be grieving for his formerly positive relationship with his wife. he appears not to have fully processed and come to an understanding of the events since the parental separation. there is no indication that the father has a vengeful or negative attitude towards the mother, he appears confused and fearful of her (alleged) unpredictability. he appears to be managing to contain his personal feelings when he spends time with the children. he appears to be able to convey the message to the children that they are loved and are safe with both of their parents, which helps the children to feel secure. each parent’s willingness and capacity to support the children’s relationship with the other parent and any other significant people, the mother appears not to have the capacity to support the children’s relationship with their paternal family. it appears likely that, without external intervention from the court, the mother would sever the children’s relationship with their paternal family. the father appears to believe that the children’s wellbeing is best promoted by a continued close relationship with their mother. there are no indications that he seeks to undermine the children’s relationship with their extended maternal family. he appears to have the capacity to support the children’s relationship with their mother and other significant people. the capacity of each party to facilitate an ongoing and meaningful relationship between the children and the other parent now and into the future, the mother, at her interview, reported that she envisages the children spending significant, extended, unsupervised time with their father in the future. however, her behavior indicates that she does not trust him to care for the children safely and she is not willing to facilitate the children to spend time with their father unless it is put in place by an external authority. in order for the mother to facilitate an ongoing and meaningful relationship between the children and their father, it is likely that court orders to this effect will be required. the father’s capacity to facilitate an ongoing and meaningful relationship between the children and their mother, now and into the future, appears to be good. however, it is possible that his attitude towards the mother may change in the future, as he has time to come to terms with the events that have occurred. whilst it is possible that the father’s attitude towards the mother may become more trusting in the future, it is also possible that it may become less trusting. therefore, it is not possible to confidently predict the father’s capacity to facilitate an ongoing and meaningful relationship for the children with their mother in the future. each parent’s attitude and capacity for shared parental responsibility for the children now and into the future, the parents have been separated for a relatively short period of time. each of them appears not to fully understand, yet, the implications for shared parental responsibility. the father’s ability to share parental responsibility appears sound, based on his current respectful attitude towards the mother and her parenting. it is likely the mother will find shared parental responsibility difficult. at this stage it appears that she believes she has the maternal right to make decisions about the children’s care (such as their medication and diet) and she should not be challenged in this respect. successful shared parental responsibility inevitably requires negotiation, compromise, empathy for the other parent and forgiveness of the other parents’ ‘mistakes’. at the current time, the mother does not appear to have these attributes. it is possible that in the future, she will develop them. however, if not, the children may come to feel caught between irreconcilable conflict between their parents and they may suffer as decisions for their care cannot be agreed on between their parents. if this should occur, to a level that significantly affects the children’s care and wellbeing, one parent or the other may need to assume full parental responsibility for the well-being of the children. if a future decision needs to be made for the wellbeing of the children, which parent has the best capacity to assume full parental responsibility will depend on an assessment of the mother’s mental health in relation to her parenting and an assessment of the father’s potential for violence. each parent’s attitude to the children and to their responsibilities of parenthood, each parent has a positive attitude towards the children and they both take seriously the responsibilities of parenthood. the likely impact on the children of each parent’s proposals in relation to the children’s future living arrangements, and the time the children are to spend with each parent in the short and long term including any separation from a parent or other person with whom the children has been living/spending time with, and it appears that the children adjusted well to the ‘week about’ arrangement that was in place prior to the interim family violence order. this arrangement appears to have met their developmental and emotional needs more effectively than the current arrangements. in that respect, the father’s proposal would appear to have a positive impact on the children in both the short and long term. however, the father currently lives with his parents and the mother has a distrusting relationship with her former mother-in-law. it is likely that if the children spend time in this household, the mother will be extremely stressed and worried about the children’s wellbeing. the children are likely to miss each of their parents when they are away from them. they are likely to need their absent parent and be unable to access them. this will cause distress, however, it is inevitable that the children will always be separated from one or another of their parents in the current circumstances. it appears that the children are not coping emotionally or behaviourally with the current extended separation from their father. y, in particular, is showing signs of intense distress. the mother’s proposal (that the current arrangements continue) is likely to have a devastating impact on the children’s development. while the children are not coping with the separation from their father and they are anxious and distressed, their optimal developmental pathway becomes compromised. their development of healthy trusting relationships, now and in the future, is likely to be affected. their ability to learn to manage their emotions and regulate their behaviour to meet others’ expectations and conform to society rules may be compromised. this risks them developing behaviour problems and mental health problems in the future. their ability to concentrate and learn is likely to be diminished, leading to less optimal intellectual development and academic achievement. any other matter which the expert considers to be significant to the court’s determination about what orders should be made in the best interests of the children and, any recommendations that the expert may wish to make in relation to the orders the court should make. the mother has asserted that she has been the children’s primary carer. this is important, as it is more distressing for children to be separated from their primary carer than their other parent, even when they have a good relationship with both parents. in usual circumstances, ‘week about’ arrangements are not recommended for children as young as y because they need more than fifty percent of their time with their primary carer. the time the mother has spent with the children is consistent with her assertion that she has developed a primary carer relationship with the children. she took time off from work after the birth of both children and spent time at home caring for them. she currently works part time, in order to be available for the children more than she could if she were working full-time. in contrast, the father maintained full time work throughout the children’s lives, which is inconsistent with the development of a primary carer relationship (considering the mother’s availability to the children was significantly greater). however, the children’s behaviour in the observation sessions raises doubt in respect to the primary carer relationship with the children. it is expected that many children would be distressed by the degree of separation from their father that x and y have experienced. however, the degree of anxiety and distress shown by the children is higher than expected. y, in particular, appears not to be coping with the separation. in addition, the children were significantly happier and more settled spending time with their father than spending time with their mother during the observation. the children’s behaviour with their father was consistent with the expected behaviour of children who miss their father and want to spend time with him. the father had the ability to calm the children and comfort them, even when they became over-excited or upset. however, y could not be calmed by his mother. there was repeated experience of y being highly distressed and unable to be comforted. when this information is considered as a whole, along with the mother’s mental health history, it is possible that the mother’s experience of mental illness may have compromised her ability to form a stable and secure bond with her children when they were young. the children may have turned more to their father for comfort and nurturing than would be expected in a family situation where a mother is not working and a father is working full-time. if this is the case, it is likely that the children now have equal primary care relationships with both parents. this is consistent with the observations, it is clear that the children look to their mother for care yet it is also clear that they are highly dependent on regular and sustained time with their father for their emotional well being. adjusting to separated parenting is challenging for almost all parents and especially difficult when the parents are in conflict in respect to the children’s care. it is likely that the parents will each benefit from attending the f contact centre course arck (assisting responsible care for kids). improving care arrangements to better match the children’s needs is the highest priority to support the children’s well being. however, once the children have had the opportunity to adjust to their new care arrangements, they may benefit from counselling. in the short term, y is too young to benefit from counselling. however, x is likely to benefit from the f contact centre kayaks (kids and youth are kool post separation) program. a specialist counselling program for post-separation issues is recommended for both the parents and the children, rather than a generalist counseling service. the father has requested that the children not be allowed to travel overseas unless with joint permission of both parents. there were no reasons for the children to travel overseas without both parents’ permission that the consultant was made aware of. the father’s request, in this regard, appears a reasonable precaution for the children’s safety. it is expected that the parents will find communication in respect to the children’s care difficult. the computer / phone application ‘talking parents’ is likely to be a safe and effective way for the parents to share information in respect to the children.
2. with regard to the matters addressed in term 7 above, the expert shall provide an opinion about what living arrangements are in the children’s best interests for both the short and long term, it is in the children’s best interests that the care arrangements, in the short term, revert to the ‘week about’ care with each of their parents alternating in and out of living in the family home. this is consistent with x’s expressed wishes and it is the arrangement that y appears to have coped best with. it provides the least disruption to the children’s lives and the best stability and routine possible for them. this is dependent on this living arrangement being safe to all family members. if the court assesses that there is a high likelihood of the father enacting alleged threats to kill the children, this is not an appropriate arrangement. even if the court assesses the father as a low risk of harm to the children, it is likely that the mother will remain feeling scared of the father and unsafe in his presence. it is recommended that change-over of care occur without the parents being in each other’s presence (for example, at school and day-care). if change-over is needed and it cannot be at school or day-care, f contact centre is recommended. it may help the mother’s sense of safety for home security to be reviewed. locks or chains that make doors inaccessible from the outside (even to those with a key) may be appropriate. alternatively, electronic locks with an entry code that can be changed by each parent (with a neutral code agreed on for change-over) may assist. even if the parents are alternating week about from the same home, there is no need for them to be within each other’s presence. if the court assessed the father as being at significant risk of harming or killing the children, it is recommended that supervised time continue. however, it is recommended that the supervised time increases to twice per week. in the long term, insofar as it is assessed as safe to the children, it is recommended that each parent establishes their own home and the children spend time between each home in an equal shared care ‘week about’ arrangement.
report of dr d
71 dr d’s report, dated 26th november 2019, became exhibit c. like dr e, [psychiatrist] dr d was not required for cross examination.
72 the following parts from that report, albeit slightly dated, relevant to the ongoing matters before the court, were as follows (emphasis added):
8. i asked her what the case was about and she said: “domestic violence.” i asked her what happened. she said: “my ex was violent towards me and my two young sons. in particular, he threatened me with a gun and knives on several occasions in front of the children and it escalated over the years.” she said that with the support of a psychologist and the domestic violence service, she was helped to make a safe exit from the marriage. .... 11. i asked her what had escalated. she said: “the possessiveness and controlling. he said, ‘you can’t visit your family, your mother or your brother in sydney. you’re not allowed to have hobbies because we don’t have money to do anything else [apart from renovating homes]. only i’m allowed to go on trips.’” ... 25. the mother told me that she had complications resulting from the birth and that the father would force her to have sexual intercourse and she felt degraded, despite explaining to him that she was in pain and it was uncomfortable. 26. i asked her how long after the birth was it painful. she said: “i still have pelvis issues. i was bleeding for 12 weeks and in pain for six. he [x] was stuck and they made me push him out this side. he [the father] was sexually abusive. he’d grab me by the neck and force me to the bed. he’d force me to perform oral sex.” 27. i asked her about her getting pregnant with y. she said: “he forced me into that as well. we had unprotected intercourse. our relationship was already deteriorating. things were getting bad. he’d force intimacy on me, throw things and say, ‘why don’t you love me?’ and said, ‘you’re a slut. you’re my wife. i married you to have sex.’” she said: “i felt ill during the pregnancy but [the father] insisted on intimacy and said, ‘you will obey me.’” ... 33. “his mother put x in danger with her medication being available. he’d be burnt, given coffee and alcohol before the age of two, allowed to play in the car with a remote control, with knives, the iron. they were burning him with hot water continually. i wanted to put him in day care. mr paolo said, ‘no, my mother can look after him.’ she’d abused me. she’d be so aggressive and ring mr paolo. he’d be aggressive when he came home. she’d say profanities. she’d say your mother’s a bitch or mean, ‘she doesn’t love you but i do’.” ... 42. she said the father “looked through [her] phone all day”. one day, she’d gone into the garage, he was yelling and screaming. she went to get something while the children were in bed. “he shoved me against the metal cabinet and with a shotgun against my head, said, ‘i’ll get you. i’ll kill you like the pig you are’, with his finger on the trigger. i thought i was going to die that night.” ... 45. she said: “x would be crying. i couldn’t move. i was so scared. i’d tried to de-escalate and continue cooking. he’d stand on the other side of the bench. he said, ‘so, why don’t you love me, you miserable cunt? you’re causing problems in my family.’ he made my life miserable. that was a normal day. i experienced it regularly, especially after his parents got physical with me. he had a pocket knife like a stanley knife. he said, ‘you can’t go. don’t take my kids.’ he got paranoid, seeing my friends and family. he threatened to slash my tyres.” ... 48. “our friend, l, was driving in her own car in front. she asked, ‘can you guys drive behind me?’ mr paolo was saying, ‘you’ve ruined my life. you’ll pay. it’s your fault.’ x said, ‘stop, daddy.’ i was saying, ‘it’s ok.’ then mr paolo started to speed. out of nowhere, we passed our friend. he’s looking at me aggressively and holding the steering wheel. the only saving grace was it made x sick. he was driving over 200kph. x vomited and we had to stop. l rang and asked, ‘are you ok? i thought he was going to kill you.’” 49. i asked the mother when this happened. she said: “november 2017.” and i said: “and you separated in january 2018”, to which she agreed. i asked if there was any other specific incident. she said: “there was the gun and the knives daily. that kept happening. he’d chase me around and put his fist in my face. he’d put the children in the car and he’d threaten to kill himself and the children. he said, ‘if you leave, i’ll kill myself and the children. they don’t love you so go and die.’ he put them into the car and said, ‘i’m gonna go.’ ... 53. the mother proceeded: “i found this psychologist at m psychology. at the initial appointment, i gave my background situation and she said that there was no way to do marriage counselling. she said, ‘you’re in danger.’ he’s come from a domestic violence background. i was called paranoid. he said it was ‘all in your head’. as soon as i saw this woman and went through the background, she said, ‘it’s a domestic violence situation.’ she was immediately very concerned. she suggested the domestic violence service in canberra. i was quite scared and processing the situation. i couldn’t speak to anyone. if i’d left, he’d kill himself and the children. i have no family. i discussed with the psychologist how to de-escalate and look forward.” 54. “once we delved into the threats and the one-way trip [to the region n], the gun and his physical abuse by his parents, she said, ‘you’ll become a statistic.’” 55. “she gave me the phone number and we rang the domestic violence service during the session. the psychologist said to me, ‘i’m really scared for your life. is there any refuge you could go to?’” 56. the mother said that she and the psychologist went through a domestic violence questionnaire and it asked whether her husband had been violent towards the dog. “yes.” violent with a gun? “yes.” threatening with knives? “yes.” financially abusive? “yes.” sexually abusive? “yes.” “i had 12 out of 12. i was high risk.” the psychologist said to the mother, apparently, “he will kill you. you’ll become a statistic.” she wondered how she could facilitate assistance and the mother explained to her that x and y don’t hear what goes on and shouldn’t be exposed to it. she said: “i kept up a strong front.” 57. she went on to tell the psychologist, “he’d go through my phone bill, about who i spoke to and things escalated. he became more paranoid, asking, ‘what are you telling the psychologist?’” 58. the mother told me of another incident that occurred in 2017. she said: “i was a bridesmaid at my friend’s wedding in city o. we had been married and went to the car show when he got angry and hit me after that. he was quite angry at the wedding because i’d spent a lot of time having photos. i didn’t get a chance to talk to him. he came to the bridal table where i was sitting and looked at me. there was a beverage on the table between us. he said: ‘you’re nothing but a miserable cunt. i will kill you, you stupid bitch.’ i said to him: ‘please stop. you’re upsetting me.’ he spilt the drink on me, on my sequinned dress. he said, ‘if you tell anyone, you know what’ll happen.’ i went to the bathroom and some other girl said, ‘we saw what happened. we saw him throw it at you.’ i was covered with drink. he said, ‘you didn’t tell anyone, did you? i’ll kill you on the way home.’ he grabbed me and said, ‘if you tell anyone, you know i’ll kill you. one word and i’ll know.’ it was being filmed,” the mother told me. 59. “a girlfriend of mine pulled me away from him. he threatened to kill me again and then, i explained to the psychologist. when i explained this, the psychologist started to cry. she was really quite concerned.” ... 64. i asked about the family violence order (fvo). she said: “i got legal assistance and explained to the registrar and had it put in place for me and the children. he fought the fvo and he appealed to the magistrate to have it dropped. he applied to the family court, saying that i’m mentally ill and it went to a final hearing. judge neville was inclined to use supervised contact at f contact centre for six months and then gave him unsupervised time. but all the psychological damage [to the children]. the domestic violence is continuing. the children are becoming more and more distressed. now it’s nine nights a fortnight with him five nights. the children are off the fvo when at school, day care or f contact centre.” ... 103. i asked the mother where the father had got the gun. she said: “i didn’t ask. i was worried about being killed.” i asked about the date of the gun incident and she said she couldn’t remember exactly, but it was april or may 2017. i said, “so, the father brought the gun home prior to that?” she said: “yes.” “had you seen it before?” i asked. she said: “yes.” i asked what the father used it for. she said: “i don’t know. i wasn’t allowed to question it. i wasn’t going to question it.” 104. i asked why she didn’t mention it to the domestic violence counsellor at p counselling. “i was very discreet. i don’t’ know why. it was explained to them.” i said: “but you told them in the notes that there was no physical abuse.” she said: “i reported it. i can’t comment on their notes.” i asked: “why would they not have written it down?” she said: “i’m not sure. those services are supposed to say things. the psychologist had destroyed the questionnaire i did. the domestic violence one. after 10 years, they destroy files. it will be questioned through ahpra.” “so, you told them but they didn’t write it down?” “yes,” she answered. i asked if she had anything else to tell me. she couldn’t think of anything. i asked her if she had ever been criticised by her own mother. she said: “oh, yes.” i said: “did that ever affect your relationship?” “not in such a way. we get along really well. we’re quite close, especially since having children.” observations of the mother: 107. the mother was a very neatly dressed woman in black clothes with black high-heeled shoes. her hair was perfectly done on both days. she had a tense, angry demeanour and seemed aggrieved at times. her mood seemed superficially cheerful but her affect was intense with obvious body tension due to anxiety. 108. there was no formal thought disorder, although some of the history was somewhat disorganised. she held some contradictory beliefs: that her husband is a danger to the children, that her parents-in-law are a danger to her and the children, but she was complacent about the unsupervised contact with the children and the paternal extended family and the father. 109. some of her comments were projections, such as, “mr paolo’s taken upon himself to put conditions on the contact,” something which she has done herself, and she said, “he became more paranoid” asking her what she’d said to the psychologist, when much of the mother’s belief system about the father was persecutory. she repeated statements such as, “he threatened to kill me”, she became tearful when she described how concerned the clinical psychologist was when she heard the mother’s story. 110. during the second morning of the assessment, while i was observing the children playing with their mother, at one stage, the children ran into the other waiting room where the father was sitting behind a closed door. the mother allowed the children to be there alone rather then going in and removing them, apparently unwilling to see the father, even in the controlled environment of the assessment. 111. some of the mother’s history and evidence shows that she believes the father to be homicidal towards herself, the children and her parents. she alleged he threatened a murder-suicide. she emailed the contact supervision centre that he was trying to poison the boys and was causing their diarrhoea. if she truly believed these to be true they constituted persecutory delusions. ... 114. i asked the father what he believed the case was about. he said: “for me, wanting to be with my children.” when i asked him what had been happening, he said: “we can’t move forward. we want to try and move forward in a way that i can spend time with them and be part of their lives.” he said that he knows that he couldn’t see the children daily and that he had learnt to live with that since separation, but, he said, “the boys suffer a lot and different things come up all the time. they’re missing out and get upset a lot. it hurts.” ... 122. i asked him about the allegations of domestic violence. he said: “none of it happened at all. nothing remotely at all. it’s all been devastating.” ... 125. i asked him specifically about the allegation that he had held a gun to the mother’s head. he said: “i’ve never owned a gun. i’ve never had a firearm or a licence for a firearm. none of my family or friends are into that stuff. it’s hard to believe where it came from.” 126. i asked the father if he defended the family violence order. he said he was surprised in reading the report that the mother had made just one telephone call. his solicitor subpoenaed firearms’ licencing records and found that he had never had a firearm. 127. i asked him about the allegations that he had repeatedly held a knife to the mother’s throat. he said he had never, ever done that. ... 136. i asked the father about the alleged death threats that he had made to the mother, including specifically at the wedding in 2017. he said: “it didn’t happen. i don’t know where it came from. i heard about it through a friend and this is what she said, ‘we know it didn’t happen but this is what was said.’ the father felt that he didn’t know this person (the mother) any more. 137. i asked if he thought the mother was lying or psychotic. he said: “i don’t know. i can’t keep thinking about what’s happening there or how my asking would be interpreted. there’s a past history there.” i asked him to elaborate. he said he thought that the mother suffered from post-natal depression and anxiety following x’s birth but, in the doctor’s record, it suggested paranoid psychosis. 138. he said: “i felt really bad at the time. mum and i were helping and didn’t understand fully the extent of what was happening. at that time, you’ve got a newborn. she never wanted me or mum to leave. she wanted her there all the time. she didn’t want her parents. there were days when i had to comfort her. she was on medication, not for anxiety. it was completely different. i didn’t not trust my wife. i really don’t understand. we’d get something, a new story, all the time. i constantly have to defend myself.” 139. i asked if the mother had told anyone at the time. he said: “her best friend, ms l, who no longer talks to her after that. ms l had a lot of questions about the story but, when she asked ms malena, ms malena got angry. ‘just believe what i say, or you’re gone.’ i’ve got a good relationship with ms l. she’s lost her best friend and doesn’t know why. i lost a wife. i can’t understand why. we could relate on the same level.” observations of the father: 183. the father was a casually dressed, overweight man in a t-shirt and shorts, who smiled frequently and had a tattoo on his left arm. he was tense at the beginning of the interview and tearful on a couple of occasions, when describing the children’s distress. he had large calloused hands and seemed to have a sense of humour. 184. the boys gravitated towards him to show him what they were doing and he was able to include both of them in games, including tolerating their silliness, such as “knockover chess” with good humour and patience. 185. he consistently denied any aggression or violence, used logic to support his innocence (“i’ve never owned a gun. i’ve never had a gun licence”) and showed patience and an easy-going temperament with the children who repeatedly knocked over the chess pieces (which was quite irritating). 186. he naturally included both boys in the game and calmly redirected them when they needed it. 193. when considering three wishes, he wished to stay at dad’s house, to drive a car and to have a flying car. to a desert island, he would take “dadda, nonno, nonna, uncle mr q, uncle mr r and that’s it”. in a rocket to the moon, he would only take dad. 195. i asked what the best thing about his mother was. he said, “i’d say, she makes tacos” and the worst thing was “she makes peas for dinner”. i asked what the mother did when he was naughty. he said that he had to go to time out in the corner. the best thing about dad was “he never gets cranky with me. he gives us a hug.” the worst thing was “nothing at all”. i asked what his father did when they were naughty. he said, “not sit in your bedroom. he comes and asks you when you’re ready.” i asked if he was ever smacked and he said, “no.” observations of x 201. x was a neatly dressed boy who was tense on arrival but settled immediately when he saw the toys. his front incisors had erupted. he was cheerful, articulate and polite. 202. he relaxed after five minutes alone with me, was quite self-contained when he was with his mother but went for her hugs on arrival. 203. he seemed more relaxed in the room with his father and was encouraged to include y and allowed to make a mess and be louder when his father was there than with his mother. he seemed very keen to leave with his father and showed no fear of his father, in fact, sought him out during the assessment, running into the other room to check that he was still there. 204. when it was the mother’s time with the children and the mother left to take y to the toilet, x surreptitiously went into the waiting room to check on his father’s presence but quickly returned to the assessment room, undirected. observations of y 209. y was a well-nourished, casually dressed boy who was extremely cheerful and showed evidence of an early sense of humour. he was energetic and continually in action and never still during the three hours of the assessment. at times, he was attention-seeking, dived over his father’s legs on the floor, said, “hey, daddy! i want you to play. you be the ferrari” or, “noony! i found something.” 210. he repeatedly tried to make eye contact with me during the observation part of the assessment and repeatedly checked on the father when he was in the other room, went to show the father his colouring book or to get the matchbox cars from his father during the mother’s time. when he was overtired and demanded to go to the father and the mother refused, he sat and cried, saying, “no, no, no!” in the corner near the door, which the mother ignored as there was only five minutes to go until the end of the assessment. while his mother was colouring in with x, y attempted to seek attention from either his mother or me. ms g, clinical psychologist: ... 318. ms g told me that she referred the mother to the domestic violence service, thinking that they would be more helpful and she understood that the domestic violence service made a child welfare notification. 319. the therapy that ms g did with the mother was about managing stress, teaching relaxation and mindfulness and giving practical recommendations such as calling the police, having a bag packed and the car ready to go. beyond that, ms g didn’t think that she could help me very much. 325. i found the dass profile sheet in the subpoenaed m psychology file for ms malena, dated 19 october 2017. it showed that the mother scored in the normal range for depression, anxiety and stress, which is at odds with a wife living with a potentially homicidal husband, who was apparently fearful of him. document review summary of the mother’s mental health history from her health records: ... 28 september 2012: diagnosis anxiety, lexapro 10mg increasing to 20mg. 18 november 2012: mother prescribed xanax for anxiety. 20 november 2012: diagnosis anxiety, not taken xanax nor called psychologist, referred to psychologist, ms s. 23 november 2012: gp referred mother to psychiatrist, dr t, with the diagnosis of post-natal psychosis with paranoia. 12 december 2012: mother seen by dr t. diagnosis “combined generalised anxiety disorder and post-natal depression”, she “speaks of paranoia”, “exacerbated by her other symptoms”. “consider changing to fluoxetine” and having “interpersonal therapy”. 16 december 2012: better with xanax (according to the gp) but still paranoid. 18 december 2012: according to the gp, still noted paranoia. 20 december 2012: diagnosis generalised anxiety disorder, 40 per cent improved, noted thoughts insertion [sic], referral to psychologist, with a family history of maternal grandmother suffering from depression and the mother’s past history of anxiety and depression. opinion and issues for determination by single expert: as per terms of reference.
the nature of the relationship between the children and each of their parents and the emotional attachment of each of the children with each of their parents:
the mother 326. the mother has been the primary carer for the whole of the children’s lives and continued to be, post-separation. the mother breastfed both boys and worked part-time since having the children. 327. despite suffering from post-natal depression after x’s birth, she remained at home during this time with assistance from the paternal grandmother and with medication and treatment. she gradually recovered. 328. sometimes, mothers with post-natal depression reject their infants and are incapable of caring for their babies due to the frequency of feeds and multiple night wakenings. in this family, the infant feeding continued by formula after five weeks of life and the paternal grandmother assisted the mother to remain involved at this time. there is only disagreement in the motivation thereof. 329. following y’s birth, the mother had no difficulty with breastfeeding so did not require the paternal grandmother’s assistance until she returned to work and then she had the paternal grandmother and the maternal grandmother babysit for one day each. 330. in my office, both children seemed to use their mother as a secure base for play and they both sought her attention. she gave affectionate hugs and touches when appropriate, i.e. at the beginning of, and at intervals during, the observation. in general, she was less openly affectionate that the father. both boys checked on the father’s presence during the mother’s time in the assessment, wondering if he was still there, and ignoring the mother’s instructions (or mine) to remain in the observation room. the father and the children 331. the boys were aged 2½ and 5 years when the parents separated. they both lived with father during the attachment phase of their development (from 0 to 2 years). 332. for the three months after separation, there was a “nesting arrangement” whereby the children stayed in the marital home and the parents lived there on alternating weeks until 28 february 2018. afterwards, there was no contact between the boys and the father until 26 april 2018 when supervised contact started, a few hours a week, before overnight contact was reintroduced in september 2018. 333. the father had assisted with food preparation and daily child care activities throughout the boys’ early lives and was able to drop off and pick up the children when permitted to do so. when x was an infant, the father encouraged the paternal grandmother to assist him and his wife with the newborn infant while she was unwell with post-natal depression. 334. at my assessment, the boys had been in the care of the father for five days in a row and seemed very happy and relaxed with him. he coordinated their play together with him, or each independently when they chose. they lay on his legs, leaned on him, teased him and joked around in a very relaxed manner. 335. at no time did they appear insecure while with him, only when he was out of the room. they seemed to think he might disappear. they never seemed scared or apprehensive of him or of the paternal grandparents. the likely effect (if any) of any change in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect on them of any separation from either of their parents, or from any other child or person with whom they have been living: 336. the children have already had to endure the three-month separation from the father and longer from the paternal grandparents. 337. x expressed that he missed each parent when at the home of the other, and it would be extremely distressing to the children to repeat the separation in the future. 338. both children would miss the father’s input to their lives. they both enjoyed the extended time with him during the week of the assessment and seemed through their behaviour and interview to ask for more. they appeared happy and well-adjusted in the father’s care and, during the assessment, they were more tense and self-restrained with the mother. 339. having been brought up with the assistance of the paternal grandmother, it is likely that x also has a primary attachment to his nonna, whereas y does not. the paternal grandmother was assisting in the home during the older boy’s attachment period (under the age of two). this means that he will yearn for his nonna, miss her and revel in the time that he spends with her, given that the relationship is underscored by neurology in the frontal lobe of the brain. this develops during infancy and remains as a blueprint for relationships throughout life. although this wasn’t specifically tested for, it is likely that the paternal grandmother was another attachment figure in x’s life but possibly not in y’s. 340. missing out on time with the attachment figures is often painful and unsatisfying for a child. the attitude of the parents to the children and to their responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the parents: 341. both the parents love their children and want the best for them. the mother 342. the mother has behaved as if she considered the children were her own property to do with as she pleased. she has made the children available, or not, for contact according to her own wishes and cut them off from their father when it suited her, in the name of protection with the family violence order (fvo). she changed x’s school from one day to the next without warning the father or his family, using “bullying” as the reason but without elaborating the situation or explaining her reasons for the decision. she was aware of the shared parental responsibility orders, but made the change a fait accompli. 343. on the other hand, according to the principal of u school, mr v, she had worked with teachers to ameliorate x’s situation at school. she could have let the father know more details before taking a unilateral decision. she would have known that the father would be annoyed by this action of changing schools and the lack of communication. 344. the mother had done well as a single parent, setting up a home for the boys with assistance from her parents, but she had not been able to enrich their lives with sporting activities or other extracurricular things which the father could have done or shared. the father 345. before separation, the father assisted the children by working hard, earning a living and making a home for the family. he helped with day-to-day routines and, especially prior to separation, when he believed his marriage was going reasonably well, this continued to just prior to the end of 2017. 346. he and his mother assisted when the children were little when they could and when the mother was unwell. the father revelled in having the children and enlarging the extended family. he believed his wife was happy to have been absorbed into his family as well. 347. the father told me that he was shocked and couldn’t believe the fvo allegations and was devastated the day it was presented to him at x’s school by the principal. he was highly distressed but not aggressive or overreacting. he left the school grounds when requested and even after the extreme provocation that he couldn’t pick up his own son. (this evidence was reinforced by mr v, the principal.) 348. since that time, the father has continuously tried to regain contact time with the children, patiently attending supervised contact and applying for unsupervised contact when practicable. he had been frustrated when the mother had not made the children available, had not confirmed visits, failed to communicate about visits or times, making this part of their lives frustrating and uncertain. the capacity of each parent to provide for the children’s emotional and intellectual needs including each of the parents’ attitudes to and understanding of the children’s relationship with other significant people and their attitudes to the children’s education: the father 349. the father assisted in the children’s intellectual growth by arranging sports and swimming lessons for x before separation and since then has been able to encourage reading every night with the boys when they stayed with him. he encouraged them in things which interested him, such as cars, engines, fixing things and construction. both the boys benefitted from this. they had also been to see a fire engine in sydney and had specific knowledge of car brands and other age-appropriate information, such as colours and counting. 350. the father assisted the children financially by paying child support. 351. his emotional understanding of their needs seemed reasonably good. he realised that they were confused and pained by the separations from him and his parents. he attended two courses about parenting after separation and said he got something out of each of them. 352. at my assessment, he was able to include both boys in the game well, rather than one at a time. the father seemed confident of his good parenting and that the boys were happy with him and were no trouble at all. 353. he seemed insightful into the mother’s mental health in the post-natal period and realised that her mental health had severely affected her ability to parent and that she required assistance for baby x and, with help, they had survived a difficult time together. 354. he understood the importance of consistency in a child’s life and that the mother’s lack of communication was making that largely impossible. he was aware that the precipitous change of school was somewhat distressing for x. the mother 355. the mother had managed the child’s educational needs, spending time at school when required to, such as when x needed assistance with his behaviour prior to changing schools at the time she thought necessary. 356.she spent time with y during their days at home together, doing activities while x was at school. she helped with homework when required. the mother seemed to understand the children’s emotional state at the assessment, setting reasonable limits on y’s behaviour when he was tired and cranky and engaging x in intellectual activities and conversation. 357. in the past, she projected some of her own beliefs about the father onto the children – that they are scared of the father, that they want to avoid him in view of his past abusiveness. she seemed to mistakenly believe that the paternal grandparents favoured x over y, which the paternal grandparents denied and for which there was no evidence at my assessment. 358. usually in the context of mental illness, people are no longer able to empathise with others temporarily, due to their anxiety, depression or psychosis. at that time, the individual is absorbed by their own disturbing thoughts and feelings. this makes responding to a newborn or child almost impossible as they are unable to tolerate the chaos or interpret the cries for food, sleep or comfort. sleep deprivation also reduces one’s empathic ability, and causes crankiness, poor judgement and may precipitate a mood disorder. 359. while either parent suffered from a mental illness, they would be temporarily unable to provide for the children’s emotional needs. they are trying to cope with their own thoughts and feelings and are unavailable to others until they recover or have treatment. while the mother suffered from post-natal depression, she was unable to care for x. 360. if a child is cared for by another person, i.e. not a parent, during the attachment period of the life, they will develop the same level of attachment to that person as to a parent. this person becomes a significant source of security in the child’s life and they will yearn for that person just like they would a parent. it is likely that x has this kind of relationship with the paternal grandmother, and not that the paternal grandmother was trying to favour him but that he has a special attachment with her because of her early involvement with him. this was not repeated with y. 361. the mother has maintained her view that the father and paternal grandparents are a danger to the children. there was no objective evidence of this. in fact, the parents’ friend, ms l, denied that the father would throw a drink at the mother and in her affidavit, ms l said the mother thought he was “too soft” – both of which is evidence to the contrary. the likely effect (if any) on the emotional and psychological needs of the children if either of the proposals made by the mother and the father respectively were implemented: 362. the mother proposed to reduce the father’s contact by two days a fortnight, for the father to have a three-day weekend once a fortnight only and her to have the boys 11 nights a fortnight. 363. i asked her specifically about the holiday time and she said that she didn’t believe in the boys’ interests to have extra time with the father on holidays. 364. on the current 9/5 split, the boys are wanting their father more and i believe that they have been encouraged to reiterate that view to me by the father. however, they seemed happy and played noisily, were well-adjusted, busy little boys in the father’s care and seemed relaxed and safe. they would certainly benefit from significant and substantial time with him, in my opinion. 365. with their mother, they seemed quiet and compliant but less relaxed and wondering, if their father was still there, if they could go with him, despite my telling them that that was the plan. they were more polite with their mother, trying to make her happy, it appeared. 366. i believe they would enjoy more equal time with their father, as they had the week of my assessment. this would allow the paternal grandparents extra opportunity to spend time with them, as well as to spend time in the holidays with the extended family. 367. i understand that the father has suggested equal time in the past, however, the practicalities of week-about contact require good and flexible communication between the parents. part of the problem in this family was that the mother has repeatedly not replied to the father’s communications on the parenting app, or only at the last minute to solicitor’s letters. there has been ample opportunity for her to improve communication, but she has not done so, for example, not notifying the father of x starting at the new school until the day, when he was to pick him up. i don’t believe that this was because of her fear of the father or from paranoia, she just didn’t want the father to prevent the change of school. 368. under the circumstances of shared parental responsibility, she has not shared the decision-making, leaving the father the catch up when she decided to send him a solicitor’s letter. children at this age need stability and predictability and to do age-appropriate activities. 369. all australian children need to learn to swim in order to save their lives if they fall into a swimming pool or deep water. the mother’s lack of provision of swimming lessons and other sporting activities is a shame and these activities would have been possible if she had worked collaboratively with the father. studies have shown the benefit of regular activities to help children, grow in self-esteem, gain social skills and add resilience in the face of trauma. 370. little children don’t cope well with week-about contact as they frequently leave books, school uniforms and other belongings at the wrong home and it doesn’t give them the consistency they need for regular school attendance, homework and extracurricular activities. i understand that the father has now suggested that he become primary carer of the children and the children have contact with their mother. likewise, the paternal grandparents suggested that the father have nine days a fortnight and the mother, five days. i believe that either of these possibilities would work well and i do not believe that there would be problems for the boys in adjusting to this. 371. my concern would be that the mother would not take them to sporting activities on her weekend, so they would not be able to learn about being a part of a team and being a regular attendant at games and training. 372. given the poor communication between the parents, shared parental responsibility seems unworkable and the father and the children would be in the same position of uncertainty regarding contact times and dates which is anxiety-provoking and likely to add to the children’s confusion. the understanding of each party of appropriate parenting strategies and behaviours arising from their participation in parenting courses and programs, and the ability of each to implement such parenting strategies: 373. i understand that the father has attended two parenting courses which he believed had assisted him in his understanding of parenting after separation, what to expect and how to assist his sons. i am not aware if the mother has attended such courses but she has worked with the u public school to assist with x’s school behaviour and then changed schools in order to give him a fresh start. because she didn’t tell the father about the difficulties that x was having at school, only saying he was bullied, the father was not able to put into place any preventative strategies to assist his son. 374. the mother probably believed that she had been protective of the children and that she behaved appropriately. 375. i do not believe that the mother understands attachment theory or the effects on children of separation from their father, or other attachment figures. if she had, i do not believe she would have prevented all contact by the father and paternal grandparents, unless she was paranoid, fearful or spiteful. 376. the manner in which she left the marriage was not in a way that one would act if in mortal danger from her husband or she would not have agreed to initial “nesting arrangement”. she would have gone into a refuge or straight to the maternal grandparents’ house with the children. she continued to live at the same residence for six weeks and then moved permanently once the fvo was in place, after given advice. assessment of the current mental health state of the mother and the father: the father 377. the father was the oldest of three sons to country z migrant parents who lived in canberra. he described a very happy sociable childhood in which he played sports all saturday and a lot of sunday. he completed year 12 at school and became a tradesman and joined his father in the family business. 378. he was shocked by the mother’s mental health problems after x was born and enlisted his mother’s help and managed to stabilise the family. after y’s birth, he sided with his wife in excluding the paternal grandmother and then the paternal grandfather, and was devastated and distressed by the fvo that was presented to him at the child’s school by the principal. 379. he attended a clinical psychologist for two appointments to help cope with the circumstances of his separation but told me that he never needed to return. 380. he was extremely upset by the allegations of family violence made against him and that he was forced to defend himself against. he had consistently denied all allegations made, as did his parents. my observations of him were that he was an overweight man who seemed very relaxed and calm with an inner confidence of his capabilities as a good father and in the knowledge of unconditional support from his parents. there was no evidence of unstable affect (mood) at my assessment. he seemed child-focussed. the mother 381. the mother was the younger child of country aa immigrants and also told of a happy childhood in canberra with camping holidays down the coast. she said she was a good student but, despite the apparently ideal environment, she was not a secure or confident woman, with a history of recurrent anxiety, for which she could give no explanation, and low self-esteem, despite years of psychotherapy with psychologists. 382. the father said she told him that the maternal grandmother was very critical of her and that she was told that “she would never be a good mother” and that “she should not have children”. this kind of repeated criticism from a parent would certainly explain a rift between the mother and the maternal grandmother and the reason for the mother’s feelings of low self-worth. it would also explain the lack of the maternal grandmother’s presence at my assessment and the mother’s feeling that she was a daddy’s girl. 383. the mother had an extensive past history of anxiety and recurrent depression, including during the post-natal period. she was prescribed anti-depressants continuously during this time, although it is uncertain how often she took them. she had talking therapies which, she told me, she found extremely helpful and continued to use the strategies “to this day”. 384. it is difficult to piece together whether the mother has or has not had a paranoid illness as well. the gp’s referral to the psychiatrist, dr t, and the gp progress notes show the mother to be paranoid and that he treated her with the anti-psychotic medication, seroquel, at that time. she denied this in retrospect and told me that it was “just to get in quicker” to see the psychiatrist. if she had been suffering from post-natal depression with persecutory delusions that her parents would criticise her, blame her for doing a bad job, it would explain her refusal to see her parents after x was born and her inability to function, banging her head and ripping her pyjamas and wanting to avoid the gaze of people on the street and remain in a darkened room. 385. after y was born, it is possible that her paranoia included the paternal grandparents and no longer the maternal grandparents. she insisted that the paternal grandparents had excluded from seeing baby y, but her own parents were allowed to be involved. delusional beliefs may evolve like this with time, but if delusions recur, they remain in a similar nature – in this case, persecutory – in line with the previous type. 386. she later accused the paternal grandmother of throwing y on the floor, something which seemed very out of character, with no evidence of injury to the infant or a police report. it was very hard to believe. the mother also accused the paternal grandfather of assault after “patting her on the shoulder” in front of the paternal grandmother and the father. neither agreed that this was hitting, and she was not hurt at all. it is possible that the mother exaggerated or lied, conflating actual occurrences with imagined. 387. ms l told me that the mother accused the father of throwing a drink at her at the wedding in city o, but ms l said that the father would never do that. she did not say the father drove 200kph and was not concerned he would kill the mother and the children. 388. following separation and during her attendance on the m psychology psychologist and the p domestic violence service, the mother’s evidence evolved from the father being “supportive” and only the paternal grandparents being abusive, to the father being sexually, physically, emotionally and verbally abusive with threats to commit suicide and murder the children, and his owning a shotgun which she said he held to her head. the father was alleged to have repeatedly run around the kitchen after her with a kitchen knife which he had repeatedly held to her throat, something which the father has repeatedly denied. there was no contemporaneous evidence of the same apart from the mother’s hindsight when she wanted to separate. 389. ms l told me that the mother was calmly cutting her children’s hair two days prior to separation, hardly the behaviour of a woman who said she was living in fear. 390. my impression is that the mother was either being disingenuous or delusional. in the first instance, the domestic violence service had given her the information that she needed to leave in a way that she could prevent any contact between herself and the father, or between the children and the father. she also had the full support of her family that she had been victimised, although they were entirely unaware of such abuse during the marriage, even though the mother could have called her family from work or told a friend or the police confidentially. this did not happen until she started domestic violence counselling. 391. it is rare but possible to have a delusional disorder in which the patient is fully functional, but has a single delusion (fixed false belief) such as “the father is a hateful, homicidal person who would stop at nothing to harm her and even kill his own children”. despite evidence to the contrary that the father loved the children, came from a nurturing home and was struggling through court to get the best for his sons. 392. my impression is that the mother did possibly suffer from a brief psychosis following each delivery and it was characterised by persecutory beliefs about either her parents or her parents-in-law which were transient. later, the mother started to say that the father was a threat to her and the story developed and ballooned from there, following separation. 393. there was no doubt that the parents argued and yelled at each other and the mother and paternal grandmother also were likely to have yelled at each other. the paternal grandmother admitted to calling the mother a bitch when most strenuously provoked and prevented from seeing her grandsons. 394. other beliefs which the mother propagated were that the paternal grandfather was also physically abusive, and that the father was trying to cause the children’s diarrhoea by poisoning their food at the contact centre. this, if she truly believed it, is probably a persecutory delusion. it is completely illogical that the father would want to poison his sons with whom he was trying to claim more time and while being constantly scrutinised. 395. on the other hand, the mother could have contacted her parents during the years she alleged that she was isolated from the family by using a work telephone to avoid the father’s notice. furthermore, the maternal grandfather and grandmother complacently tolerated years of no contact with their daughter and grandson. most grandparents would not put up with this unless directed by their daughter, i believe. 396. whether the mother has delusional disorder or believes she is in danger from the father or has lied about the domestic violence to obtain an fvo is very difficult to ascertain. she has reiterated her evidence but has mostly complied with increasing unsupervised contact for the father, with which the children seemed to have flourished. 397. ms l told me that the mother was a suspicious person with paranoid ideas about people watching her or driving past the house, but also that she hated the paternal grandmother and wanted to vent about this to her. she could not countenance the mother’s evidence that the father threw a drink at the mother. ms l’s evidence was at odds with the mother’s regarding the return trip from town bb to canberra in november 2017 after the car show, showing that the mother was exaggerating or lying for effect. 398. if the mother were to agree that she had delusional disorder, there would be no way to mandate the mother taking an anti-psychotic medication, even it if it were regularly dispensed, as tablets are difficult to supervise in their administration, even in hospital. 399. should the court find that the mother has been disingenuous about the domestic violence, then the tendency to deceit and lying are more indicative of anti-social personality traits, and the paranoia symptomatic of borderline personality. 400. either way, it would be highly psychologically damaging for the children to be brought up believing that their father was domestically violent, a potential murderer, in line with the mother’s world view, which is either delusional or disingenuous. 401. it is also inappropriate for a mother with mental illness to be demonised or demeaned for that reason, if the paternal extended family has been saying such things. 402. in summary, i believe the mother has a long history of anxiety and depression which relapsed and remitted (as it does) and that she has received and accepted treatment for this over the years. she has probably also had a brief reactive psychosis in the post-natal period after x which was self-limited and went away by itself, either completely (and has lied, in which case she has anti-social personality traits) or incompletely (and has delusional disorder) and she maintains suspicions regarding her own and possibly the children’s safety, (borderline personality traits). any aspect of the psychological or psychiatric health of the mother or father which in the opinion of the expert may have an effect on that parent’s ability to provide for the well-being of the children and what that effect may be: 403. as mentioned above, the mother harbours suspicions regarding the father and his parents, that they are a danger to herself, her parents and her children. whether she is lying or delusional, the children are going to grow up with the mother’s beliefs. they will become confused that the loving father that they experience is supposed to harbour homicidal intent towards them and their mother. 404. should the court find that there is no evidence to show that the father is dangerous or a risk to the mother or children, then the children would still be exposed to very damaging false beliefs. the children realise that each parent contributed half their genetics to them and, if one of their parents is so bad that he wanted to kill their beloved mother, they would develop very low self-esteem and feel guilty about loving and resembling their father. 405. both parents expressed concern for the emotional wellbeing of the children. the mother encouraged x to do the kayak’s program and was aware that the children would be emotionally affected by the father sending messages with them. she understood such concrete parenting rules and worked with the school to improve x’s behaviour. 406. the father also appeared responsive to the children’s expressed emotion but had less opportunity to manage that. he understood the importance of physical exercise for boys but was more flexible with bedtimes and diet than the mother, apparently. 407. should the court find that the father and paternal grandparents are lying and that significant domestic violence occurred with victimisation or harassment that has been ongoing as the mother alleged, this would reinforce the veracity of the mother’s evidence. the court would then need to decide whether significant and substantial time with the father was a risk to the children. the mother, however, has shown no excessive anxiety about the children’s time with the father. none of the mental health professionals have made post-traumatic stress disorder on the mother a diagnosis that may result from life-threatening dv as stated. 408. my impression was that neither the father nor his parents pose a risk to the boys. they seemed happy and well-adjusted after five days in the father’s care. if they spend the majority of the time with their mother, who believed that they are in danger when with the father, they would develop anxious thoughts and anticipatory anxiety prior to contact and confusion as to whether or not they can trust their father. this will undermine their relationship and may lead to their later rejecting any contact with him in favour of their mother and in order to please her. their self-esteem would remain low because, as mentioned above, they will know that they are made of half of their father’s genetics. 409. my impression was that the father and paternal grandparents have better emotional understanding of the children than the mother and maternal grandfather, which is useful during the boys’ childhood so that they feel understood and accepted, not criticised and rejected. 410. the mother’s tendency to reject either her own parents or her husband’s or her best friend would make the children feel insecure, that they might be rejected, too, if they displeased her. 411. the father’s size, being a large man, was probably enough to encourage the children to comply with his wishes at this age. he seemed patient and easy-going with the children, even when they were irritating. he had a history of enlisting his parents’ assistance and also seeking professional assistance if required. the nature of the relationship and emotional attachments between the children and other significant adults in their life: 412. as mentioned above, during the attachment period of x’s life, his paternal grandmother was present and assisted in day-to-day parenting. this is underscored in the developing brain with neurology which is believed to be maintained throughout life. when a child is separated from a carer they yearn for them and they remain significant throughout life. 413. during my assessment, both boys ran in and out of the rooms with the paternal grandparents and the maternal grandfather (y exclaimed: “i saw diddo!”), delightedly. y may have an emerging strong attachment to the maternal grandmother although she was not available on the assessment day. the paternal grandparents claimed that they were not allowed to be so involved in y’s early years prior to being banned from the boy’s life following separation. 414. the maternal grandfather was not a psychologically-minded man and was more concerned about the children’s and his daughter’s physical safety. he complained that the father was carelessly allowing the boys to be injured at contact. he was picking up the boys from day care and school on the days that the mother worked and brought them home, being of good practical assistance. he denied being involved in changeovers. i did not hear any evidence of “altercations” between the father and maternal grandfather as the mother told me. any wishes expressed by any child in relation and consideration of the children’s respective age and maturity, the degree of appreciation by the child of the factors involved in the issue before the court and their longer term implication: 415. the children both seemed very happy and relaxed after five days with the father and when they moved into the assessment with the mother, both seemed more self-contained and tense. 416. x explained his wish to have both parents in his house, a common fantasy of reunification held by most young children. both boys had been spoilt for a few days with attention from the paternal grandparents and were looking forward to being driven home in their motor vehicle, and had visited a fire truck and were hopeful of a visit to location cc. they seemed to want more time with their father, which x articulated but he agreed that he did miss his mother when he was with dad. (i got the impression that the father could have encouraged both boys to speak up for more time with him.) 417. the delight that the boys showed with the paternal grandparents seemed genuine and x place the paternal grandparents in the house next door to his in the illustration of three houses. 418. i saw no favouritism of x over y during the assessment. 419. being aged four and seven, the boys were too young to understand the duration and implication of the orders being made. they clearly loved both their parents and the three grandparents who attended the assessment. they had already suffered from the separation from their father and the extended paternal family. whether the children are at risk of physical, psychological or other harm or abuse, including exposure to family violence if the children spend time with either parent: 420. there was no evidence found that the father had been physically or sexually abusive to the mother, apart from her evidence, despite multiple opportunities of the mother visiting gps and psychologists over the years. there was evidence that the mother had anxiety and depression and possibly a brief paranoid illness with persecutory beliefs or ideas about the father. these beliefs were greatly affecting her behaviour towards the father and paternal grandparents and the children and their carers. if the beliefs or ideas were false, then the children were going to be greatly affected in acquiring her beliefs in time and would probably end up rejecting the father and their paternal extended family. this amounts to psychological harm, in my opinion. 421. on the other hand, to reduce the father’s time would disappoint the boys and further distance them from the paternal extended family. it would put more pressure on the mother to provide for all their needs, such as sporting activities, which she has not yet found time to provide. each parent’s capacity to provide for the children’s physical, emotional, social and psychological needs: 422. this was dealt with above. each parent’s attitude towards the other and the likely effect of that attitude, if any, on the children: 423. this was dealt with above. each parent’s willingness and capacity to support the children’s relationship with the other parent and any other significant people: 424. despite the mother’s apparent belief that the father is domestically violent and potentially dangerous, she has mostly made the children available for contact. however, her refusal to confirm or deny whether contact would go ahead made any sort of planning of arrangements impossible for the father with the boys. she attempted to control contact when it was at the contact centre, concerning the children’s food, blaming the father for the children’s diarrhoea and indicating to the contact centre staff that she believed he was trying to poison them, even when they were only eating food that was brought from an independent vendor. 425. the father has been willing to have any amount of contact that he was allowed, however, there was a disagreement over the venue for handovers when f contact centre was closed over the christmas period in 2018. the mother refused for changeover to occur at a police station and so contact did not go ahead. the capacity of each party to facilitate an ongoing and meaningful relationship between the children and the other parent now and into the future: 426. the mother has not shown herself to be flexible or easy to communicate with, and there is no evidence that this is likely to change in the future, given the maternal grandfather’s evidence that he intended to extend the fvo when it runs out in april 2020. parents need to be able to pass information to each other about the children’s wellbeing for them to parent equally and well. 427. the mother has used the fvo as a reason to contact the father only by solicitor’s letter and this is insufficient for good, flexible co-parenting. 428. the father had shown a wish to contact the mother for information about the children’s health, school progress, social lives, but felt stonewalled by the mother not answering or only answering at the very last minute. the psychological and psychiatric health of each of the parents and the impact of same on each of the parents’ capacity to provide for the wellbeing of the children: 429. this has been dealt with above. each parent’s attitude and capacity for shared parental responsibility for the children now and into the future: 430. this was dealt with above. any other matter which the expert considers to be significant to the court’s determination about what orders should be made in the best interest of the children and, any recommendations that the expert may wish to make in relation to the orders the court should make: recommendations: 1. that parental responsibility be shifted to the father alone. 2. that the mother have contact every week of the school term from monday afternoon school pick-up to thursday morning school drop-off. 3. that the mother have contact half of each school holidays. in the short holidays, in odd-numbered years, the first week for the mother and the second week for the father, in even-numbered years, the first week for the father and second week for the mother. while the children are still at primary school, in the summer holidays, they should have weekabout care. when they are both in high school, the holidays should be split in odd-numbered years, one half to the mother (three weeks) and second half to the father and the reverse in even-numbered years. 4. the father is to notify the mother of all health emergencies, chronic health conditions, educational needs, or other important decisions. that she be sent notifications from the school and be allowed to attend school concerts and open days. 5. that the mother and father use the talking parents app to communicate with each other, apart from solicitor’s letters. 6. that the father not approach the mother’s or the maternal grandparents’ residences. 7. that there be sporting activities, including swimming, for the boys every week, and that the parents make a commitment to their regular attendance at these. 8. that the father and paternal extended family not discuss or demean the mother or her family in the children’s presence and likewise, that the mother and the maternal extended family not demean the father or his family in front of the children. 9. if the mother were to withhold the children, that she lose contact for four weeks.
applicant’s written submissions
73 the applicant’s submissions, filed 16th june 2021, were as follows:
1. these proceedings concern the parties’ two young sons- x (now aged 8) and y (now aged 5). these submissions are made in support of the orders sought by the father in the case outline filed 14 april 2021. 2. allowing for all that the court sees, this is an extraordinary case. the mother seeks orders for equal shared parental responsibility and equal time notwithstanding that she maintains - and continued to maintain when specifically given the opportunity to retract - that the father perpetrated the most extreme family violence against her, against the children and in the presence of the children. perhaps the most extreme allegation she makes is that the father put a shotgun to her head and said “i will kill you, like a pig” (mother’s affidavit filed 9 april 2021, paragraph 89(l), “mother’s trial affidavit”). other allegations made and not retracted include that: “on 3rd october 2017 mr paolo raised a large kitchen knife to my throat on several occasions in the kitchen in front of the children...and said ‘it would be nice to slice you up you piece of shit. nobody loves or needs you’” (mother’s trial affidavit, para 97), and “on 4th november 2017, after attending the town bb car show mr paolo “accelerated to over 200km saying ‘i will kill all of us’. the children were in the back seats and x vomited” (mother’s trial affidavit, para 91). 3. fortunately, the court has available to it: a. documents (including material produced under subpoena) which make it clear that there is no basis whatever to the mother’s allegations, b. the comprehensive and detailed family report of dr d dated 26 november 2018 (exhibit c) where dr d opines (at p. 60) that “[m[y impression is that the mother was either being disingenuous or delusional”, and c. the evidence of the children’s relationships with and attitudes towards, the father, and views about their living arrangements, which is completely inconsistent with the allegations which are made. 4. it is submitted that this is not the case that this court sees so frequently- where family violence has occurred, but its nature, extent or impact has been exaggerated. this is a case where the court will be able comfortably to find that there has been no family violence whatever perpetrated by the father. further, in any case where the mother’s evidence conflicts with the father’s, the father’s evidence should be preferred. 5. there is much that is tragic about this case. three years after the father commenced these proceedings, the mother is now asking the court to make orders which reflect essentially the arrangement the parties put in place on separation, and which the father initially sought. given what has happened over that period, and the likely corrosive impact of her distorted reality upon the children, the father now seeks sole parental responsibility and primary care of x and y. 6. mitigating the tragedy is the fact that the court would be satisfied that the children have a devoted and loving father who is - perhaps much more than most parents the court sees - meeting all the children’s needs and to a high level. despite all that the mother says about him, despite them being wrenched from him in february 2018 at such a young age – and then not seeing him for months – the evidence is that their bonds and attachments and relationships have endured and grown. the father is supported in his parenting by a loving extended family who are likewise devoted to the children and adored by them. 7. the court would make orders which support the father’s parenting of the children by granting him sole parental responsibility and primary care. this will ensure that the children’s reality is firmly based in reality- rather than in the mother’s distorted view of it. the dangers for the children of exposure to the mother’s distorted reality are set out clearly in the family report of dr d (exhibit c). the impossibility of the father having to make significant decisions for the children in consultation with the mother is evident. 8. from here these written submissions are set out as follows: the evidence about family violence, parental responsibility, live with/time arrangements, other matters. the evidence about family violence 9. a finding is sought that the father has not perpetrated family violence against the mother or the children, nor in the presence of the children. the court is aware of the full court’s expression of the law in amador [2009] famcafc 196 at [95]: “the best interests of a child the subject of an application for a parenting order must require that the court determine relevant allegations of violence where that can be done. ...the more serious the allegation of violence the more important it will be to the child to investigate and determine the allegation.” 10. it is submitted that in this case the allegations can be determined. indeed (and ironically), the court could not make the orders sought by the mother unless it made findings at least that the most serious of her allegations are false. 11. a finding is also sought that the conduct alleged by the mother against the paternal grandparents - where that is contested by them - did not occur. 12. during cross-examination, the mother was taken to documents contained in a folder “father’s tender bundle” and to documents on the court file to test her evidence in relation to family violence. key aspects of that evidence only are highlighted and, it is submitted, are sufficient for the findings sought. 13. it is important to record that the most serious of the allegations the mother made related to events which occurred in 2017 (the year prior to the parties separating). it was during this year that she said the three events referred to in para 2 above occurred, the latest (the town bb car show incident) in november 2017. she gave oral evidence that the shot gun incident occurred in about april or may 2017. 14. father’s tender 3 was identified by the father in chief as the complete text messages on his phone between him and the mother for the period 12 january 2017-28 february 2018. the mother was given the opportunity to examine this record over night on 22 april 2021 – the first day of the trial. she did not quibble with that description. 15. the mother eventually conceded (as she had to do) that the messages presented a consistent picture throughout this period of loving, caring and supportive spouses messaging each other. it was put to her that such a picture was inconsistent with the allegations she was making about the father’s behaviour in 2017. her evidence in response was simply that she had to effectively “tip toe” around the father and (agreeing with a proposition put to her by your honour) that the father was in effect a “dr jekyll and mr hyde” character. she could not explain why he would seek to portray himself in that false way in private text messages between the two of them. the court would readily conclude that it is highly improbable that the father was engaging in the conduct alleged by the mother while his text message communication during the relevant period (and hers to him) was uniformly loving, caring and supportive. 16. father’s tender 2 is the complete talking parents record, commencing on 5 february 2018, just after the parties separated. again, it was put to the mother that this record is completely inconsistent with the evidence she gave about having been forced into a “nesting arrangement” by the father (including by him having threatened to kill her if she did not). again, she simply resorted to saying that the record is inconsistent with the father’s actual behaviour and with reality. the court would not believe her. 17. father’s tender 9 is the records of m psychology in respect of the mother for the period 19 october 2017-1 march 2018. the mother conceded that she had established a good relationship with the practitioner who she saw at m psychology during that period- ms g. she conceded that she would have told ms g about concerns she had, and that ms g was helpful to her. when she first saw her on 19 october 2017 (her evidence being that just a few months earlier the father had held a shotgun to her head), the record shows that she was focused on what she saw as difficulties in her relationship with the father stemming from over-involvement of the paternal extended family. she made no mention of any behaviour which might constitute family violence by the father. at the next appointment, on 9 november 2017, she begins to mention the father’s behaviour but denies any history of physical violence. it is inconceivable that she would give this report to her trusted psychologist if the events set out at para 2 above had in fact occurred. 18. the next appointment occurred after the wedding about which she gave evidence to dr d (recorded at top p. 13). that included evidence that the father threatened to kill her a number of times at the wedding. to her trusted psychologist she gave a contemporaneous account of the wedding (she conceded it was the same one) in 2017: “ms malena reported things have been better. at a wedding they attended together ms malena reported that mr paolo was very upset she didn’t take more notice of him (she was in the wedding party) and was very rude to her in public- but they had a fight and then talked and he recognised that she was ready to leave but undertook to do whatever he needed to in order to change things.” the mother appeared puzzled, as much as anything, when this account was put to her. she could see it was inconsistent with her allegation, but offered no explanation other than the possibility that her psychologist had not recorded it correctly. again, it is inconceivable that she would give this report to her trusted psychologist if in fact what occurred was what she told dr d. 19. the last record of m psychology records the mother’s unhappiness with the shared care arrangement and that the mother is going to arrange an “interim order.” it was put to the mother that it was in fact her wish to move away from the equal time arrangement which led to her beginning to make the serious allegations she subsequently made. she denied that, but the court will find that is the most likely explanation for what subsequently occurred- or some combination of that and a deterioration in the mother’s mental health. 20. the mother was referred to the domestic violence crisis service. their records are father’s tender 8. again, there is no mention whatsoever of any of the very serious allegations the mother subsequently makes. the complaints are largely focused on the father’s parents. there is no mention of any of the incidents referred to at para 2 above-nor of a gun, a knife, or threats to kill. if there had been there would have been a report by dvcs to cyps, the mother confirmed she had never been contacted by cyps. 21. things rapidly changed when, at the end of february 2018, the mother made an application for a family violence order including the children as protected persons. her application is father’s tender 7, and the transcript of the interim hearing is father’s tender 11. in her application she made a slew of allegations of bizarre kinds. but even there she makes no reference to the most serious of the allegations she now makes. 22. when asked in cross-examination why her lawyer would not have told the court about the “shotgun incident” (she gave evidence that she had told her lawyer about it) she said she thought they had said that was a matter for the family court. when the early family court documents (including the notice of risk she first filed) were put to her, she acknowledged they made no reference to the shot gun incident. it appears that allegation was first raised by her in submissions to the court in the middle of 2018 (those submissions are father’s tender 10). 23. the mother has since gone on to make almost every accusation that could be imagined, from the most serious to the most trivial. this process of escalating and new allegations did not stop in 2020 after the interim consent orders were made- she made fresh allegations (both in her fresh application for a family violence order and in her most recent affidavit) which it is submitted simply have no basis in the evidence. the court saw this process “in action” (so to speak) when the mother gave oral evidence that y was conceived when the father forced her despite her saying no. disingenuously she said when asked if she was alleging rape “is it rape if it is in marriage?” 24. likely it would take a trained psychiatrist watching the mother in court to say whether she was simply lieing or is deluded. her presentation during cross examination about the family violence allegations was perhaps more consistent with her being deluded, but she had no hesitation in lieing to the court on the second day of her cross-examination- by describing her partner mr h (previously undisclosed) as her “colleague”. another obvious (but in the scheme of things relatively minor) example of her lieing was the complete turnaround from her evidence in her trial affidavit that “for now, other sports are out of the question, because from the previous experience of my children, they are not acceptable and desirable, such as football, which they hate and are not interested in” (para 60). photographs of the (happy) boys at sports were tendered (exhibit d). under cross examination by the icl the mother readily conceded that the children enjoy sports and seemed even to have forgotten she had said anything different. 25. on the bases that: the court would not believe any of the contested evidence of the mother, the court would believe the evidence of the father, the father’s evidence is corroborated by the unchallenged evidence of his father, his mother and ms l, and the documents in evidence (perhaps most particularly father’s tender 3), the court could confidently make a finding not only that the mother’s most extreme allegations are false, but also that the father has not engaged in family violence at all. the question then becomes, what are the implications of that finding for the parenting orders which should be made? parental responsibility 26. when the matter was last before the court for final hearing on 2 december 2019, the parties agreed effectively to trial an equal time arrangement (no order was made for parental responsibility). the mother was “on notice” that this was her opportunity to make the arrangement work. true she has not failed to comply with the orders in the egregious way which it is submitted she did during 2018 and 2019 (the mother conceded under cross-examination that she had not complied with orders but said she had failed to do so for safety reasons). nonetheless, the court will be satisfied that the evidence about what has occurred since then (in the context of the history of the matter and the mother’s behaviour over that history) means that espr is evidently not in the boys’ best interests. it will also be submitted below that equal time is not in the boys’ best interests. 27. there is an argument to be made that what the mother has done is family violence and therefore the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility does not apply. that argument is not pursued because it is submitted that - even if the presumption does apply – it is clearly rebutted in this case. 28. the mother continues to maintain that the father has committed the most appalling crimes against her and against the children, and against her in the presence of the children. given the opportunity to retract she did not. given the opportunity to reflect that she may be deluded, she could not acknowledge that. the court would be readily satisfied that – at least unless and until the mother gets psychiatric assistance – there is no possibility of the parties being able to cooperate and reach agreement. 29. the general impossibility of communicating effectively with the mother in relation to the boys is laid bare in father’s tender 1- the email exchange between the mother and the icl dated 13 april 2021. the mother’s response was extraordinary. if she communicates in such a way with an officer of the court, appointed to represent her children’s interests, and in the high stakes environment she knew she was in, the court will readily appreciate the father’s impossible task if espr was to be ordered. 30. prior to the interim orders in december 2019 there were decisions which the mother made unilaterally (for example, changing x’s school, and only informing the father, through his solicitor, of the change on a day when x was to be collected by the father). there were also difficulties during this period with getting decisions made about speech pathology for y. the mother had the opportunity after the making of the interim orders to show she could make communication work, the evidence is she cannot. 31. the court has the benefit of the evidence about how communication between the parents has worked in the period since december 2019. father’s tender 2 is the complete record of the talking parents messages (which, pursuant to the interim orders, is the only mechanism the parties use to communicate directly with each other). 32. the father did create topics and attempt to engage the mother. the mother’s only substantive communication related to handovers particularly where that involved f contact centre. the evidence about the father’s attempted communication in relation to christmas 2020 should suffice to make clear the inevitable difficulties, and risk of further litigation, if an order for espr was to be made. it is submitted that the mother’s conduct in relation to christmas arrangements was extraordinary. rather than contact the father herself through the talking parents app in relation to christmas she apparently told x that he would be with her for christmas, leading the father to confirm the arrangements provided for in the orders. she then told him to “contact his solicitor”. she instructed her solicitor to agree to extended time for the father over christmas rather than accepting an offer of time on christmas day (she later admitted this was partly because f contact centre was not available as a handover location on christmas day). she subsequently called police to do a welfare check on the basis that the children had not been returned to her care on 30 december- notwithstanding that she had agreed to them staying with the father until 6 january. she at no time contacted the father via the talking parents app to ask where the children were or to confirm handback arrangements for the children, notwithstanding that the police had told her that the father could be contacted any time on the app. she then filed a contravention application (subsequently withdrawn on the first day of the hearing). 33. the father can be trusted to include the mother and keep her informed in accordance with his proposed orders. ultimately, however, he would be given the authority to make the decisions which need to be made. absent such authority further litigation seems inevitable, that would be a tragedy for everyone. live with and spend time with orders 34. what are the implications of the findings sought in relation to the mother’s allegations about family violence for the appropriate live with and spend time with orders? 35. the court would be satisfied that the (unacceptable) risk in this case is that the mother will psychologically damage the children through their exposure by her and/or by members of her family to her beliefs or falsehoods about their father. dr d opines in detail as to the risks to the children from this at pages 62 and 64 of exhibit c. 36. while it appears that the boys are generally doing well, y’s pre-school teacher has observed enough to lead her to send the email which she did to his parents (father’s affidavit filed 1/4/21, para 27). 37. it is submitted that the father best captured in oral evidence why less time with the mother than currently occurs is best- “i can’t do anything about what she says to them during their time with her- i can just focus on their time with me”. more time with him means less psychological risk. it also clearly prioritises their relationship with their father in a way which is likely to mean that if the mother continues to do her worst the boys will likely ultimately simply reject her- rather than rejecting the father. 38. dr d recommended that the boys be in the primary care of the father, in a rather unusual week-time focused arrangement (family report, p. 66). her report is now somewhat dated, but no party sought that she be available for cross-examination. it is submitted that, had there been the opportunity to put the oral evidence to her, she would likely only have strengthened her views. she recommended an 8:6 arrangement in favour of the father (but with limited weekend time for the mother). she also opined that a 9:5 arrangement “would work well and i do not believe that there would be problems for the boys in adjusting to this” (top p. 58). she was concerned that the mother would not facilitate the boys’ attendance at weekend activities (second complete paragraph, p. 58). the mother conceded that she has not always ensured they attend sports- despite the interim orders requiring her to do so. 39. the court would be satisfied that the father is well-equipped to be the boys’ primary carer. despite all that he has been through, he does not speak badly of the children’s mother. he acknowledges they love her. he acknowledges she loves them. the icl almost invited him to tell the court that the children’s brief calls with the mother must be explained by something the mother is doing or not doing- y could talk under water but he doesn’t do that with his mother. the father did not take that invitation-instead saying it is probably explained by the fact that the calls are in the evening and the boys are tired. the court will also recall his evidence about what should happen at handover (“we are supposed to be the adults here”), but acknowledgement of the possible need to find alternatives given the mother’s attitude. the court would be satisfied that he is not only a diligent and capable parent, but one who enjoys his boys. 40. more time with the father has been the consistent wish of the children. they are, of course, still young children. the court would take account of their views not because they should be given what they say they want, but because their views clearly reflect the strength of their relationships with their father and the paternal family. 41. the father’s orders sought provide for a regular 10:4 arrangement, but with an extra night once a month to give the boys some weekend time with their mother. they will have regular stretches of time with her during school holidays. it is submitted these orders are - in the unusual circumstances of this case and in circumstances where, notwithstanding the risks, the father concedes the children would have regular time with the mother – in the children’s best interests. other matters 42. the mother seeks that handovers which do not occur at school continue to occur at f contact centre. there was significant evidence which would support that this should not be the order. not least, the mother conceded that she is aware that f contact centre is not open on mondays and tuesdays, nor on public holidays. 43. if the court is inclined to make an order for handover to occur at f contact centre for a transition period, the father would seek that the interim orders requiring the mother to book and pay for this and notify the father and for an alternate location in the event she does not, be replicated. 44. the mother has an admitted history of breaching the orders. dr d opined that she regards the children as “her own property” (bottom p. 54). she tells extraordinary stories about the father- and presumably will continue to do so. in these circumstances the father seeks the protection of an airport watchlist order applying to the mother only. the court would understand him seeking such an order and would make it. 45. the father’s orders sought also seek that the mother be required to attend on a psychologist and/or psychiatrist. he seeks these orders without any optimism that the mother will engage effectively with such professionals, but in the hope that she might. as dr d opines, “even if the mother were to agree that she had delusional disorder, there would be no way to mandate the mother taking an anti-psychotic medication, even it if [sic] were regularly dispensed, as tablets are difficult to supervise in their administration, even in hospital”. as she opines, it may be the case that the mother has a personality disorder, rather than delusional disorder, in which case medication will presumably not assist. 46. there are risks associated with the children spending time with the mother, but it is the father’s case that they can be minimised by making him the primary carer and giving him sole parental responsibility. it is submitted that, in those circumstances, the risks are worth taking so that the children continue to benefit from a meaningful relationship with their mother.
respondent’s written submissions
74 the respondent mother’s submissions, filed 3rd june 2021, were as follows.
1) the mother seeks the orders set out in her case outline document filed 15 april 2021. in summary she seeks that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, that they continue live with their parents in an equal time arrangement in accordance with the interim orders made by consent in december 2019. the mother seeks that handovers that cannot occur at school occur at f contact centre and that orders be made facilitating communication between the children and the parent they are not spending time with. other ancillary orders are sought but do not need to be addressed in these submissions. 2) the case outline filed on behalf of the mother sets out the law applicable to parenting matters such as this. to the extent it is necessary the mother relies on that earlier summary and does not seek to replicate that in these submissions. family violence 3) the mother asserts a history of family violence perpetrated by the father. various documents were put to her in cross examination including from her counsellor’s notes, and copies of text messages between herself and the father during the relevant period, which the father says tell a different story. the mother did not resile from her evidence that the family violence she asserts occurred. the father was firm in his evidence that the family violence did not occur. as was put to the father in cross examination there are three possibilities that explain this situation: a) that the family violence did occur, or b) that the family violence did not occur, the mother knows that it did not occur, and that she is nevertheless asserting that it did to gain some kind of advantage in these proceedings, and/or to negatively affect the father’s relationship with the children, or c) that the family violence did not occur, but the mother genuinely believes it did, which suggests that the mother is suffering from some kind of delusional disorder. 4) the court could not, on the evidence before it, make a finding that the family violence occurred. this is not the same thing as making a finding that it did not occur. the mother provides an explanation as to why the documents do not appear to support her evidence. it is open to the court to decide whether to accept that explanation. if the court was to decide that the evidence was sufficient to ground a finding that on the balance of probabilities that the family violence as asserted by the mother did not occur, there would be a need to be specific articulation of which allegations or categories of family violence any such finding was in relation to. it is not the case as the father asserts at paragraph 4 of his submissions that “this is a case where the court will be able comfortably to find that there has been no family violence whatever perpetrated by the father.” the evidence before the court is not of such a scope as to ground a blanket finding that family violence of any kind never occurred in this relationship, and in any event such a finding is not consistent with the kinds of findings referred to in amador & amador [2009] famcafc 196. the evidence of the mother prepared as a self-represented party, it is conceded, may make such demarcation difficult. in any event, the mother’s case is that a positive finding one way or the other is not necessary in circumstances where on both parties’ cases the children are to spend substantial and significant time with each parent. 5) one of the challenges in this matter is that the court is left to determine what the implications of this dispute about family violence might be, and in particular what flow on effects a finding or even a strong inference that family violence did not occur as asserted by the mother might have in assessing the best interests of the children. 6) if the court finds that the family violence did not occur as the mother asserts, it is submitted that the court does not have sufficient evidence before it to make a finding one way or the other whether the reason for this is option (b) or (c) from those set out above. dr d certainly suggests at page 19 in reference to the mother’s reports to her that “if she truly believed these to be true they constated persecutory delusions.” she goes on to say at page 60 that “it is rare but possible to have a delusional disorder in which the patient is fully functional, but has a single delusion (fixed false belief) such as “the father is a hateful, homicidal person who would stop at nothing to harm her and even kill his own children”. despite evidence to the contrary that the father loved the children, came from a nurturing home and was struggling through court to get the best for his sons.” however dr d was not tasked with conducting a psychiatric assessment of the mother and as such properly does not purport to offer a diagnosis. she says (at page 61) that “whether the mother has delusional disorder or believes she is in danger from the father or has lied about the domestic violence to obtain an fvo is very difficult to ascertain.” the mother has not provided the court with psychological or psychiatric evidence that would enable this issue to be determined. the key issue for the court is what impact the mother’s beliefs (or assertions if not actually believed by her) might have on the children. 7) the father’s submissions at paragraph 5 refers to the “likely corrosive impact of her distorted reality upon the children.” he does not indicate what these might be. the father’s submissions do not point to any evidence of this impact on the children presently. if it has not occurred to date, then what evidence is there that it is not just possible but is in fact “likely” in the future, as he asserts? the evidence of both the father himself and the family report writer is that the children have a positive, warm and loving relationship with their father. it was put to the father in cross examination that if it was the mother’s aim to undermine his relationship with the children then she was doing a poor job of it. he agreed. while it is the case that dr d sets out (at pages 61 and 64) the risk of it being “highly psychologically damaging” to the children being exposed to the mother’s narrative of the father, it is submitted that these risks have not materialised. the children love, and on all accounts have a great relationship with, their father. given the time that has elapsed since separation, and considering the mother’s consistent assertions in relation to the family violence she says that she experienced, one might expect that such detrimental effects might have made themselves felt. it is submitted that they have not. 8) it is submitted that the greatest risk to the children if the mother asserts to them, or they otherwise become aware of the assertions made by their mother, that their father has threatened them or behaved in violent ways towards their mother, is that this view of their mother will prove inconsistent with their lived experiences of the father. it is submitted that the risk should this be the case is the children’s rejection of the mother and the deterioration in their relationship, not their relationship with the father. parental responsibility 9) the mother seeks that the parents share parental responsibility for the children. the father seeks that he has sole parental responsibility. 10) it appears that neither party is taking the position that the allegations of family violence are sufficient to say that the s61da(1) presumption does not apply, but rather the battle ground is whether the presumption is rebutted by evidence that it would not be in the children’s best interests for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility. the father asserts that it is not in the children’s best interests for them to share parental responsibility, the mother’s position is that it is. 11) the father’s case is that the communication between the parents is poor, and that historically the mother has made unilateral decisions in relation to the children, such as changing x’s school. the mother accepts that this was the case. 12) the mother’s case is that the parties communicate sufficiently well for the week about arrangement to work, and that indeed it has been working successfully despite the communication between the parties being sparse. neither party raises any significant issues regarding the welfare of the children in the current arrangements, and neither asserts any risks to the children that have been brought about through inadequate communication. the mother’s position is that there is no reason why they could not engage with one another to make any long-term decisions. she points to the fact that in december 2019 the parties agreed as to where y would go to preschool, and this has occurred. 13) this is not a matter in which the parties consistently abuse one another in their communication. this is a matter in which the issues raised is the limited nature of the communication. in cross examination the father was taken through the messages in the parenting app from the period since december 2019 when the week about arrangements came into operation, and he conceded that the nature of the communication was more in line with him providing information about sports (from a general mailout) and other information that did not require a response, and that in any event the mother usually “noted” that she had received such information. 14) the mother’s case is not assisted by the fact that she revealed under questioning by his honour that the person referred to in the material as “mr h”, is in fact a new partner that she is now living with. she agreed that she had not informed the father of this, despite the time that he would be spending with the children while they are in her care. that she was not upfront about this with the father or the court is problematic and a factor that will be taken into account. 15) regardless of what arrangements are in place for the children, whether those sought by the mother or the father, the reality is, given the history of the relationship between the parties and the personalities of each of them, that these are parents that are almost certainly going to have to parent in parallel to each other. they have effectively been doing just that on a week about arrangement. the mother’s position is that it is in the children’s best interests to have both parents involved in making decisions about their schooling and health care in circumstances where on either party’s case they are spending substantial and significant time with each parent. it is clear from the material filed by the parties that both parents are dedicated to the children’s wellbeing and are concerned to ensure they thrive. time arrangements 16) it is not in contention by either party that the children will, and do, benefit from having a meaningful relationship with each of their parents. this is clear from dr d’s report, and is recognised by the week about orders that the parties entered into by consent in december 2019, and the fact that until the father’s minute of orders sought for the final hearing neither parent sought a substantial change to these arrangements. 17) both parties agree that it is in the children’s best interests to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. the question before the court is the nature of this arrangement. the mother seeks that the week about arrangement continue, the father seeks that the children reduce their time with the mother to a 10/4 arrangement with the mother’s time occurring during the week and an extra night once per month to facilitate weekend time. 18) the father’s proposed time pattern provides very little weekend time between the children and their mother, which is important down time and family time. it will not allow her to routinely facilitate them attending any local events, children’s birthday parties or weekend extra-curricular activities. it is conceded that the mother’s evidence about her willingness to facilitate weekend sport was varied, but she herself seeks an order that she be required to take them to weekend sport. 19) neither party can point to any real negative effects on the children of the current week about arrangement, and it is telling that neither sought that the family report be updated. it is conceded by the father that the mother has complied with the december 2019 orders, and that his relationship with the boys has flourished. 20) the children are young, and their views would not be determinative. in the absence of an updated family report the most recent information on the children’s views comes from the icl who indicated more time with the father would not be inconsistent with what she understood of their views. 21) it is unclear how, if the rationale for the reduction in the time is the risk is that the children will be exposed to the mother’s views of the father, or her version of the history of the relationship, they are somehow less at risk of this exposure in 4 days a fortnight instead of 7. 22) the children appear to have a close and loving relationship with each of their parents and their extended family on both sides. the arrangements on either party’s proposal allow for the time with the extended families to continue. neither parent has any other children. 23) while neither parent is proposing orders that would involve a complete separation from a parent or other person, now that they have settled into their week about routine, the father is seeking to reduce the mother’s time with the children. the mother has always been the children’s primary carer. there may be an impact on the children in both being separated for longer periods (and on weekends) from their mother, and in trying to understand why this change is happening. the father’s responses to questions in cross examination about managing this change to their settled routine and care arrangements, while well-meaning, were nevertheless nebulous and revolved around providing comfort but not proactive planning for the orders he was seeking. 24) both of these children need their parents to cease to engage in litigation and to focus on parenting to their best of their ability. if they continue in the current week about arrangement there is no change to the children’s arrangements, and the parents can continue to parent in what appears to be a largely parallel, but successful, arrangement. if the mother’s time with the children is substantially reduced it is difficult to see how this will lead to a more harmonious and less-litigious relationship between the parties. f contact centre handovers. 25) the mother seeks handovers occur at f contact centre when they cannot occur at the children’s school(s). she acknowledged that there are disadvantages to this such as the restricted availability of the service. however, her position remains that this is her preference as it makes her feel safe. her evidence is that she has not observed the children to have any difficulty with this. the father’s evidence is that the children have negative memories of f contact centre. 26) given a) that no-one is suggesting that it be used as a supervision service and only as a handover centre, b) that the parties following questions from his honour could not identify a person they both agreed could conduct handover on their behalf, c) that there would only be limited occasions per year when f contact centre would be required, and d) the parties remain free to make alternative arrangements to move away from f contact centre as the children get older and the parties settle into the final arrangements,
a) that the family violence did occur, or b) that the family violence did not occur, the mother knows that it did not occur, and that she is nevertheless asserting that it did to gain some kind of advantage in these proceedings, and/or to negatively affect the father’s relationship with the children, or c) that the family violence did not occur, but the mother genuinely believes it did, which suggests that the mother is suffering from some kind of delusional disorder.
b) that the family violence did not occur, the mother knows that it did not occur, and that she is nevertheless asserting that it did to gain some kind of advantage in these proceedings, and/or to negatively affect the father’s relationship with the children, or c) that the family violence did not occur, but the mother genuinely believes it did, which suggests that the mother is suffering from some kind of delusional disorder.
c) that the family violence did not occur, but the mother genuinely believes it did, which suggests that the mother is suffering from some kind of delusional disorder.
a) that no-one is suggesting that it be used as a supervision service and only as a handover centre, b) that the parties following questions from his honour could not identify a person they both agreed could conduct handover on their behalf, c) that there would only be limited occasions per year when f contact centre would be required, and d) the parties remain free to make alternative arrangements to move away from f contact centre as the children get older and the parties settle into the final arrangements,
b) that the parties following questions from his honour could not identify a person they both agreed could conduct handover on their behalf, c) that there would only be limited occasions per year when f contact centre would be required, and d) the parties remain free to make alternative arrangements to move away from f contact centre as the children get older and the parties settle into the final arrangements,
c) that there would only be limited occasions per year when f contact centre would be required, and d) the parties remain free to make alternative arrangements to move away from f contact centre as the children get older and the parties settle into the final arrangements,
d) the parties remain free to make alternative arrangements to move away from f contact centre as the children get older and the parties settle into the final arrangements,
it is submitted that f contact centre remains the best option, albeit not a perfect one.
travel. 27) the father seeks in effect that the mother be prevented from travelling overseas with the children. he has couched this as a kind of “one sided” airport watch list order. placing a child’s name on what is now properly referred to as the family law watchlist prevents the travel of the child, either for a defined period, or if qualified, the parents may agree to take the child’s name off the watchlist for a specified time. a family law watchlist order is not made in relation to a particular parent. in practical terms, since the order the father seeks cannot be made, it seems he is asking for an order that the mother not be permitted to travel overseas with the children without an order of the court. this is the order the mother herself seeks, though hers is sought in mutual terms such that neither party should be permitted to travel overseas with the children without an order of the court. neither party has put evidence before the court that would enable the court to find that either party was a risk of taking the children overseas and not returning. ordering the mother to attend upon a psychologist or psychiatrist 28) orders 25 and 26 of the father’s minute set out in his case outline should not be made. the mother may choose to engage in psychological therapy from time to time. it may even be recommended that she do so. but to be ordered to do so, in final orders, where she must presumably meet the cost, is forced to provide ongoing reports to the father against her wishes, presumably until both children turn 18, is simply inappropriate, both in relation to this matter, and at law. 29) the father’s submissions do not identify what power the father says the court has to make such an order in circumstances where the orders are not part of the “gateway” to increasing time and thus attached to orders as to the welfare of the children, let alone how such onerous orders would be policed. noting that this is a matter that has already seen numerous applications for contravention, to put the parties in a position where the mother must effectively report to the father in relation to her mental health in circumstances where there is no evidence before the court that she has been diagnosed with a mental health issue is unwarranted and unsupported. the court would not make such an order.
submissions of the independent children’s lawyer
75 the icl’s submissions, filed 10th june 2021, were as follows.
1) on 23 april 2021 at the conclusion of the hearing his honour requested that the parties provide written submissions. the issues in dispute remain, a) parental responsibility for the children x and y. b) the time that the children should spend with each parent and any changeover arrangements. 2) the icl requests that these submissions be read in conjunction with the icl outline of case filed in these proceedings. 3) both the mother and the father gave oral evidence and had filed material for the hearing. 4) the reports of dr d and dr e were admitted into evidence but neither of the experts were required for cross examination. 5) it is submitted that the mother’s oral evidence was at times difficult to follow. the mother at times had difficulty understanding what the question was that she was being asked and had difficulty in answering the question she had actually been asked. at times she appeared unable to answer a question and was prompted on a number of occasions. it is noted that on the morning of her oral evidence she advised his honour that she had a migraine and had taken some medication to keep it at bay. position of the parties. 6) the father seeks orders as set out in his outline of case filed 14 april 2021 effectively being that he has sole parental responsibility for the children, that they live with him and spend 4 nights a fortnight with their mother. the father proposes that changeover be at school when applicable and at the front of store b in suburb c if the children are not attending school. 7) the mother proposes that the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children and that the current 50/50 shared care arrangement remain in place. she also remained quite adamant that any changeovers that could not occur at the school occur at f contact centre only. risk issues. 8) the father’s evidence raised the risk issue of the mother’s mental health and the impact this may have on the children when they are in her care. 9) the mother gave evidence that the father was a perpetrator of serious family violence against her and the children and she continues to hold concerns for the safety of the children in the father’s care. 10) the mother’s evidence was that the father is a serious risk to herself and the children. she maintained that the father would kill her if he had the chance, that the children were scared of him, that the father and his family continue to denigrate her and use the children as a conduit in which to convey this view and that the father has a ‘jekyll and hyde’ personality and continues to traumatise the children. despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary the mother continued to hold these beliefs. 11) the risk issues for the icl are, a) the status of the mother’s mental health. b) the cumulative emotional and or psychological harm for the children if they continue to be exposed to the mother’s beliefs about the father. c) the emotional or psychological risk to the children if they are to spend limited or no time with their mother. d) based on the evidence that has been filed by the parties, the independent evidence contained in the documents in the tender bundle and the oral evidence given by both parties, the icl has formed a view that the children are not at risk of physical, emotional or psychological harm when they are in the father’s care. the mother’s mental health. 12) the mother stated that she had no mental health diagnosis. 13) under cross examination by dr behrens a number of allegations that the mother made about the father were put to the mother including three specific serious allegations. these incidents were then referred to as a ‘shotgun incident’ where the mother alleged the father placed a shotgun against her head and threatened to kill her, the ‘knife incident’ where the mother alleged that the father put a knife to her throat when she was in the kitchen at the former family home with the children present and the ‘driving incident’ where the mother alleged that the father drove with herself and the children in the care at over 200km an hour towards a pole after he had threatened to kill them all. 14) it was put to the mother that these incidents did not occur and she was lying. the mother’s response was that the incidents had occurred and she was telling the truth. 15) it was put to the mother that she may be misremembering and she may actually have a serious delusional mental health issue. the mother denied this. 16) it was put to the mother that she had not reported these very serious incidents to her psychologist, the police, child protection, dvcs or any close friend as the documents produced under subpoena did not show any such reports. the mother’s response was that she had told her psychologist and dvcs but that they had failed to record this in their documents. 17) the mother stated that she had recorded the incidents in both a diary and a spreadsheet. both documents were called for but the mother was unable to answer the call. she advised that she had moved house and now had a different laptop and neither the diary nor spreadsheet could not [sic] be located. 18) it was put to the mother that if she truly believed these incident occurred she could not possibly propose seek the orders she was seeking. the mother’s response was difficult to understand and, it is submitted, was at times rambling and off topic. however in summary it appeared that the mother thought that the current arrangement was working for the children and should not be disrupted and everyone should move forward. this position is difficult to reconcile with her unshakable belief that the father poses such a risk to herself and the children. 19) the mother was asked if she would be willing to undergo a mental health assessment by a psychologist or psychiatrist to see if in fact she may have a mental health disorder such as a delusional disorder. the mother stated she would not undergo such an assessment as it was not necessary. she denied that she was either lying or delusional. when it was put to the mother that an order could be made that the children’s time with her be suspended or supervised only until she completed such an assessment her response was that she would still not undergo an assessment even if this meant the she had no time with the children. the mother did not appear to consider the impact on the children if they were unable to spend time with her due to her refusal undergo an assessment. time that the children spend with each parent and consideration of any unacceptable risk. 20) since december 2019 by consent the children have lived in a shared care arrangement with each parent on a week about basis. 21) the boys have continually expressed a view that they wished to spend more time with their father. this view was expressed to dr d in her report in 2020 and most recently to the icl when the icl met with the children on 14 april 2021. 22) the father gave evidence that the boys enjoyed being with him and there were no issues. the father described taking the boys to football practice and weekend games. he also described taking them to their swimming lessons. 23) if the children spoke negatively about their mother the father gave evidence that he “shut the conversation down” and spoke about something else. he stated that particularly x became anxious when he was aware that the changeover day was coming and the father’s evidence was that he spoke positively about the mother and they would be seeing him again soon. 24) the father’s evidence was that the boys did not like going to changeover at f contact centre and it had negative connotations for the boys. he described the changeover process and that it was all a bit of a production that x and y were well aware of. 25) it is submitted that the father provided consistent and guileless evidence about the relationship he has with the children. 26) the mother was asked by both dr behrens and the icl if she believed that the children were scared of the father. she replied that she believed that they were. 27) when asked how she formed this view the mother stated that the children had told her that they were scared for her. in her affidavit and her oral evidence she stated that x had become distressed saying that the father had threatened to hurt the mother and he was worried for her. her evidence was that this continued up to the present. 28) it was put to the mother that the evidence in dr d’s report did not support that the boys were scared of their father. neither x nor y had told either of the experts, anyone at school or the icl that they had heard the father makes threats to kill or hurt the mother. the mother acknowledged that this was the case. 29) it was put to the mother that the observations of the boys with their father and the paternal grandparents in the expert report was affectionate and loving and that there was no evidence that the children did not want to engage with the father. 30) the mother again acknowledged that this appeared to be the case. nevertheless she maintained her view. 31) the mother agreed that the children had spent time with the parents largely in line with the current orders. she stated that at time the children were hesitant to return to the father but she encouraged them to do so and at no time had the children refused to return to their father. 32) the icl put to the mother that is can be confusing and conflicting for children if they are exposed to views about a parent that does not align with their lived experience of that parent. expressly, that they are exposed to the mother’s view when they are with her that the father is a risk to herself and the children but that does not appear to be their experience of their father. 33) the mother agreed that this was the situation that x and y were in. 34) it was put to the mother that as the children grew older they would become tired of being in such a situation and may become resentful. the mother’s answer was that at this time the children were fine. 35) the father’s evidence about both boys experience of f contact centre was put to the mother. she disagreed that the boys did not like f contact centre, that they were happy to go there as they knew it was ‘safe’ and they liked the changeover process. 36) the mother gave evidence that the boys had been traumatised during the relationship. she also stated that they were continuing to be traumatised due to the father using the boys to convey derogatory messages to her. the father denied this. the mother further stated that it was likely that the boys would be further traumatised if changeover other than at the school was at a public place rather than f contact centre in case the father “went off’ or something happened. the mother appeared to also include the possibility of an incident between the father and a nominated agent of the mother’s if she did not wish to attend. 37) the mother was asked why she believed that the boys would be traumatised by meeting with the icl in april 2021 and why she had declined to facilitate such a meeting. the mother gave evidence that the boys were traumatised in their previous meeting in 2019 with an icl. when asked what she meant by this she explained that the boys were distressed and crying because she was not in the room, that they thought they would not see her again, that they were asked questions about their mum and dad and did not know why they were being asked these questions. she agreed that the recent email she had written in response to the icl’s request to meet the children may have been unreasonable. 38) throughout her evidence the mother did not waver from her belief that the children were scared of their father, that they had been, and continued to be, traumatised but that it was in the boys best interests that the current shared care arrangement continue. she continued to believe that the father was a serious threat. unacceptable risk. 39) in m and m (1988) 166 clr 69 the court determined the standard of proof in determining whether a child is exposed to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse if spending time with a parent is the civil standard of proof as expressed in the matter of briginshaw. 40) the matter of a v a [1998] famca 25, (1998) flc 92-800 extended the concept of unacceptable risk beyond sexual abuse to other types of risk such as physical and emotional harm. 41) section 60cc (2) (b)of the family law act does not mention the phrase “unacceptable risk’ but it speaks of the need to protect a child from physical, emotional and psychological harm through exposure to abuse which may take many forms ( simmons v kingley [2014] fam cacf 47 at [17-20] ) 42) it is submitted that the mother’s views concerning the father and the risk he poses to her are entrenched. 43) the mother has not changed her beliefs despite independent evidence showing the contrary. 44) it is unlikely that the mother would be able to consider an alternative without assistance. 45) any appropriate assistance may likely depend on what, if any, mental health issues the mother may have and what treatment, if any, would be most beneficial. 46) the mother has stated that she will not undergo a mental health assessment deeming it unnecessary. 47) as the mother is unlikely to change her view it is submitted that the boys will be continued to exposed to the views held by the mother when spending time with her. 48) this exposure may be, a) directly: such as the mother expressing to the children that the father is a threat, that he will harm her and insisting that changeovers be at f contact centre if not at school because she is not safe in a public place with the father b) indirectly: the mother’s demeanour if the father is spoken about, lack of any positive view of the father and her parenting of the boys in the belief that they continue to be traumatised. 49) it is submitted that a continued exposure of the children to the views of the mother will cause further emotional and psychological damage to the children. it is also submitted that the children may become resentful of spending time with the mother if she continues to hold these views and disengage from her in the future. this may result in the children having no relationship with their mother as they get older. 50) in m and m the court determined that in considering the concept of risk the court must consider whether there is a serious risk to the child, if so how serious is that risk, and determine how, if at all, the risk can be managed. 51) it is submitted that continued exposure of the children to the mother’s fixed beliefs about the father exposes them to emotional and psychological harm. 52) if this risk cannot be managed then the court would need to consider making orders that the children spend no time with the mother. 53) should this occur this raises another risk to the children of the impact on them of not spending time with their mother at all, in circumstances where they have always spent time with her and have been in a shared care arrangement with both parents since december 2019. 54) in considering the competing risks as outlined above it is submitted that the risk to the children can be mitigated at this time by reducing the time that the children spend with the mother and are therefore exposed to her views of the father. parental responsibility. 55) if the court accepts the mother’s evidence of the family violence perpetrated by the father it is submitted that the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility would be rebutted. the icl submits that the court would have difficulty in accepting that the incidents put to the mother occurred. 56) it is submitted that if equal shared parental responsibility is to be in the best interests of the boys the parents need to be able to communicate effectively and in a timely manner with each other in regards to major long term decisions about the children. 57) the father’s evidence is that he cannot communicate with the mother as she does not respond when he raises issues in regards to the boys. 58) both parents agreed that they communicate via the talking parents app. 59) the father conceded that many of the messages between the parents provided to the court were about extracurricular activities that did not necessary refer to the welfare of the children. the father agreed. 60) the father agreed that presently there were no major issues that the parents needed to determine about the boys but that they had also not discussed a possible high school for x. 61) on a number of occasions, specifically in regards to the attempted communication about christmas 2020 the mother’s respond [sic: “response”] to the father was to tell him to contact his solicitor. 62) this evasive communication appeared to support the father’s evidence in regards to the difficulties he had when trying to communicate with the mother. the mother did not appear to be willing to discuss the arrangements with the father directly using the talking parents app over the period where the solicitors were not available due to the christmas break. this resulted in the police attending the father’s holiday accommodation at the request of the mother to perform a welfare check on the boys. the icl submits that this was completely unnecessary and entirely avoidable. 63) it was put to the father that, aside from the christmas 2020 issues, there had been no major communication issues since the children had been living in a shared care arrangement. the father agreed. 64) the mother has previously made unilateral decisions in regards to changeover locations and variation of changeover dates to accommodate her decision resulting in a number of contravention applications. this appeared to be because the dates on which changeover was to occur were days on which f contact centre was not open and she did not agree with the alternative public place location. the mother’s evidence was that she made these decisions due to her safety concerns and that she had proposed makeup time. 65) it was put to the mother that if she complied with orders there would be no need for makeup time. she stated again it was for safety reasons. the icl submits that the court cannot be confident that the mother will comply with any order for changeover at a location that the mother does not agree with. 66) the mother unilaterally changed x’s school without the knowledge or consent of the father stating that this was due to x being bullied. this was not supported by the school records of the information contained in dr d’s report when she spoke with the school principal. the mother did not advise the father or the court when she had the opportunity to do so that she had changed x’s school until it was a fait accompli. 67) the mother, under cross examination by dr behrens, advised the court, and apparently the father for the first time, that she had a partner whom she described as a colleague. under further cross examination the mother advised that she did not work with this person and in fact she lived with him and had done so for approximately six months. in circumstances where the children have been spending week about with each parent since december 2019 it is submitted that this is important information in regards to the living arrangements for the children and involves a significant person in the children’s lives about whom the father had no knowledge. again this appeared to be a decision affecting the children that the mother did not think the father needed to be advised about. 68) in conclusion the icl supports the orders as sought by the father, that he have sole parental responsibility, that the children live with him and that they spend four nights per fortnight with the mother with changeover to occur at school or store b suburb c on other occasions.
a) parental responsibility for the children x and y. b) the time that the children should spend with each parent and any changeover arrangements.
b) the time that the children should spend with each parent and any changeover arrangements.
a) the status of the mother’s mental health. b) the cumulative emotional and or psychological harm for the children if they continue to be exposed to the mother’s beliefs about the father. c) the emotional or psychological risk to the children if they are to spend limited or no time with their mother. d) based on the evidence that has been filed by the parties, the independent evidence contained in the documents in the tender bundle and the oral evidence given by both parties, the icl has formed a view that the children are not at risk of physical, emotional or psychological harm when they are in the father’s care.
b) the cumulative emotional and or psychological harm for the children if they continue to be exposed to the mother’s beliefs about the father. c) the emotional or psychological risk to the children if they are to spend limited or no time with their mother. d) based on the evidence that has been filed by the parties, the independent evidence contained in the documents in the tender bundle and the oral evidence given by both parties, the icl has formed a view that the children are not at risk of physical, emotional or psychological harm when they are in the father’s care.
c) the emotional or psychological risk to the children if they are to spend limited or no time with their mother. d) based on the evidence that has been filed by the parties, the independent evidence contained in the documents in the tender bundle and the oral evidence given by both parties, the icl has formed a view that the children are not at risk of physical, emotional or psychological harm when they are in the father’s care.
d) based on the evidence that has been filed by the parties, the independent evidence contained in the documents in the tender bundle and the oral evidence given by both parties, the icl has formed a view that the children are not at risk of physical, emotional or psychological harm when they are in the father’s care.
a) directly: such as the mother expressing to the children that the father is a threat, that he will harm her and insisting that changeovers be at f contact centre if not at school because she is not safe in a public place with the father b) indirectly: the mother’s demeanour if the father is spoken about, lack of any positive view of the father and her parenting of the boys in the belief that they continue to be traumatised.
b) indirectly: the mother’s demeanour if the father is spoken about, lack of any positive view of the father and her parenting of the boys in the belief that they continue to be traumatised.
outline of principle
76 in ams v aif, hayne j said (internal citations omitted):[61] 4] the problems that family law legislation deals with are human problems: with all their attendant variety and complexity. and at the end of a court proceeding under such legislation, a judge must make an order - usually an order that says yes or no to some application. "[a] complicated mass of human experience has to be reduced to the simplest possible terms." because the problems are human problems, because they are as varied and complicated as they are, the legislature speaks in terms more often found in statements of aspiration than legal prescription. it is, then, hardly surprising that the guiding principles prescribed by the legislation for application in cases concerning the guardianship or custody of children or related issues, are principles that seldom, if ever, permit syllogistic reasoning. 205] further, when considering the reasons given by a judge who has made an order in an application about the guardianship or custody of children, it is necessary to bear steadily in mind that the judge must grapple with the chaotic complexity of real life, make predictions not only of what he or she concludes may happen in future but also of what will be "best" for the child, and do so having regard to what the parties have chosen to contest or emphasise in the course of the hearing.
77 in a number of respects, the concerns and observations that i have noted reflect the varied interplay of facts, circumstances, legal principle and discretion, which are the warp and woof of all trials. such matters were more elegantly put by the high court in the joint judgment of gleeson cj, gummow and kirby jj in fox v percy, in that court’s consideration of appellate intervention. their honours said (internal citations omitted):[62]
on the one hand, the appellate court is obliged to “give the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first instance.” on the other, it must, of necessity, observe the “natural limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on the record. these limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the “feeling” of a case which an appellate court, reading the transcript, cannot always fully share. furthermore, the appellate court does not typically get taken to, or read, all of the evidence taken at the trial. commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the obligation at trial to receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence and to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.
78 it is also important to set out now the jurisprudential framework or scaffold in part vii of the act to which the court must have proper regard.
79 in mazorski v albright, in the light of, and by reference to, relevant full court authority, brown j conveniently set out an overview of principle in relation to part vii of the act, using of course as a primary point of reference the full court’s decision in goode v goode.[63] respectfully and gratefully, i adopt brown j’s comments:[64]  the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))
80 her honour also made important observations about the term “meaningful”, as used in part vii of the act, in the context of what is comprehended by a “meaningful relationship.” at [20] – [26], her honour outlined a range of considerations. i set them out below, and again respectfully (and gratefully) adopt brown j’s observations:[65] ] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s 60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.  ] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.  ] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):  6] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.  ] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
81 in addition to the above, i recall kay j’s important observation in godfrey v sanders, at [36], where his honour said (emphasis added):[66]
even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
82 similar comments were made by dessau j in relation to a long-distance and meaningful relationship in m v s at [45] (emphasis added):[67]
i am conscious that a long-distance relationship, with longer but less frequent times spent together, is inevitably different from a relationship where people live closer together with regular face-to-face contact. but it does not itself mean it cannot be meaningful.
83 the comments by kay j in godfrey & sanders, and by dessau j in m v s, were cited with approval by the full court in mccall v clark at [116].[68] similarly, the full court in sigley v evor approvingly canvassed the same decisions, at [131] – [136] and again at [182] – [183]. although primarily stated in the context of a “relocation” case, the basic principle remains apposite for other circumstances, such as the present.
84 further, i should note that in sigley v evor, at [136], the full court also commented as follows (emphasis added):
we also observe that in champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 the full court (thackray, o’ryan & benjamin jj) observed at [103]:
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994.) (emphasis in original)
85 the full court also observed at [191]: “the first and very important observation we would make about this complaint is that the expression ‘meaningful relationship’ is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’ ”.
86 finally, regarding proper consideration of allegations of “risk”, it is sufficient to recall and record the comments of the full court in amador v amador firstly at [90] thus:[69]
clearly, the more serious the allegation the greater degree of certainty in relation to making the finding is required. as dixon j set forth in briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 at p.362:
the seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequence flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal.
again in neat holdings pty ltd v karajan holdings pty ltd [1992] hca 66, (1992) 110 alr 449, 67 aljr 170 the high court said at alr 450, aljr 170: “the strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts on the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature of what it is sought to prove.”
87 then at [94] – [96], the full court continued: ] a finding by a trial judge in a children’s case under the act that a party has assaulted another party or a person can have significant impact on the findings made on the matters the court is required to consider under section 60cc of the act. the provisions of sections 60cc(2)(b), 60cc(3)(f),(i),(j) and (m) would require a consideration of the impact of any finding of fact as to violence perpetrated by a party seeking a children’s order. [95] the best interests of a child the subject of an application for a parenting order must require that the court determine relevant allegations of violence where that can be done. the consequence of placing a child under the supervision and/or care of a person who has been violent may be far reaching and very detrimental to the child’s welfare. the more serious the allegation of violence the more important it will be to the child to investigate and determine the allegation. as stated earlier we regard an allegation of rape by the father of the mother to be a very serious allegation which should, if possible, be determined. [96] it is important, in our view, not to confuse what has been said by the high court and the full court as to the obligations on a trial judge to make positive findings of fact in relation to allegations of abuse or sexual abuse against a child where parenting orders are sought and where the test to be applied is “unacceptable risk”, with the circumstance in a parenting case where allegations have been made of domestic violence and/or assault by one party upon another. in the latter case it will be necessary for the court to make findings where the evidence enables that to be done.
88 obviously, i take such statements of principle as critical in the current proceeding in determining what orders are in the best interests of the boys.
consideration & disposition
89 first, i must make further comment on particular aspects of the evidence before the court. given what i have already said in these reasons, i can be quite succinct – for a change.
90 curiously, there was barely passing comment on the two reports of dr e and dr d by anyone. this was understandable because of them being prepared in 2018 and 2019 respectively. that said, they both contained very helpful and important comment on, and analysis of, the parties, the mother in particular. for my part, the report of dr d – again i note that it was unchallenged in any respect – was particularly helpful. having watched and engaged with the mother not only during the trial but on many occasions over a number of years leading up to it, almost all of dr d’s comments, in my view, remain apposite and directly relevant to the mother in the light of the evidence given by her at trial. indeed, there was little in the mother’s evidence that would warrant me to take any major different view to those expressed by dr d, not in any clinical sense but notably in the complete dissonance between, for example, the mother’s account of how the boys are responding or reacting to their father and all of the other compelling evidence contrary to the mother’s account.
91 secondly, it follows from this view, and the strong and quite unqualified acceptance of dr d’s assessment of the mother that, not as a juridical assessment but essentially as a human consideration (and to the degree apposite, a legal consideration regarding, for example, questions of parental capacity and insight), i am deeply moved by and rather sorry for the plight of the mother. she is both unable and unwilling either to see or to accept what is plain to everyone else, such as that the boys not only love their father intensely but also there is no possible, or plausible, risk to them from him. further, she plainly considers herself to be at grave risk from the father. she is the only person to do so.
92 thirdly, the mother’s lack of insight regarding the significance of her “colleague”, turned lover and partner, mr h was also deeply troubling. how or why she would not consider that a person with whom she co-habits and does so when the boys are in her care for such long periods of time is a person of significance in their lives, and therefore of special interest to the court, is astonishing. mr h should have been on affidavit. the mother should have disclosed details of her relationship with him. she did not do so. this was a very significant omission. it was a crucial piece of the parenting puzzle that, for reasons passing strange, the mother either did not see as important, or deliberately kept it to herself and hid it from the court.
93 fourthly, unless and until the mother obtains proper professional assistance to help her through whatever parenting maze she seems regularly to inhabit, which seems really quite removed from the reality of everyone else, and in particular how to deal with the father and her very troubling memories (whatever their bases), i fear that she will remain a troubled and angry mother. unless she obtains such assistance, in my view, it also means that her communication with the father, such as it is, will remain highly problematic. absent proper assistance and some change in the dynamic and the forces in play in the mother’s life, in my view, the evidence clearly highlights that, over time, there is a potential risk to her relationship with the children. this may be simply or solely from her completely jaundiced view of the father – historically and current, or it may be from an even more complex range of factors, many of which are noted by dr d. the ball is squarely in the mother’s court to take remedial/therapeutic action for her own sake, and for the sake of the children.
94 in the light of all the evidence, it is time to turn to the dreaded legislative scaffold or pathway prescribed in part vii of the act.[70]
95 the boys are still relatively young, which militates somewhat the weight to be given to their views. that said, as recorded in each of the reports noted, and equally so by the icl in her meeting(s) with them, they have consistently expressed a strong view to spend more time with their father. there is no doubt that they love their mother but they particularly want to spend more time with their father.
96 there is no question that the boys have a good and close relationship with both parents, especially the father. although not the subject of cross examination, all independent reports confirm that the boys also have a close relationship with the paternal grandparents, but rather less so with the maternal family. for reasons already recorded, unfortunately it is unknown what the relationship of the boys is with “mr h”, the mother’s new partner.
97 as to the considerations in sub-paragraphs (c), (ca), (f) and (i), regarding parental decision-making, spend time and communicate with the children, fulfilment of parental “obligations”, parental capacity to provide for the needs of the children, and attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood, the evidence shows a quite disjointed range of matters.
98 for example, there was the undisputed instance where the mother unilaterally changed x’s school, with no notice to or consultation with the father. there have been regular skirmishes, over quite a period of time, regarding changeovers, and also regarding “time-with” arrangements. in my view, the evidence clearly puts the responsibility for the overwhelming majority of these difficulties at the feet of the mother. primarily, they have arisen because of her historical and ongoing belief in the danger posed to her and the children by the father.
99 the mother is very earnest in her care of the children and in her actions more generally regarding the boys. invariably, and certainly in recent times, she does so with little regard to or consultation with the father. on the other hand, the father is, on his own evidence and based on the observations of the experts noted, much more relaxed (in a good way, not lackadaisical) in his approach to the care of the children. he is assiduous, in his relaxed way, with the care of the children. certainly in terms of their responses during the assessments by experts, and also in the responses of the boys with the icl, the children enjoy the much more relaxed parenting of the father. “difference” in parenting styles is not uncommon. nor is “difference”, strictly speaking, “opposition”, it is simply “different.” however, in this matter, any and all differences in parenting styles and approaches are magnified many times because of the disturbing history between the parties and its flow-on effects for the mother. all of this said, there is no question that both parents love the boys intensely.
100 put another way, “highly strained”, bordering on the “dysfunctional”, is perhaps the best way to describe the co-parenting relationship. another way to describe it, with which both parents seem to agree, is that neither of them effectively communicate at all, even using a parenting app. in this respect it almost matters not a jot who is primarily or even solely responsibility for this sad and deeply regrettable situation.
101 for the purposes of sub-paragraphs (d) and (e), on the evidence, especially of the experts, it is highly unlikely that there will be much, if any, difficulty arising from a change in the “time-with” arrangements for the boys spending somewhat more time with the father and less time with the mother. unsurprisingly, the change in time-with arrangements will quite likely have a greater impact upon the mother rather more so than on the boys. over a period of time, one may hope that both parents (and the boys) will acclimatise to the “tweaking” of the current time-with orders. certainly in terms of “practical difficulty” and “expense”, little will change on the father’s orders being made.
102 for the same or similar reasons just noted, the considerations under sub-paragraph (g) are readily fulfilled. the father will, in my view, clearly, readily and well attend to the boys having due and proper regard to their ages and levels of maturity. the mother would do so as well but in a rather different way. it is not a contest between the parents as to who is the better parent. it is a much more complex and nuanced set of circumstances that reflect the complexities of the parental and relational history between the parents. always, the ultimate criterion is what is in the best interests of the boys having regard to all of the circumstances and the evidence before, and assessed by, the court.
103 there was a family violence order to which the father consented without admissions. the allegations of extreme family violence have been canvassed at some length in the course of these reasons. accordingly, i need only comment on the considerations in sub-paragraphs (j) and (k) as follows.
104 i cannot and do not make any definitive finding that the despicable acts complained of by the mother never happened. however, there is only the mother’s troubled evidence that they did and a very large amount of independent evidence that they did not. the mother plainly and vehemently believes that she was the victim of extreme family violence and over a significant period of time. the court has significant expert evidence that the mother has suffered from various psychiatric and psychological conditions including paranoia and delusions. she does not present in court in these ways, but it is otherwise impossible to account for the extraordinary dissonance in her evidence regarding the allegedly violent and completely villainous father she perceives and fears, on the one hand, and the genial, gentle, child-focussed father deeply beloved by the boys (who have not the slightest fear of him at all), as well as the strong expert evidence that supports his account and deeply, if not thoroughly, undercuts the mother’s evidence, on the other.
105 in my view, the orders proposed by the father are not only in the best interests of the boys but also are the most preferable and least likely to lead to further litigation.
106 it remains only to consider whether an order should be made for the father to have sole parental responsibility. two observations may be made briefly – in addition to what has already been stated in these reasons..
107 first, the extensive allegations of extreme family violence, of themselves, in my view are more than sufficient to rebut the presumption under s.61da of the act for equal shared parental responsibility.
108 secondly, the evidence of both parties similarly is more than sufficient to enable the court to find that the communication between the parties is essentially, and practically, non-existent.
109 accordingly, and also because the boys will be spending more time with the father during school terms, there should be an order for sole parental responsibility in the father’s favour. he is required to keep the mother informed of any major long-term decision regarding the boys care and welfare. indeed, absent emergency, he is to consult the mother about any such issue beforehand but ultimately he is vested, pursuant to these orders, with sole parental responsibility to make such decisions.
110 the orders sought by the father are, in my view, very much in the children’s best interests. to a reasonable degree, and while ensuring the children maintain a good and close relationship with their mother, the orders sought by the father and now made by the court will safe-guard them from the ongoing, and thus far, unrelenting and tremendously negative view (both explicit and implicit) that the mother has of the father. moreover, notwithstanding the relative peace over the last short while when a shared-care arrangement has been in place (presumably to some degree this “peace” has been because the parties have been before the court and thereby subject to a greater scrutiny than would otherwise be the case), i have a greater degree of confidence in the father supporting and encouraging the boys’ relationship with the mother than vice-versa.
dated: 3 february 2022
[1] apart from these incidents being recorded in multiple affidavits filed by the mother, they were referred to on multiple occasions in the course of the hearing. see, for example, transcript (22nd and 23rd april 2021) at pp.70 – 73, 75 – 83, 86 – 88, 90 – 93 and 100 – 101. hereafter, references will be simply “t” followed by the relevant page number.[2] although at times unrepresented, in the course of the litigation the mother confirmed that she had used 10 different lawyers to act on her behalf. t 137.[3] references to the mother’s “non-reporting” of the allegations may be found in the following places in the transcript: t 81 – 82, 109, 121, and 132. it should be noted however that at par.50 of dr e’s june 2018 report, there is a summary of these allegations. likewise, in summary fashion, at par.8 of dr d’s report, there is mention of incidents involving “a gun and knives on several occasions in front of the children.”[4] see t 114 – 115, 121.[5] t 109 & 153.[6] t 93.[7] t 126 – 127.[8] see, for example, t 120.[9] the family reports by psychologist, dr e, (in june 2018), and by psychiatrist, dr d, (in november 2019) were admitted into evidence as, respectively, exhibits a and c. neither expert was required for cross examination. details from these reports are set out later in these reasons.[10] t 22.[11] t 24.[12] there was an earlier tender bundle that became exhibit b. the later tender bundle, again from the father, was marked for identification (mfi1). marked sections of that bundle were later formally tendered.[13] t 29.[14] t 33.[15] t 33 – 35.[16] t 36 – 37.[17] t 38 & 40.[18] see t 40.[19] t 41.[20] among other places, see t 57 – 58.[21] t 62.[22] t 70 – 71. the shotgun incident was said to have taken place in may 2017. see t 75.[23] see t 72.[24] t 73 – 74.[25] t 74 – 75.[26] t 76 – 78. the clinical notes in question here are dated 19th october 2017.[27] see, for example, t 79 – 80.[28] t 80 – 82.[29] t 83.[30] t 83 – 84.[31] t 85 – 86.[32] t 87.[33] t 90.[34] t 90 & 109. at t 112, the mother confirmed that she never told anyone about the alleged threats by the father to force her into the “nesting arrangement” for the boys.[35] t 91 – 92.[36] t 93.[37] t 100 – 101.[38] t 102.[39] t 103.[40] t 104.[41] t 107 & 108. see also t 181 – 182.[42] t 114 – 115.[43] t 117. there are similarly grave comments at t 126.[44] t 120.[45] t 121.[46] t 129.[47] t 130 – 131.[48] t 132 – 134.[49] t 147.[50] see t 149 – 151.[51] t 153 – 154.[52] t 161 – 162.[53] t 156 – 158.[54] t 165 – 173.[55] but see some qualification of this at t 177.[56] t 173.[57] t 174.[58] t 178 – 179.[59] t 180.[60] t 184.[61] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.228 [204] & [205]. of course, the comments by hayne j were in a legislative context different to that which operates today. accepting that qualification, respectfully, his honour’s observations remain important.[62] fox v percy [2003] hca 22; (2003) 214 clr 118 at pp.125-126 [23]. see also the extensive discussion by mchugh j in the same case at [65] – [93]. more recently, see the high court’s comments in lee v lee [2019] hca 28; (2019) 266 clr 129 especially in the plurality’s judgment (bell, gageler, nettle and edelman jj) at [55].[63] goode v goode [2006] famcafc 1346; (2006) 206 flr 212; (2007) 36 fam lr 422.[64] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[65] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. more recently still, a further full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[66] godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102; (2007) 208 flr 287.[67] m v s [2006] famca 1408; (2008) 37 fam lr 32.[68] mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483.[69] amador v amador [2009] famcafc 196; (2010) 43 fam lr 268. the civil standard of proof referred to here has, of course, been formalised by s.140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth). in relation to risk, more particularly risk of sexual abuse (“unacceptable risk”), which is not argued in the current matter, see the full court’s comments in johnson & page [2007] famca 1235; (2007) flc 93-344 especially at [57] – [77], and earlier in m v m (1988) 166 clr 166 at [22] – [25], and in the full court decision in a v a [1998] famca 25; (1998) flc 92-800 especially at [3.9] – [3.37].[70] without necessarily listing each sub-paragraph of the “considerations” in s.60cc(3), i should be taken to follow them sequentially.