last updated: 12 may 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
rice & powell [2022] fedcfamc2f 161
orders
the court orders by consent that:
1. all previous parenting orders be discharged.
2. the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x (born: in 2007) (“x”) and y (born: in 2011) (“y”) (“the children”).
the court orders that:
3. where the parties are unable to reach an agreement, prior to implementing any major long-term decision in relation to the children, while ever the children live with the father, the following applies (if either of the children returns to live primarily with the mother, the following orders shall apply in the mother’s favour in relation to that child/children):  the father will advise the mother in writing of the proposed decision intended to be made by him, (b) the father will seek a written response from the mother within 14 days, (c) the father will consider by reference to the best interests of the children, and any such response from the mother prior to making the decision, and (d) the father will advise the mother in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of his final decision.   the father will seek a written response from the mother within 14 days, (c) the father will consider by reference to the best interests of the children, and any such response from the mother prior to making the decision, and (d) the father will advise the mother in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of his final decision.   the father will consider by reference to the best interests of the children, and any such response from the mother prior to making the decision, and (d) the father will advise the mother in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of his final decision.   the father will advise the mother in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of his final decision.
relocation
4. subject to order 26 below in relation to y, the children live with the father.
5. the father may relocate the residence of the children to the canberra/city b region.
6. upon relocating the residence of the children, the father must immediately notify in writing to the mother the full address of the residence and all telephone or email contact details, and the father agrees to notify the mother within 24 hours of any changes to those contact details.
parent’s time with children
7. unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, x spend time with the mother:  every second weekend from 5:00pm on friday until 5:00pm on sunday, and (b) half of the nsw gazetted school holidays.   half of the nsw gazetted school holidays.
8. unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, y spend time with the mother at the following times:  every second weekend from 5:00pm on friday until 5:00pm on sunday, and (b) the first half of two nsw gazetted school holiday periods, and for all of the remaining two nsw gazetted school holiday periods.   the first half of two nsw gazetted school holiday periods, and for all of the remaining two nsw gazetted school holiday periods.
it is noted that, for the purposes of this order, the full school holidays shall not be during the christmas/new year long holidays.
9. unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, and notwithstanding any other order, the children shall spend time with the parents at the following times:  during the easter period: (i) from 10:00am to 5:00pm on easter sunday with the mother in years ending with an odd number, and (ii) from 10:00am to 5:00pm on easter sunday with the father in years ending with an even number (b) during the christmas period: (i) in years ending with an odd number: from 10:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the father, and from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the mother. (ii) in years ending with an even number: from 10:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the mother, and from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the father. (c) from 10:00am to 5:00pm on mother’s day (sunday) with the mother. (d) from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day (sunday) with the father.   from 10:00am to 5:00pm on easter sunday with the mother in years ending with an odd number, and (ii) from 10:00am to 5:00pm on easter sunday with the father in years ending with an even number  ) from 10:00am to 5:00pm on easter sunday with the father in years ending with an even number   during the christmas period: (i) in years ending with an odd number: from 10:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the father, and from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the mother. (ii) in years ending with an even number: from 10:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the mother, and from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the father. (c) from 10:00am to 5:00pm on mother’s day (sunday) with the mother. (d) from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day (sunday) with the father.   in years ending with an odd number: from 10:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the father, and from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the mother. (ii) in years ending with an even number: from 10:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the mother, and from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the father.  ) in years ending with an even number: from 10:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the mother, and from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the father.   from 10:00am to 5:00pm on mother’s day (sunday) with the mother. (d) from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day (sunday) with the father.   from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day (sunday) with the father.
10. the children’s time with the mother can occur at her residence
changeover
11. unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, for the purpose of orders 7 – 10, changeover shall occur at an agreed location roughly half-way between the parties’ residences. absent agreement regarding the changeover venue, it shall be at mcdonalds at town c.
communication
12. the children have telephone or other video-conferencing communication with the mother:  at 7:00pm with the mother to initiate the call: (i) each wednesday, and (ii) alternate sunday during the week that the children do not see the mother.   each wednesday, and (ii) alternate sunday during the week that the children do not see the mother.  ) alternate sunday during the week that the children do not see the mother.
13. notwithstanding any other order, the children are at liberty to contact the mother in accordance with their wishes.
14. for the purposes of communicating information the mother and father will:  communicate by telephone all matters of urgent nature, and (b) in all other cases, communicate by an agreed parenting app (such as my family wizard, talking parents or similar) to communicate about all day-to-day matters relating to the children, including arrangements for each parent to spend time with the children, with such communication to be limited to the care and wellbeing of the children.   in all other cases, communicate by an agreed parenting app (such as my family wizard, talking parents or similar) to communicate about all day-to-day matters relating to the children, including arrangements for each parent to spend time with the children, with such communication to be limited to the care and wellbeing of the children.
15. the parents attend a facilitated parenting meeting facilitated by d families or other agreed organization at a frequency agreed between the parents, but failing agreement, at least 2 times per year, with the costs of such a meeting to be shared equally between the parents. for the purposes of this order the parents will forward a list of issues for discussion (if any) to the other parent via the parenting app no fewer than 7 days prior to the scheduled meeting.
medical
16. the children engage in psychological treatment with an appropriate service in the local area to assist with managing their mental health and transitional needs.
17. the parties shall inform each other, as soon as reasonably practicable, of any medical condition, significant health issue or other illness suffered by the children, via telephone in the case of emergencies, or otherwise, in writing via the parenting app.
18. the parties shall, at all times, keep each other informed of any appointments with any medical practitioner, counsellor, or service that the children engage with, and that these orders operate as authority for the parties to obtain information from any such practitioner or service.
school information
19. the parties authorise the schools attended by the children to give the parties information relating to the children’s educational progress, and other school related activities and supply them with copies of notices (including but not limited to passwords for any school online portal), school reports, photographs, certificates, and awards obtained by the children (at the cost of the requesting party).
restraints
20. for the protection of the children, and of mr powell, the mother is to ensure that her husband, mr powell, does not physically discipline or harm the children at any time.
21. for the protection of the children, and equally for the protection of mr powell in the light of the ongoing but unsubstantiated assertions against him, the mother is to ensure that the children are not left in the sole care of mr powell without another adult being substantially present.
22. the parties are restrained from speaking in a manner that is insulting, belittling, rebuking, or denigrating of each other or each other’s family members, or allowing any other person to do so in the presence or hearing distance of the children.
23. the parties are restrained from discussing these court proceedings with the children, or doing so in their presence, or allowing any other person to do so.
24. pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975, and on a without admissions basis, each party is restrained by injunction from:   shouting at the children, (b) physically disciplining or threatening to physically discipline the children in any way or from allowing any other person to physically discipline or threaten to physically discipline the children in any way during those periods that the children are in their respective care, or (c) exposing the children to conflict or violent behaviour (including physical and verbal abuse) during those periods that the children are in their respective care.   physically disciplining or threatening to physically discipline the children in any way or from allowing any other person to physically discipline or threaten to physically discipline the children in any way during those periods that the children are in their respective care, or (c) exposing the children to conflict or violent behaviour (including physical and verbal abuse) during those periods that the children are in their respective care.   exposing the children to conflict or violent behaviour (including physical and verbal abuse) during those periods that the children are in their respective care.
25. during the time the children are with either parent, that parent shall:  respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the children about the personal life of the other parent or their families, (b) speak of the other parent respectfully, and (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent or their family in the presence or hearing of the children and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.   speak of the other parent respectfully, and (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent or their family in the presence or hearing of the children and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.   not denigrate or insult the other parent or their family in the presence or hearing of the children and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.
26. the independent children’s lawyer is to:   explain these orders to the children, (b) remain in the matter for the next 9 months so that on two occasions she can meet with the children and check-in with how they are going (y in particular), and, (c) should the independent children’s lawyer form a view that y wishes to return to live primarily with his mother (noting that he wishes anyway to live in a week-about arrangement), absent agreement between the parties regarding live with and spent time with orders regarding any child returning to live primarily with the mother, the independent children’s lawyer is at liberty to relist the matter to determine such a change in residence and related matters.   remain in the matter for the next 9 months so that on two occasions she can meet with the children and check-in with how they are going (y in particular), and, (c) should the independent children’s lawyer form a view that y wishes to return to live primarily with his mother (noting that he wishes anyway to live in a week-about arrangement), absent agreement between the parties regarding live with and spent time with orders regarding any child returning to live primarily with the mother, the independent children’s lawyer is at liberty to relist the matter to determine such a change in residence and related matters.   should the independent children’s lawyer form a view that y wishes to return to live primarily with his mother (noting that he wishes anyway to live in a week-about arrangement), absent agreement between the parties regarding live with and spent time with orders regarding any child returning to live primarily with the mother, the independent children’s lawyer is at liberty to relist the matter to determine such a change in residence and related matters.
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville:
introduction
1 this is a very long-running parenting matter. it involves two children: 14 year old x and 10 year old y (“the children”). i delivered very long oral reasons in mid-december. at that time, and particularly because the mother (ms powell, formerly, ms powell) was relatively recently self-represented, i advised the parties and the independent children’s lawyer (“the icl”) that i would provide the reasons in written form. these are those reasons revised from the transcript.
2 history and context are important matters in any litigation. among other things, they can explain a number of things that might otherwise remain hidden but nonetheless are crucially relevant to the determination of matters that are currently before the court. in the course of these reasons, i provide a number of items of history and context that were never addressed or referred to either at the final hearing or in submissions. in part, this may be explained by the simple fact that, although there are now many other actors on the litigious stage, and past legal thespians (to keep the theatrical metaphor running briefly) have been replaced, the parents and i have been the only persons involved in the matter since it began, now somewhat lost in the mists of time, in 2016.
3 put very shortly here but noted in detail later in these reasons, nearly everyone at the latest final hearing really only focussed on one issue, namely mr powell and a range of mostly historical matters. it almost became a single-issue trial of the allegations against mr powell. proper or more balanced attention should also have been paid to other issues, such as the actions of the father and also of x, notably in the light of material that was never referred to, such as two memoranda from ms e, and a family report of ms f that was released to the parties just before the 2017 final hearing. but more of these things later in these reasons.
background
4 this court made final parenting orders by consent on 23rd november 2017 regarding the children. those orders provided for the children to live with their mother in city g(strictly speaking, a township called town h, the road to which one passes on the way into city g, as i did for the 14 years or so when i was running the circuit to that delightful mini-central western metropolis), and to spend significant and substantial time with the father. those orders were made in circumstances where there were many accusations of abuse by one or either party against the other, including in particular, against the mother’s husband, mr powell. many similar accusations have come and gone since those final orders, while quite a few of them have remained and most recently have been – literally – regurgitated.
5 quite a few accusations against mr powell, in my view quite improperly, from prior to the 2017 final consent orders, were raised and relied upon in the current litigation. formal objection should have been taken to them. regrettably, this never happened. this should not have occurred for the simple and obvious reason that the parties entered final consent orders in 2017 knowing full well at that time the accusations being raised by one or both of them. the parties also well knew that the accusations had, by and large, never been established. notwithstanding these allegations, in 2017 the parents resolved the matter by consent. but the old allegations were nonetheless ventilated, often if not usually in a most prejudicial way, and doubtless with prejudicial intent, against the mother and mr powell.
6 in general terms, in my view, there were, and are, flaws and faults on both sides of the current parenting divide. the consequence of this is that, while there are few ideal outcomes in family law litigation, there are even less optimal outcomes in the circumstances that prevail in this matter. indeed, every possible outcome here is really quite problematic. this was and remains accentuated because two principal characters in this drama were never interviewed by the court expert, dr j. they were the mother’s husband, mr powell, and the father’s partner, ms k. dr j tried to contact both of them. she left messages for them, but neither of them were interviewed. inexplicably, both indicated (through their respective partner or spouse) that they never received the messages left by dr j. these were significant and most unfortunate omissions. given the importance and significance of each person in each of the households, this lack and omission was very unfortunate. it made, and makes, the court’s decision even more difficult and delicate. for completeness, especially given that no one mentioned it, in the earlier proceedings, mr powell filed an affidavit on 4th august 2016 in which he denied the allegations levelled against him by the father.
7 at the outset i remind myself of the court’s responsibilities to make orders that are (a) in the best interests of the children (pursuant to s.60ca of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”)), and (b) which are relevantly protective of them (pursuant to s.60cc(2a)). the court’s protective responsibilities are very much to the fore here.
8 the converse is true, namely, the court must properly assess any relevant risk, about which here there was a significant amount of talk but relatively little evidence. basic principles are well known and are set out in cases of long-standing, such as by the high court in m v m (1988) 166 clr 69, and by the full court in johnson & page [2007] famca 1235, (2007) flc 93-344, and slater v light (2011) 45 fam lr 41.[1] i do not need to set out those principles.
documents admitted into evidence
9 i record the following admitted documents:  the documents set out in the exhibits list were formally admitted into evidence (except the report of dr j, exhibit a, which i deal with separately later in these reasons), and   the chronology of the icl that is part of her case outline, and
date
event
1982
ms k (the father’s partner) is born
1983
father is born
1985
mother is born
mr powell (the mother’s partner) is born
2005
parties commence relationship
2007
the child x is born
2010
the parties separate
2011
the child y is born
2012
the mother commences a relationship with mr powell
2013
the father commences a relationship with ms k
2014
the child l is born to the mother and mr powell
2016
x discloses in her diary abuse by mr powell
aug 2016
father commences court proceedings
5 aug 2016
x tells ms k about mr powell using physical discipline
11 aug 2016
mr powell files an undertaking to the court to not physically discipline the children
6 sept 2016
y said he does not like mr powell hurting him
12 sept 2016
y tells the father and ms k that mr powell calls the father “deadbeat dad” and has smacked him three times this week
13 sept 2016
y says that mr powell hurts the children and flicks them when the mother
28 october 2016
the father and ms k take y to the hospital after y discloses that mr powell squeezed his neck
may 2017
y says that mr powell that mr powell pulls him off the bed and he hit his head
14 june 2017
incident which results in mr powell being charged with assault occasioning actual bodily harm
19 june 2017
father sees y had bruising to his ear and a scab line cut. y says he initially hit his head on concrete but then says that mr powell lifted him off the ground by the ears and then threw him on the bed. the police are called and the father takes y to hospital
5 aug 2017
the police take out an advo against mr powell with y as the protected person
18 oct 2017
x says mr powell accidentally kicks her instead of the dog
23 nov 2017
final orders are made by consent that: the parties have equal shared care, the children live with the mother, the children stw the father (inter alia) alternate weekends friday to wednesday and half short school holidays and “week about” in the summer holidays, the parties have liberty to relist the matter if mr powell is convicted of assault
2017
the child m is born to the mother and mr powell
23 aug 2018
mr powell is found not guilty of assaulting y
nov 2018
x ran away from home and went to the father’s home. father proceeded to withhold the child from the mother.
1 nov 2018
the mother commenced these proceedings seeking a recovery order. the court ordered for x to be returned to the mother’s care
nov & dec 2019
dcj interviews the children and the mother. the mother says that dcj told her that they had not seen anything to concern them
2020
ms k moves to town n for work
4 feb 2021
orders made in relation to documents from nswpolice
31 march 2021
dr j’s report is released
10 april 2021
x says her mother is not taking to her and the boys are going to vacation care
22 april 2021
x says that mr powell said he is glad that she will be gone in october and that she will not see m again and that he is going to tell m how worthless she is to them. the mother and mr powell take x’s phone off of her. the mother claims that she has not talked to x about the report.
4 may 2021
x says that she is questioned by the maternal aunt, ms o, about why she does not want to live with her mother
22 may 2021
x is telephoned by ms k and x says she is sad because mr powell and her mother told her that if she did not want to be part of their family then she need not go on holiday with them.
25 may 2021
x contacts ms k by snapchat and says that mr powell and her mother have called her a sociopath and called her a liar. y also calls ms k and tells her about mr powell and his mother yelled at him about the case.
11 june 2021
x self-harms. father and ms k take x to hospital. father withholds x from the mother. the mother says that y misses x and that she would be missing him.
17 june 2021
the mother says that y wet the bed which he has not done for many years. icl met with the children. the father files an application in a case, inter alia, seeking to prevent mr powell coming into contact with the children.
18 june 2021
orders made requiring the father to return x to the mother but the icl is to meet with the child. that mr powell is to remove himself from the contest and have as little as possible to do with x.
27 june 2021
x says her mother cannot take time off work and therefore her mother cannot take x to her psychologist. the following day the mother sends a text to the father which states that the psychologist appointment was postponed to 14 july due to covid. however, the father checks on this and it is discovered that the mother cancelled the appointment.
14 july 2021
date of x’s appointment with her psychologist
24 july 2021
x cuts herself again, saying that her mother and mr powell were fighting
30 july 2021
the father and ms k commence foster 2 children
8 sept 2021
y tells x he has to sleep on the floor of her room as punishment
the applicant’s minute of orders sought:
10 the applicant’s minute of orders sought, provided to chambers in the applicant’s written submissions filed on 18 november 2021, were as follows (emphasis in original):
1. that all previous parenting orders be discharged. 2. that the parties have equal shared parental responsibilities for both x (born in 2007) and y (born in 2011) (the children) 3. that x is to live with the father. 4. that x shall spend time with the mother as agreed with father or failing agreement as follows,
a) each alternate sunday from 10am to 4pm b) terms 1,2 and 3 of school holidays from conclusion of school for 7 nights each term of holidays c) term 4 school holidays will be week about arrangement d) special occasions as follows,
i) in each odd year from 5pm easter saturday to 4pm easter sunday ii) in each odd year from 4pm christmas eve to 4pm christmas day iii) mother’s day wknd from 5pm friday to 5pm sunday
5. that y is to live with the mother. 6. y shall spend time with the father as agreed with mother but failing agreement as follows,
a) each alternate friday after school until 9am monday dropped off to school b) terms 1,2 and 3 of school holidays from conclusion of school until 2pm half way through holidays for each term c) term 4 school holidays will be week about arrangement d) special occasions as follows,
i) in each even year from 5pm easter saturday to 5pm easter sunday ii) in each even year from 4pm christmas eve to 4pm christmas day iii) father’s day wknd 5pm friday to 5pm sunday
7. that both parties need to keep one another up to date with current address, telephone number and email address at all times 8. changeover will occur at fox street mcdonald’s city g, unless agreed otherwise 9. the children will have telephone communication with each parent every sunday, wednesday and friday at 7pm. also, at any other time requested by the children 10. for the purpose of communication between the mother and father they will,
a) communicate via telephone all matters of urgent nature and b) communicate by an agreed parenting app about day-to-day matters relating to the children, including arrangements for each parent to spend time with the children
11. that the children attend regular counselling 12. that the parties shall inform each other of any medical condition, significant health issue or illness suffered by the children as soon as possible, via telephone in emergencies otherwise email. 13. that the parties shall at all times keep each other informed of any appointments with medical practitioners, councilors or service children engage with. and that all information is recalled to other party after each appointment 14. that the parties authorize the schools attended by the children to give the parties all information regarding the children’s educational progress, and any other school related activities. also, to supply them with copies of notices, school reports, photographs, certificates and awards obtained by the children 15. that the parties are retrained from speaking in a manner that is insulting, belittling, rebuking or denigrating of each other or each other’s family members, or allowing any other person to do so in the presence or hearing distance of children 16. that during the time the children are with either parent, that the parent shall,
a) respect the privacy of the other parent and should not question the children about the personal life of the other parent or their family b) speak of the other parent respectfully c) not denigrate or insult the other parent or their family in the presence or hearing of the children and use their best endeavors to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children
17. prior to contacting any third party, agency or government body, each parent shall inform the other parent of aby comment made by the children that gives that parent concern about the other parent’s household. for the purpose of this order, tbe first communication about concerns shall be by telephone to all contact numbers held for the other parent.
the respondent’s minute of orders sought
11 the respondent’s minute of orders sought, provided to chambers in the respondent’s written submissions filed on 17 november 2021, were as follows (emphasis in original):
1. that all previous parenting orders be discharged. parental responsibility 2. that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x born in 2017 ('x') and y born in 2001 i ('y') ('the children'). 3. that where the parties are unable to reach an agreement, prior to implementing any major long-term decisions in relation to the children, the following applies:
a. the father will advise the mother in writing of the proposed decision intended to be made by him, b. the father will seek a written response from the mother within l4-days, c. the father will consider by reference to the best interests of the children, and any such response from the mother prior to making the decision, and d. the father will advise the mother in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of his final decision.
relocation 4. that the children live with the father. 5. that the father may relocate the residence of the children to the canberra/city b region 6. that upon relocation of the residence of the children, the father must immediately notify in writing to the mother, the full address of the residence and all telephone or email contact details, and the father agrees to notify the mother within 24 hours of any changes to those contact details. parents' time with children 7. that subject to order 17, x shall spend time with and communicate with the mother in accordance with her wishes, and y shall spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties in writing, and failing agreement and subject to the mother giving at least 48 hours' notice to the father that she will be spending time with y:
a. each alternative sunday from 10:00 am to 5:00 pm commencing the first sunday after these orders, and b. the time that the children spend with the mother pursuant to order 7 of these orders is suspended during one half of the school holidays, and unless otherwise agreed in writing, during:
i. the first half of school holidays in odd numbered years, and ii. in the second half of school holidays in even numbered years.
8. that unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, and notwithstanding any other order, x in accordance with her wishes and yin accordance with this order shall spend time with the mother and father at the following times:
a. during the easter period:
i. in years ending with an odd number:
1. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on easter sunday with the mother.
ii. in years ending with an even number:
1. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on easter sunday with the father.
b. during the christmas period:
1. from l0:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the father. 2. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the mother
1. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the mother. 2. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the father.
c. on mother's day:
i. from l0:00am to 5:00pm on mother's day (sunday) with the mother.
d. on father's day:
i. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father's day (sunday) with the father.
changeover 9. that unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, for the purpose of order 7 and 8, changeover shall occur at mcdonald's on p street, suburb q nsw. communication 10. that y have telephone or other video conferencing communication with the mother at 7:00pm, with the mother to initiate the call:
a. each wednesday, and b. alternate sunday during the week that the children do not see the mother:
11. that notwithstanding any other order, the children are at liberty to contact the mother in accordance with their wishes. 12.that for the purposes of communicating information the mother and father will:
a. communicate by telephone all matters of urgent nature, and b. communicate by an agreed parenting app (such as my family wizard, talking parents or similar) to communicate about all day-to-say matters relating to the children, including arrangements for each parent to spend time with the children with such communication to be limited to the care and wellbeing of the children.
medical 13. that the children engage in psychological treatment with an appropriate service in the local area to assist with managing their mental health needs. l4. that the parties shall inform each other, as soon as reasonably practicable, of any medical condition, significant health issue or illness suffered by the children, via telephone in the case of emergencies, or otherwise, via email. 15. that the parties shall, at all times, keep each other informed of any appointments with any medical practitioner, counsellor, or service that the children engage with, and that these orders operate as authority for the parties to obtain information from any such practitioner or service. school information 16. that the parties authorise the schools attended by the children, in this order, to give the parties information relating to the children's educational progress, and other school related activities and supply them with copies of notices (including but not limited to passwords for any school online portal), school reports, photographs, certificates, and awards obtained by the children (at the cost of the requesting party). restraints i7. that the mother be restrained from allowing or permitting the children to be in the presence or hearing of mr powell, or permitting any other person, to do so and in the event that mr powell comes into contact with the children or attempts to communicate with them, the mother shall forthwith cause the children to be removed from his presence, or hearing, and shall communication with the father and the father shall be at liberty to collect the children. 18. that the parties are restrained from speaking in a manner that is insulting, belittling, rebuking, or denigrating of each other or each other's family members, or allowing any other person to do so in the presence or hearing distance of the children. 19. that pursuant to s 68b of the family law act 1975 and on a without admissions basis, each party is restrained by injunction from:
a. shouting at the children, b. physically disciplining or threatening to physically discipline the child in any way or from allowing any other person to physically discipline or threaten to physically discipline the children in any way during those periods that the children are in respective care, or c. exposing the children to conflict or violent behaviour (including physical and verbal abuse) during those periods that the children are in their respective care.
20. that during the time the children are with either parent, that parent shall:
a. respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the children about the personal life of the other parent or their family, b. speak of the other parent respectfully, and c. not denigrate or insult the other parent or their family in the presence or hearing of the children and use their best endeavours to ensure that other do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.
icl minute of orders sought
12 the icl’s minute of orders sought, provided to chambers in the icl’s written submissions filed on 2 november 2021, were as follows (emphasis in original):
1. that all previous parenting orders be discharged. 2. that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x born in 2017 (‘x’) and y born in 2011 (‘y’) (‘the children’). 3. that where the parties are unable to reach an agreement, prior to implementing any major long-term decision in relation to the children, the following applies:
a. the father will advise the mother in writing of the proposed decision intended to be made by him, b. the father will seek a written response from the mother within 14-days, c. the father will consider by reference to the best interests of the children, and any such response from the mother prior to making the decision, and d. the father will advise the mother in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of his final decision.
relocation 4. that the children live with the father. 5. that the father may relocate the residence of the children to the canberra/city b region 6. that upon relocation the residence of the children the, father must immediately notify in writing to the mother, the full address of the residence and all telephone or email contact details, and the father agrees to notifying the mother within 24 hours of any changes to those contact details. parents’ time with children 7. that unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, the children spend time with the mother at the following times:
a. every second weekend from after school on friday until 5:00pm on sunday, and b. the first half of each of the nsw gazetted school holidays.
8. that unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, and notwithstanding any other order, the children shall spend time with the parents at the following times:
i. in years ending with an odd number:
1. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on easter sunday with the mother.
ii. in years ending with an even number:
2. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on easter sunday with the father.
1. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the father. 2. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the mother
1. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on christmas day with the mother 2. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on boxing day with the father.
c. on mother’s day:
i. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on mother’s day (sunday) with the mother.
d. on father’s day:
i. from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day (sunday) with the father.
changeover 9. that unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, for the purpose of order 7 and 8, changeover shall occur at a location nominated by the mother, and that the parties agree to a location roughly half-way between the father’s residence and the mother’s nominated location for changeover. communication 10. that the children have telephone or other video conferencing communication with the mother:
a. at 7:00pm with the mother to initiate the call:
i. each wednesday, and ii. alternate sunday during the week that the children do not see the mother:
11. that notwithstanding any other order, the children are at liberty to contact the mother in accordance with their wishes. 12. that for the purposes of communicating information the mother and father will:
a. communicate by telephone all matters of urgent nature, and b. communicate by an agreed parenting app (such as my family wizard, talking parents or similar) to communicate about all day-to-day matters relating to the children, including arrangements for each parent to spend time with the children, with such communication to be limited to the care and wellbeing of the children.
13. that the parents attend a facilitated parenting meeting facilitated by d families or other agreed organization at a frequency agreed between the parents, but failing agreement, at least 2 times per year, with the cost of such a meeting being facilitated will be shared equally between the parents. for the purposes of this order the parents will forward a list of issues for discussion (if any) to the other parent via the parenting app no fewer than 7 days prior to the scheduled meeting medical 14. that the children engage in psychological treatment with an appropriate service in the local area to assist with managing their mental health needs. 15. that the parties shall inform each other, as soon as reasonably practicable, of any medical condition, significant health issue or illness suffered by the children, via telephone in the case of emergencies, or otherwise, via email. 16. that the parties shall, at all times, keep each other informed of any appointments with any medical practitioner, counsellor, or service that the children engage with, and that these orders operate as authority for the parties to obtain information from any such practitioner or service. school information 17. that the parties authorise the schools attended by the children, in this order, to give the parties information relating to the children’s educational progress, and other school related activities and supply them with copies of notices (including but not limited to passwords for any school online portal), school reports, photographs, certificates, and awards obtained by the children (at the cost of the requesting party) restraints 18. that the mother be restrained from allowing or permitting the children to be in the presence or hearing of mr powell, or permitting any other person, to do so and in the event that mr powell comes into contact with the children or attempts to communicate with them, the mother shall forthwith cause the children to be removed from his presence, or hearing, and shall communication with the father and the father shall be at liberty to collect the children. 19. that the parties are restrained from speaking in a manner that is insulting, belittling, rebuking, or denigrating of each other or each other’s family members, or allowing any other person to do so in the presence or hearing distance of the children. 20. that pursuant to s 68b of the family law act 1975 and on a without admissions basis, each party is restrained by injunction from:
21. that during the time the children are with either parent, that parent shall:
a. respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the children about the personal life of the other parent or their families, b. speak of the other parent respectfully, and c. not denigrate or insult the other parent or their family in the presence or hearing of the children and use their best endeavours to ensure that other do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.
the father’s evidence
13 somewhat summarised, the father’s brief oral evidence was as follows. it was briefer than it should have been because the mother was not legally represented, she asked very few questions.
14 the father’s counsel asked the father the following general questions. he confirmed that he was the full time carer of his step-son r, and that he currently lives in the suburb of suburb s in city g. in this regard, he said that he was happy to share trips between city g and canberra with the mother should the children come to live with him.
15 next he was asked what might be the situation generally if x lived with him, and y remained living with his mother. he said that this would be devastating for x and that he could not see this happening. this was in circumstances where dr j had recorded in her report that x considered y to be “the most annoying person in the house”. the father agreed with this assessment but nonetheless said that x cared for y very much. in short, he said that separating the siblings would be terrible for both of them.
16 the father confirmed that y has a close relationship with the mother’s other, younger children, m and l.
17 the father’s primary cross-examination was undertaken by counsel for the icl. the father first confirmed that he usually stays in canberra 5 nights per fortnight and for the remainder of the time lives in city g. he also confirmed that in dr j’s report she recorded that he had some symptoms of anxiety. he said that he had seen his gp about this anxiety and some “panic attacks”. these things tended to manifest themselves when he was stressed. he confirmed however that his consultation with the gp regarding his anxiety had really only occurred many years ago when the litigation commenced, which he said was in 2017.
18 it followed from this that he had not seen a gp or counsellor about his anxiety in recent years. he said he had been able to deal with his anxiety, which is to say that he has learnt how to manage it with the assistance of his new partner. he said he acknowledged that it was important to seek help. by way of observation, plainly the father either has not or does not recognise any relevant stress in recent times, notwithstanding the ongoing litigation.
19 the father said he agreed that the children needed some psychological support and that x has been seeing a psychologist for about a month or so, whereas y is not currently seeing anyone other than a school counsellor, which ceased a short time ago. the father agreed that it was probably useful and beneficial for y to see someone but no arrangements had been put in place thus far. there had also been some discussions with y following reports of him stealing certain things from school. he said he had a plan in place if this happened again but he did not reveal what it was. he said he was content to agree to an order to do all things necessary to ensure y received external psychological support.
20 mr rice said that he had very briefly heard of a parenting communication app and that he would be happy to use one but otherwise he had no knowledge of such means of communication.
21 the father confirmed that he and the mother disagree in relation to either or both of y’s need for medication regarding his adhd diagnoses, or other details concerning it. he confirmed that he and the mother currently have and seek equal shared parental responsibility for both children. he said that in his view medication is best for y, notwithstanding the mother disagreeing with this course. he said that endeavouring to resolve matters with the mother by counselling had not worked in the past. he effectively said that if he could, he would make the decision for medication for y and inform the mother of this later.[2]
22 in response to questions regarding the mother’s strengths as a “mother”, he said that she has patience and at times she can be a fantastic mother. otherwise, he could think of nothing to say in this regard. in relation to himself as a parent, the father said that he thinks of himself as a “good parent”. indeed he said, completely unabashed, that he did not know what he could improve on. respectfully, this showed astonishing lack of insight and a perfection most parents would blanch at. this included him confirming that he had not completed any parenting courses since 2016. again, respectfully, perfection knows no bounds. fortunately, he did say that he would act upon one of dr j’s recommendations and would do the course or courses that she recommended, but that he had not pursued any of them yet.
23 he confirmed his position was that he believed, and had always believed, the allegations against mr powell to be true. this was in circumstances where he confirmed that the children did not always tell the truth but that he generally believed them. he confirmed also that y has often not told the truth at school. when it was put to him that x may be painting a picture of her life in the mother’s home that was not completely accurate or truthful, in my view, very surprisingly, the father said that he did not believe this, nor did he consider it to be a possibility. in my view, this not only showed again the father’s lack of insight, but it bordered on the astonishing given the history of x, particularly noted in the reports of dr j and ms e referred to below.
24 notwithstanding the comments just recorded from the father’s evidence, upon further questioning he conceded, to a degree, that the children could be somewhat “creative” in their story telling of events and that they could be telling things to each parent which that parent might wish to hear.
25 one set of allegations against mr powell, which was the subject of police investigation and prosecution, ultimately led to mr powell being found not guilty of the charges laid against him. the father said he was unsure whether or not mr powell was or was not convicted. one might have reasonably thought that given the gravity of the allegations against mr powell, the father would have ensured that he had the best acquaintance possible with the facts of all of the allegations raised. plainly, he did not.
26 the father confirmed that the last apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) expired in february 2019 and that, to the best of his knowledge, no further advo had been taken out by anyone against either mr or ms powell. he confirmed also that, to the best of his knowledge, child welfare authorities had been informed of the allegations against mr powell and that no action had been taken by them in any respect involving the children. in this regard, the court pointed out to the father that there were notes from city g hospital relating to one particular incident involving y, which confirmed that there was no bruising on y from anything alleged to have been done to him by mr powell or otherwise. in the court’s view, these medical notes were significant, or rather the lack of medical notes of any “red flags” about the care of the children were particularly important.
27 all of these matters led counsel for the icl to put to the father that, because (a) mr powell has not been convicted of any offence, (b) medical records have confirmed that there are/were “no red flags at the time”, and (c) care and protection services and the police have taken no action against mr powell (except for a single instance that led to a “not guilty” verdict), whether or not he still believed the children in relation to their accounts of various events/allegations. remarkably, in my view, the father said that he did. put more starkly or bluntly, objective, independent evidence from statutory authorities confirmed no issues regarding mr powell, the father still chose to believe the “creative” accounts of the children. the old saying of “throw enough mud and it will stick” seems rather apposite here.
28 the father confirmed that he thought that y would miss l and m (as noted earlier) and similarly he thought that x’s relationship with the two younger boys was an important relationship. counsel for the icl put to the father that there was nothing in his orders sought that was directed to facilitating these relationships between siblings. to this, the father said that he was happy for the mother and the siblings to be together without mr powell present. he also said that any of the children who were not living with him were welcome at his residence any time. he also said that he would facilitate facetime calls between the children – on the suggestion of counsel for the icl.
29 in response to questions about what he would do in circumstances where y wanted to see his mother (outside any specified orders), the father said that he would allow y to facetime his mother or call any third party. in a similar vein, he said that if the children were distraught in any way he was happy to take the children to see their mother, but again provided that mr powell was not present.
30 the father said that he agreed with the comment in dr j’s report to the effect that x has had some difficulty making and sustaining friendships. this was also likely to be impacted by a change in school for her upon her commencing to live with the father. the father observed that, in his view, x was excited about the prospect of a new school and “a new start”. he accepted that there were no specific orders sought in relation to school holiday time but said that he thought a week on week off arrangement during school holidays was likely to work best. conversely, he said that large blocks of time away from either parent would not reasonably or properly work.
31 when asked whether or not a restraint on mr powell from physically disciplining the children in any way was in place, what difference if any would that make. to this the father said that there had been a similar protection in place in the past and that (in his view) the children still “got assaulted” during that period. put in slightly different terms, the father said that allegations against mr powell have continued despite there being an undertaking from mr powell not to hurt the children.
32 i noted a number of inconsistencies in the father’s evidence before the court. for example, it was stated that y says that mr powell abused him, yet y still wants to spend equal time at both houses. the father said that he accepted such an inconsistency but said that he thought y simply did not want to upset anyone.
33 the mother’s questions to the father were very brief and were as follows.
34 to the first, the father said that he could recall only one conversation that he has ever had with mr powell. in the light of this answer, the mother asked him how he could therefore be so anxious being around mr powell. the father’s response was inconclusive and highly generalised.
35 secondly, the father confirmed that in his orders sought he is only proposing facetime with the mother and then counselling. in the father’s view, he said that it is in the best interest of the children if they do not see as much of their mother as they do now. respectfully, this was an astonishing comment which was both hurtful and showed a remarkable lack of insight on the father’s part. moreover, the basis for such a comment was not laid out at all. the mother suggested that removing the children from her primary care would likely damage their relationship with her. there was no discernible comment from the father in response. the mother further put to the father that none of the allegations against mr powell have been established. again, there was no response from the father. he did acknowledge that it would be a significant change to the children’s care arrangements if they moved from the mother’s full-time care to the father’s full-time care. the father said, with little or no qualification or evidence that he thinks it is in the best interest of the children for the change in residence to occur as he proposes. this was rather like argument mainly by assertion.
36 when asked why such a significant change in the children’s primary residence was best for them, the father said that noting the matter’s canvassed in the family report and in the light of 6 years of allegations against mr powell, in his view it was “beyond time that things change for the better”.
37 again, the mother noted that none of the allegations have been established and in fact have been proven false. the father said that in his view the allegations still place the children in a “high risk protection area”. the father acknowledged that a change in the primary residence of the children (and change in schools) will mean that the children will be somewhat disrupted, but he was sure, if not confident, that they would settle in quickly with the changes that he sought. the father confirmed that he will make the situation work whatever the court’s orders ultimately are.
the mother’s evidence
38 the mother’s cross-examination was rather more extensive than was the father’s, obviously because, as earlier noted, she was not legally represented.
39 by reference to page 100 of the father’s tender bundle, which related to a statement by ms k, the mother said that she was present when the incident referred to in this document happened. she said that she was angry with y because his bike had been left against her ute, which subsequently had been scratched by it. she confirmed that she was taking the children to school this day. she said the contest with y on this occasion took place at approximately 8:00am. when she had “the discussion” with y, mr powell was in the bedroom getting ready for work (he works for a removalist company in city g). the mother said that she was not yelling at y at all, and that she had only raised her voice, she firmly denied swearing at y.
40 the mother confirmed that mr powell was also angry with y for leaving his bike out and obviously, for scratching the mother’s car. he told y that he should have put his bike away. the discussion between mr powell and y took place in the kitchen, with x being in her bedroom hearing it. the mother said that y was not crying during these discussions.
41 x also reported another incident that allegedly involved y having a mark on his neck. the mother confirmed that she never saw any mark on y’s neck, but accepted that she was not in the room during the discussion between y and x. in any event, the mother denied that it was possible for y to have such a mark on his neck and she would not see it because (as noted above) the mother said that she took the children to school and she would have seen it as a matter of course. the mother said that she doubted that the conversation between x and y could have taken place with mr powell present regarding the alleged mark on y’s neck because mr powell had already gone to work by this stage.
42 the mother was asked why mr powell was not a witness for her in these proceedings. she said that she thought that he was (noting again that until relatively recently before the trial she had been legally represented by the legal aid office based in city g). there was also discussion regarding what the mother did or did not know in relation to the preparation of affidavits and also in relation to alleged inconsistencies in the mother’s affidavit evidence and the reported comments of x. i do not need to traverse these further.
43 x alleged at different times that the mother left her alone at home to care for her brothers (as reported to dr j). the mother said that this did not happen. amongst other things because she works at the service station in the cafeteria/kitchen 2 days per week, although when she spoke to dr j she was working there 5/6 days per week. again according to x, as recorded by dr j, x said that the mother does not get home until 7:00pm. the mother denied this. similarly, x’s claim that she has to cook meals for her brothers and look after them, and likewise that the mother sometimes brings home food from her job, the mother denied this. x’s almost blanket statements regarding, for example, she cooking dinner and the mother regularly bringing home food, perhaps lacked a likely reality by which, from time to time, the mother may have brought some bits and pieces of food home from the café at the service station but not every night for dinner and/or leaving everything to the worried and busy hands (on her account) of x.
44 x’s further contention that the mother drove mr powell to work and that x stayed home to get the children ready for school was also forcibly denied by the mother.
45 as with almost all of the statements attributed to x in one report or another, in the absence of independent verification of it (a) i would invariably have significant doubts about the accuracy and/or veracity of any such statement, and (b) in any contest between statements by x and the evidence of her mother, i would invariably accept the very candid evidence of the mother.
46 by reference to page 101 of the father’s tender bundle, there was again a detailed and somewhat prolonged discussion with the mother regarding allegations of bikes scratching cars and alleged assaults by mr powell upon y, including y being choked by him. to virtually all of these claims, the mother said that she understands that in relation to many of them this is what y thinks happened but it is not what actually happened at all. all of this said, the mother confirmed that on one somewhat recent occasion, mr powell kicked y in the bottom. she confirmed that this happened on the date mentioned, that it happened before x entered the kitchen, and that the incident was not reported to the police. the mother said that in her view, in the circumstances of the incident, it was appropriate for mr powell to chastise y as he did. however unacceptable the kicking of any person is, this was another unvarnished piece of the mother’s evidence against her own interest. indeed her candour remained throughout her testimony at all times. she said on other occasions, few though they were/are, if she takes mr powell to work and the children are left at home it is simply so that they walk to the bus stop.
47 by reference to page 104 of the tender bundle, which relates to an incident on 15th october 2021, the mother confirmed that she had not read this statement previously but that the incident referred to did not occur as recorded in it. the mother confirmed that while she works as a chef 2 days per week at the service station and that she has recently started a cleaning job for another 2 days per week, she is not at paid employment during the time of the evening meal. for example, she said that a regular shift for her on saturdays is from 7:00am to 2:00pm.
48 in the light of the number of instances where x has said one thing and the mother has said the complete opposite, the court asked the mother whether or not x had a tendency to tell one parent what they wanted to hear and the other parent something different. i asked further whether or not she was creative in her narratives and/or honest. the mother said that x likes to make her parents happy and that she says things to make the other parent happy. the mother confirmed further that x does make up stories, that she tells “white lies” and that she also tells “big lies”.
49 the mother accepted that there have been multiple allegations made by the father and likewise a range of allegations made by the children. this includes as late as 15th october 2021 that mr powell had his hands around y’s throat. when asked why y would make up such statements about when he is in the mother’s household, the mother simply said that y likes to say things to make people happy but that it is very hard to believe these stories when she herself was present in the room at the time the incident was said to take place – and it did not happen.
50 the mother went so far as to say that a number of the matters raised by y, more particularly of mr powell attempting to choke him, were all made up to please the father. returning briefly to the scratched ute of the mother, she said that she had asked y multiple times to move his bike but he had simply and consistently not done so. by inference, both in her case, and that of mr powell, the context leading to their individual levels of frustration at the continued disobedience of y ultimately led to mr powell “kicking y up the bum”.
51 various other allegations were made and either denied and or explained by the mother involving the children, for example, x being on crutches at one stage and that mr powell allegedly yelled at her to feed the dogs and that if she didn’t he would “kick her down the stairs”. as with many other allegations, the mother said that this did not happen. similarly, allegations of smacking the children in 2016, “flicking” the children during dinner, going into the bathroom while x was having a shower, according to the mother never happened. in a slightly similar vein, the mother denied the further (or perhaps simply revised allegation) that mr powell requires x to shower with the door open which, if true, makes her feel uncomfortable.
52 the mother confirmed that in her view x was at an age where she will decide where she wants to live. she also largely agreed with the proposition that the real issue in relation to x related less to where she lived but simply the logistics relating to the residences of both her parents – her mother in city g, and her father in or near town t. the distance between these two centres is around a 2 ½ hour drive, which covers the approximately 260km between the two centres.
53 further matters raised by the father (and/or x), which the mother refuted as never having happened were: (a) mr powell always calling the father a “dead beat dad”, (b) x alleging that mr powell had smacked her 3 times in a particular week and did not know why, the mother said that this was not true amongst other things because mr powell would have told the mother had he smacked x, and he has never done so, (c) various and multiple allegations of mr powell smacking the children and otherwise using corporal punishment on them and (d) the mother confirmed that the only time mr powell had been violent to the children was when he recently kicked recently “up the bum”. the mother also agreed that given x’s age she was very close to being able to make her own life decisions. the court then noted that regardless of what any ultimate orders were, given her age, x will “vote with her feet” regarding where she lives. further, she has already stated reasonably consistently in recent times that she wants to live with her father. she has also stated, as recorded by dr j, that she wants to live alone with her father and not with y. plus, as already noted, the issue mainly will become the logistics upon x going to live with her father as agreed between the parties. notwithstanding the mother conceding and indeed accepting that x was going to live with her father, she maintained that x and y’s lives were all essentially based or related to city g.
54 the mother confirmed that it was not reasonable or practicable for her and the younger children in her family, or for mr powell, to relocate closer to the father’s residence. such a proposition in any event would not solve the father’s fixation upon the safety of the children in the care of the mother, wherever she might live, while ever she remains married to mr powell. indeed, and unsurprisingly, the mother said that she would not see the children without mr powell at least being “around”. nor was she willing, she said, to have the children come to her house without mr powell being present. she stated the obvious that mr powell has been part of x and y’s lives for the last 8 years and that she wanted him to remain part of their lives.
55 the mother further confirmed (by reference to page 26 of the father’s most recent affidavit recounting the historical claims against mr powell) that there was no hospital incident due to any injury to y’s neck. perhaps somewhat curiously in the circumstances, the mother said that y’s hospitalisation was due to mr powell allegedly lifting y and dropping him on the concrete. when asked, the mother confirmed that mr powell was never charged with assaulting y. an undertaking was given by mr powell not to harm the children and an apprehended domestic violence order was put in place, which expired in january/february 2019.
56 again the issue of relevant “marks” on y’s neck arose, the mother denied there was ever any such mark. as already indicated, this is confirmed by the hospital notes which record no relevant mark.
57 various other claims, again all significantly historical, continued to be traversed with the mother. for example, again as recorded in the father’s material (pick any affidavit because it covers the same allegations) on 8th october 2017, the mother denied that on that date mr powell kicked x in the leg. she also confirmed that mr powell was charged with assault but he was found not guilty.
58 another series of allegations related to january 2020 when y suffered a head injury. when the mother took y to hospital she says that y disclosed to her that he had lied when he said that mr powell had thrown a toy at him. the mother confirmed further that no such throwing of a toy ever occurred. the mother further denied that (as alleged by the father) the mother had urged y to lie to say that the father or someone other than mr powell had hit y. the mother also denied that she was attempting to cover up the allegations and incidents involving mr powell and was trying to get y to lie for her to protect mr powell.
59 the mother said that, in her view, y and x should not be separated. almost solomon-like, the mother said that if x goes to live with the father it will be in the children’s best interest that y also moves to live there, although it is not something that the mother would agree to.[3]
60 from page 63 and following of the father’s tender bundle (again of so many historical matters), the mother was taken through a series of allegations regarding the children in various relationships which ranged from, for example, that mr powell restricts the mother’s ability to have a good relationship with her friends, to the police having been called to the property to deal with various other allegations including that mr powell is aggressive towards her. to state the obvious, the only source of any of these and many other allegations can only be one or both of the children, x and or y. how either of them could possibly know anything at all about mr powell allegedly restricting the mother’s ability to have relationships with her friends, borders on the fanciful and fantastic. in many respects, it is of a piece with the straw-like foundation of the father’s case.
61 similar to many other allegations, the mother denied protecting mr powell and preferring his interests over those of the children. she also denied that she was angry with x after reading the report of dr j. she simply said that she was just “disappointed”, the mother made similar remarks in relation to y’s comments in the report. she has not told mr powell what is in the report nor has he read it. indeed she says, unsurprisingly, that mr powell has stepped back from matters relating to the children because he does not know when another “false allegation might pop up”.
62 showing significant insight and common sense in my view, the mother said that x’s use of texts was an instance where she likes to send them and play her parents off against each other. this is also in circumstances where the mother confirmed that she had taken x’s mobile phone off her because of some inappropriate messages, including a snap chat incident which involved one of her step sisters, u.
63 the mother confirmed that mr powell has no say when it comes to matters involving y and x. the mother strongly denied that mr powell has or consistently says negative things to x including, for example, mr powell allegedly calling x a “judas” for dobbing in the mother and mr powell to child welfare authorities.
64 the mother said that she has always given x the option to live with her father but noted that she has been caught out lying in other instances, including in the report of ms e. however, the mother said that neither she nor mr powell had ever called her a liar.
65 positively (rather more positively than was the father towards her) the mother said that she and the father try to co-parent which was relatively easy most of the time. again, with insight which was lacking in others, the mother said that she did not want to separate the children but the children’s wants and needs were different, which (i infer) somehow needed to be taken into account.
66 in answer to some briefer questions from counsel for the icl, the mother responded as follows. the mother confirmed that all allegations about mr powell are not true. likewise, matters that are set out in the family report that perhaps may have happened she says did not. the mother confirmed that in her view x and y have made up the allegations. she further denied, adamantly, the possibility that the matters giving rise to the allegations may have taken place when she was not there. interestingly, the mother said that she doesn’t think that the children themselves even believe that any of the allegations are true. the mother, however, accepted that the allegations themselves would be distressing for the children.
67 the mother also said that in relation to various incidents that were alleged to have occurred shortly before the final hearing, her discussions with x were reasonably cordial and that x simply packed her bag of her own accord. the mother said that they discussed the possibility of there being a result whereby x would end up living with the father.
68 like the father, the mother said that she would be prepared to undertake any therapy or counselling to improve communication between them. she was also agreeable to the use of a parenting app rather than e-mail. the mother confirmed, in answer to a regularly made contention, that the children never refer to their father as either mr rice or mr rice. likewise she was adamant that it was simply not possible for the children to stay with the mother without mr powell being present. she acknowledged finally that simply spending time only with x would be valuable. there was some moderately detailed discussion regarding some of the logistics involving the children, the subject of the litigation, catching up and spending time with l and m.
69 at the end of the mother’s cross-examination, the court simply recorded, in the light of many comments and concessions made by the parties and by the mother in particular, that everyone would or should be operating on the basis that x would be moving to live primarily with her father and therefore the court’s primary focus hereafter would be on appropriate arrangements regarding y.
70 the mother had no questions for the father’s partner, ms k.
report of dr j
71 dr j’s report, dated 31st march 2021, became exhibit a. from dr j’s report, i note the following:
47. ms powell initially denied any other history of concerns relating to her mental health but then with prompting, she disclosed that she is 'always anxious'. specifically, ms powell offered that she worries constantly about further allegations being made against her by mr rice and ms k. ms powell described frequent worrying that is ruminative in nature and that she finds difficult to control or regulate, in addition to which she tends to catastrophise in her thinking by considering the "worst case scenario". in addition to cognitive worry, ms powell also endorsed physiological signs of anxiety associated with heart palpitations, respiratory distress and hot flushes. ms powell also described fitful and disturbed sleep in the context of rumination and consequently, she complained of feeling fatigued. ms powell told me that her anxiety tends to be most severe around court hearings or other reminders of the family court process. 48. ms powell reported that she has never consulted with a mental health professional at any other time nor has she engaged in any psychological treatment for any other reason. 51. ms powell offered that she only has contact with mr rice around the children and she acknowledged that this communication can often be difficult, which ms powell attributed to mr rice tending to shut her down and refusing to communicate openly about relevant issues. ms powell also believes x tends to play her parents off against each other, especially because she is aware that mr rice and mr powell do not like one another. ms powell added that although she makes an effort, mr rice refuses to cooperate with her in relation to parenting matters. as such, ms powell described any attempt to communicate with mr rice as ‘just a headache' and ideally, she does not want anything to do with mr rice outside of matters pertaining to the children. 57. ms powell demonstrated a basic understanding of the role and responsibilities of parenthood. she described the usual weekday and weekend routine in the home, which appear to be appropriate and have a reasonable balance of necessary and pleasurable activities, as well as time that is both structured and unstructured. ms powell also told me that the children participate in the running of the household with chores. in response to specific questioning, ms powell denied that x is over-responsible but she did report that x will fold the laundry for her if she is tired, as well as babysitting her younger brothers sometimes as needed. she also described using appropriate methods for managing the children's behaviour through discipline and ms powell claimed that the children are generally responsive to attempts at limit setting. 59. when asked if she has any concerns for x, ms powell offered that both children have been affected by the court process. when prompted to elaborate. further, ms powell claimed that the children have been negatively impacted by being withheld from her care by their father, in addition to being taken to the police station and encouraged to make reports about concerns for their safety. consequently, ms powell commented that the children 'don't know if they are coming or going' and she stated that they have been told the court orders are meaningless and that x can choose where she lives. ms powell acknowledged that she has told the children that mr rice will 'get in so much trouble for this' but she claimed that x told her that her father had said to her that she can voice her own opinion about residence. ms powell also referred to x having run away before. 61. according to ms powell, y is 'crazy' and x-box obsessed', in addition to which he likes soccer. ms powell described y as a 'very caring' child, who can be 'very apologetic' and who also seems to need a great deal of attention and reassurance. 62. ms powell expressed concern for y's behaviour, which she primarily attributed to his having been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. ms powell stated that y 'acts up' at school by hurting other people and being 'hands on'. ms powell suggested that y does this for attention and he is apparently often in trouble in school for misbehaviour. comment: it cannot be ruled out that physical aggression has been modelled for y either. y also reportedly lies and can be impulsive, as well as easily triggered to emotional dysregulation. further to this, she stated that he 'shuts down a lot', in addition to which ms powell noted that y tried to cut himself last year in an act of self-harm. she also claimed that y struggles to regulate his sleep. ms powell also believes the family court process is having a negative impact on y's behaviour. she claimed that he used to' be in psychological treatment but y was apparently 'bored' with this and so he did not continue to attend sessions. 65. in response to specific questioning, ms powell offered that mr powell's relationships with the children are 'pretty good' but she then stated that y and mr powell's connection is 'strained'. she attributed this to the stress that mr powell feels in relation to concern a further allegation will be made about his behaviour towards the children. as such, ms powell stated that mr powell 'steps back' from the children in order to ostensibly protect himself against a further report. ms powell also stated that y and x have usual sibling bonds with m and l but that x and m seem particularly bonded. 66. position in relation to the current court matter - according to ms powell, she and mr rice separated in or around 2010 and initially, the parties had a fluid arrangement between them that mr rice could see the children whenever he wanted and they would make arrangements for this between themselves. however, ms powell commented that mr rice did not see the children regularly, which she attributed to his desire to prioritise socialising with his friends. 73. when asked about her ideal outcome from the court process, ms powell stated that she would like mr rice to be 'held accountable' for his actions in recent years. she stated that mr rice 'doesn't care about the law'. ms powell expressed frustration that the process has been going on for as long as it has and she also expressed a sense of hopelessness that anything will be achieved. ms powell added that she just want(s) to move on' and she is tired of 'everything (being) in limbo'. 85. according to the neo-pi, ms powell is a conscientious and goal driven person, who has a high need for achievement. people who score similarly tend to be hard working, diligent and reliable. further to this, the profile is suggestive of someone who is good natured, sympathetic and respectful, as well as having intact self­ esteem and being largely free of any psychological distress, although she is likely to experience occasional frustration and irritability with others based on her responding. ms powell endorsed being someone who is able to cope with stress well. there was no evidence of personality disorder on the test profile.
72 regarding mr rice, i refer in particular to the following paragraphs of dr j’s report:
109. mr rice endorsed a history of anxiety that dates back about five years and is seemingly triggered by concern that he will run into ms powell's partner, mr powell, in the community. mr rice explained that one day he felt as if he was having a heart attack and his partner explained to him that this was anxiety. mr rice offered that his anxiety 'flares up' around the family court process, in addition to being out in the local community. specifically, mr rice described worrying that he will encounter mr powell, as mr powell is often 'mouthing off' when they run into each other, in addition to which mr rice noted that mr powell is intimidatory in his manner and will stare at him. in addition to the aforementioned cognitive worry, mr rice endorsed physiological symptoms of anxiety, including tightness in the chest, elevated heart rate, diarrhoea, hot flushes and some respiratory distress and nausea. 118. parenting - mr rice offered that he had wanted to be a parent and he was apparently motivated to give a child a different experience of childhood to what he had. mr rice noted that the pregnancy with x was unplanned but he was apparently 'over the moon excited' when he found out about the pregnancy and he claimed that becoming a parent was 'the best feeling i ever had' and 'like i fell in jove'. 119. mr rice described experiencing the normal vicissitudes of adjustment to parenting, which was 'all new and unknown' for him but he described being an active and involved parent, who enjoyed taking care of his children and contributing to their care needs and development. mr rice stated that he 'love(s)' being a parent and he reflected on the feeling of responsibility that as a parent, he has for another human who is still growing and developing. he also commented on enjoying being involved in contributing to the development of a child, in response to which the child will give him love. 120. with respect to his strengths as a parent, mr rice offered that he is 'very positive' and makes an effort to consider the children's the needs and how he can best achieve these. mr rice also reflected that he does not need to actively discipline the children and rather, he can talk to them in a relaxed manner about any problematic behaviour. he denied ever utilising corporal punishment with the children, claiming that he wants to be different to his father in how he manages the children's behaviour. mr rice could not identify any weaknesses as a parent. 121. mr rice reported to have completed a 'stepparenting course' that was allegedly court ordered about three or four years ago. he believes that ms powell and mr powell had to do the same course. on further questioning, it seems that perhaps this was a parenting after separation course and mr rice claimed to have concluded from this course that 'we were fine as stepparents'. this is the only parenting course that mr rice has participated in. 122. mr rice demonstrated an insightful and rather sophisticated understanding of the role and responsibilities of parenthood. he was able to describe a usual week day and weekend routine with the children, which includes a balance of necessary and pleasurable activities. further to this, mr rice's account suggests that he knows the children's interests well. he also described arranging the household routine around ms powell's scheduled time to call the children. mr rice did however, report a bed time for the children between 9 and 9:30 and when i challenged him on whether this is too late for a child of y's age, he agreed but claimed that he has been 'more lenient' with y of late, although mr rice commented that he does not believe this is 'the end of the world', as y gets enough sleep apparently. comment: i note the account of his school principal, which will be outlined below, that y often appears tired and as if he is not getting enough sleep. the children do not participate in any organised activities according to his account. 123.mr rice described x as a child who is 'a bit weird' and 'funny'. he stated that she is 'very focussed' at school and is apparently achieving well. mr rice added that x is 'very polite' and 'very sociable' and he claimed to feel a sense of pride in how he has contributed to her development. mr rice does not have any particular concerns for x's functioning or development but he did report that she apparently broke her arm some time ago and he did not find out about this for some time thereafter due to ms powell withholding this information, which concerned him, especially as her arm has now healed with a 'bend'. mr rice described his relationship with x as 'great'. 124. mr rice described y as a child who tends to be quiet but can also be funny. he also claimed that y can be 'silly' in a manner that he attributed to gender, such that y will apparently do silly things or run away. mr rice offered that his relationship with y is 'fine'. 125. mr rice offered that whilst y has improved of late, last year, he was apparently 'all over the shop'. when asked to expand on this, mr rice reported that y was stealing, swearing and hitting other children at school. this behaviour has apparently predominantly occurred in the school environment but is also an issue at home sometimes, where he will also apparently 'back chat'. mr rice described being very concerned about y and his behaviour, as a result of which y was assessed by a paediatrician and allegedly diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. mr rice added that the paediatrician recommended that y be medicated and although mr rice agreed with this, ms powell allegedly refused and thus, he has not been treated with any medication to date. 126. mr rice believes that y's attention deficit hyperactivity disorder has been caused by 'trauma' related to 'everything that's happening’. specifically, he believes that this trauma is a function of the abusive environment y has been exposed to in the home of ms powell and mr powell. within this context, y also allegedly developed a stutter in recent years. mr rice commented that y's regulatory capacity has improved but he still struggles with both restlessness and inattention. comment: i note that exposure to or experience of trauma cannot cause attention deficit hyperactivity disorder per se however, it is not uncommon for traumatised children, as well as those who have been exposed to poor, inconsistent or abusive parenting practices, to become dysregulated, which can often manifest in behavioural and cognitive concerns similar to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. 128. mr rice stated that the children are not presently engaged in any counselling or mental health treatment, which he claimed has been prohibited until the family court process is finalised. mr rice believes that the children should be in treatment and he claimed that some years ago, the children saw a therapist at the v psychology service within the context of the initial family court process. mr rice claimed that he is not allowed to offer the children to see this therapist again and rather, they have to ask for such intervention, which he stated that the children will not do and therefore, there has been no recent or ongoing therapeutic intervention for them. comment: i requested the file notes from v psychology but i could not access these apparently. 130. position in relation to the current court matter - according to mr rice, the relationship with ms powell broke down in or around 2010 and he stated that there were no orders or parenting agreements in place initially but he would apparently see the children most afternoons after work. mr rice also reported to have seen the children on weekends, which he would organise with ms powell. as such, the time with the children was unstructured initially but apparently he and ms powell could work cooperatively with each other to organise time for the children to spend with him. 131. mr rice noted that once the relationship commenced between ms powell and mr powell, the situation became more difficult. when y was about two years old, he claimed to have believed that 'there were some issues going on'. when prompted to expand on this, mr rice claimed that on one occasion mr powell 'abused the crap out of him’ in front of the children because mr powell did not want the children in the house over the weekend, as he had things to do. mr rice noted that he was holding y at the time and he chose to leave the situation, as he did not want the 'confrontation'. he claimed to have felt at the time that mr powell's behaviour was inappropriate and that he was 'unstable'. mr rice added that ms powell did not intervene at the time or say anything and he remembers her looking scared. it seems to have been in the aftermath of this incident that mr rice initiated the family court process the first time, commenting that he wanted something structured and organised in place for him with the children. 132. at present, mr rice offered that the children are with him five nights in a fortnight from a friday afternoon after school to the following wednesday morning. in addition, he and ms powell share the school holiday time. mr rice told me that he was hopeful of a shared care arrangement but ms powell refused to agree to this. 133. mr rice offered that the aforementioned arrangement has been in place since final orders were granted in 2018. when asked what has changed since that time, mr rice reported that x ran away from school in august 2019 and she allegedly came to his house and refused to leave. mr rice stated that this technically meant that he was withholding x and so he called ms powell apparently, who then came to his house in an attempt to encourage x to come home with her. x reportedly refused and was highly distressed apparently, such that after about an hour, ms powell apparently said to x 'fine you can stay with your father' and whilst mr rice assumed this meant x was able to stay with him, ms powell applied for a recovery order. mr rice also claimed to have called family and community services for advice about x's rights, in response to which he was allegedly told that neither he or ms powell could forcibly remove x. mr rice reported that after about 36 hours, x agreed to return to her mother. even so, x apparently ran away the same day to return to him and ms powell described finding it very distressing to have to tell x that she needed to go back to her mother's. 134. according to mr rice, the following day, x again ran away, this time with y, after school, when they went to a friend's mother's house. mr rice stated that ms powell blamed him again for this and they had to return to court however, he was adamant that he did nothing to encourage x. mr rice offered that it was around this time that judge neville made an order for a family report. 135. with respect to concerns for the children in ms powell's care, mr rice attributed these to mr powell and his generally aggressive and at times, abusive conduct. mr rice claimed that when y was about two years old, mr powell allegedly threatened to cut his elbows off if he did not move them from the table. when mr rice apparently spoke to ms powell about this, she claimed that mr powell was joking. comment: even if this comment was meant as a joke, a child may find this distressing. 136. mr rice also told me that both x and y have disclosed to him that mr powell has picked y up by the ears and left marks on his ears as a result. mr rice also believes that mr powell is intimidatory in his manner towards the children, such as standing up in their faces if they get in trouble and blowing in y's face or flicking his ears if he has trouble getting to sleep. mr rice also understands that mr powell has 'bad mouthed' him to the children by telling them that mr rice is 'a fuckwit dad' or that his name is stored in the phone as 'dead beat dad'. he also claimed that ms powell and mr powell have encouraged the children to refer to mr rice by his first name. 137. as a result of what the children have told him, mr rice believes that mr powell is both physically and emotionally abusing them. he also expressed concern about possibly sexually inappropriate boundaries by mr powell. for example, mr rice claimed that x has told him on occasion, mr powell has walked in to the bathroom when she is in the shower. he also expressed concern that x is left to care for the children often and for extended periods when ms powell is working. mr rice added that he has discussed any concerns raised by the children's disclosures with ms powell but she has dismissed these. 138. i asked mr rice if he has any concerns in relation to ms powell's care of the children. he made reference to the children's clothes being unkempt at times, in addition to which he reported to have heard that ms powell slapped x on one occasion but mr rice denied any other concerns. 139. i asked mr rice about the allegation made in the documentation provided to me that he prefers to avoid dealing with issues around the children and rather, he will defer to his wife, ms k, for such matters. mr rice denied that this is the case and claimed that this allegation 'doesn't make sense'. mr rice told me that the court orders specifically state that ms k is not to interact with ms powell in relation to the children and he claimed that ms k has not spoken to ms powell for some years now. as such, mr rice reported that he will communicate with ms powell about issues associated with the children as needed. however, he did describe ms k as being the more organised of the couple, such that she is primarily responsible for organising matters for the family.
73 among other things, i note that at par.153, x refers to her brother y as the “least favourite member of the family” and that he was “annoying as well as mean.” at par.156, x described the environment in her mother’s house as being a “bit chaotic” and therefore not as relaxed. notably, at par.174, dr j recorded y as saying that his preference is and would continue to be for a week about arrangement. given the nature and duration of the allegations involving y, including criminal proceedings in 2017 against mr powell for assault on y (for which he was acquitted), it does rather cause some questions about the accuracy and veracity of the allegations that have been made in this matter since it began back in the mists of time in 2016. i will come back to the allegations and contentions shortly.
74 properly, dr j noted, at par.186, that there was correspondence from the nsw department of communities & justice, dated 19th march 2019, which confirmed that, as a result of home visits and interviews with the children “we have not identified any current safety or risk concerns, and will be closing the matter.” in my view, and in the light of reasons that follow, this assessment is consistent with the regular cycle of (a) complaints, mainly but not only by the children, primarily involving mr powell, followed by (b) some investigation, in this instance by care and protection authorities, and (c) a conclusion that there are no relevant risks. very unfortunately, this regular cycle has involved (sometimes consumed) both families (including the children) for years.
75 the following final sections of dr j’s report, entitled “additional consultations, opinion/summary”, and the last sections deal with her consideration of the terms of reference and recommendations, thus:
additional consultations: 195. i was able to speak to ms w, principal of z school by telephone on 17 march 2021. ms. w told me that she has worked at this school for a period of five years and therefore, knows both y and x, even though x has now progressed on to high school. 196. ms w reported that this year, y has returned to school seemingly more settled and calm and she also claimed that y appears 'more confident' than she has seen him in some time. ms w stated that sometimes y steals things at school and this is usually an indicator that 'things are not going well in his life' and whilst she claimed that y engaged in this behaviour in the weeks prior to our call, this soon desisted again. in response to specific questioning, ms w offered that she is unsure what the specific triggers to y's stealing are but she claimed that this behaviour tends to occur more when y is in his mother's care. she also reported to me that y appears more tired and dishevelled when with ms powell. 197. ms w described y's behaviour as 'immature' and she stated that he struggles to make consistent and positive friendships in the school. she also claimed that he tends to befriend the more hyperactive and unsettled children. according to ms w, y has hit other children in the past and at times, he has difficulties focusing in class and following instructions given to him. he can apparently also 'backchat' teachers sometimes. ms w noted that these behaviours tend to occur more often when y in his mother's care. ms w is aware that ms powell opposes y being medicated for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder but she believes that this would be helpful for his school behaviour and academic progress, as well as y's social functioning. ms w also expressed concern about y's sleep, as he apparently often seems very tired and she wondered if medication treatment may assist this. 198. ms w told me that both ms powell and mr rice are actively involved in the school and she referred to a meeting held recently when both parents attended due to concerns about y not following instructions. ms w claimed that at times, ms powell can be inattentive during these meetings, such as by playing on her mobile phone. 199. ms w reported that y has made complaints to the school on a number of occasions about mr powell's behaviour towards him, which includes y referring to being hit by mr powell. further to this, y has allegedly disclosed that mr powell's punishments for him are what ms w referred to as 'excessive'. for example, y has apparently told the school that he has been made to sit at the kitchen table for three hours if he has done something wrong, in addition to which he was not allowed to eat a meal or he was made to sit in his room for extended periods. ms w is also aware that y has disclosed being pushed against a wall by mr powell. ms w stated that the appropriate child protection reports have been made on each occasion. 200. ms w reported that she has encouraged y to engage with the school counsellor but she believes that until recently, this has not been possible. she claimed that he has recently commenced with the school counsellor, which she believes is positive. ms w identified y and x as 'at risk'. 201. given her time at the school, i asked ms w if she has anything she wanted to tell me about her experience with x. she claimed to hold 'real concerns' for x, whom she described as a 'very sad girl'. ms w recalled an incident about three years ago when x refused to return to her mother's home, although she did not say why. ms w noted that family and community services were called but did not offer assistance and she remembers sitting with x for some hours until ms powell could convince x to leave the school with her. however, ms w claimed to be aware that x got out of her mother's car thereafter and allegedly walked to mr rice's house. ms w described this experience as 'emotionally draining and devastating' for x. she also reported to be aware of other occasions when the children refused to go to their mother's house and would instead, go elsewhere and ring their father. opinion/summary: 202. the parties in this matter, ms powell and mr rice, were involved in a relationship that lasted somewhere between six and eight years and did not involve marriage. the couple has two children, x, now aged 13, and y, who is nine. the parties separated in or around 2010 and both have since repartnered. ms powell shares a further two sons with her husband and mr rice has contributed to raising his stepchildren and a foster child with his wife. 203. according to both parties, the relationship between them was generally positive and without incidences of serious abuse or violence. however, ms powell described being bored in the relationship and soon tired of its routine nature whereas mr rice alleges that ms powell was unfaithful repeatedly throughout the union. whatever the case, the separation seems to have been reasonably amicable with the communication and relationship deteriorating significantly after ms powell repartnered with mr powell. mr rice attributes this to the controlling and abusive influence of mr powell, whereas ms powell believes that mr rice does not like mr powell and may harbour some jealousy towards him. 204. both ms powell and mr rice came into their relationship with vulnerabilities on the basis of their developmental experience. ms powell was raised in a dysfunctional and seemingly abusive family environment, in which she was exposed to disrupted and rejecting attachments, parental alcoholism, maternal gambling and a lack of consistent care. she also claimed to have been a lonely child, who was often left to her own devices as well as subject to harsh and excessive forms of punishment. 205. as a result of her developmental experiences, ms powell did not want to be a mother, she has had difficulties with empathy and emotional reciprocity and exposure to harsh physical discipline was normalised for her. this is suggested to have made it difficult for ms powell to bond with x, which would have also been affected by her experience with pnd, although this reportedly improved over time with more children and i also believe that her expectations about discipline may play out in what she will tolerate from her partner towards the children, given the claims of harsh, abusive and excessive forms of discipline utilised by mr powell. 206. ms powell has generally participated meaningfully in the community and there is no history of substance abuse concerns for her. she acknowledged a history of pnd however, in addition to some ongoing anxiety relating to the family court process. further to this, however, ms powell appears to be a rather pragmatic and stoic individual, who seems to have difficulties appreciating the emotional experiences of her children. further to this, her understanding of the roles and responsibilities of parenthood are basic and she has limited appreciation of her weaknesses as a parent, although she expressed love for her children. 207. mr rice was also raised in a difficult and abusive family environment as a function of his father's belligerent, aggressive and at times, physically abusive behaviour. this man was also reported to have been an alcoholic, whose attachment with his son was problematic. however, this was balanced to a degree by mr rice's strong attachment to his mother. 208. mr rice reported to have been bullied as a child in school, as a result of which his self-esteem was poor and he developed some anxiety. this has resurfaced in recent years for mr rice and is triggered by the family court process and by being in the community as a function of fear that he will see and be abused by mr powell. there is also no history of substance abuse in this case and i note that mr rice has been productive in the community. further to this, he described being somewhat isolated socially but mr rice told me that his focus is on his family. 209. in contrast to ms powell, mr rice very much wanted to be a father and he has reportedly enjoyed being an active and involved parent, who takes some delight at being engaged with his children. like ms powell, mr rice also presents with limited insight into his weaknesses as a parent but his understanding of his responsibilities as a parent is well developed and rather sophisticated and i note that mr rice has prioritised remaining in city g for his children, despite his wife and stepchildren relocating to canberra for a job opportunity. as such, mr rice presents as a skilled and responsive parent generally, although in my view, the bed time he allows for the children, especially y, is too late. 210. after the breakdown of the relationship between the parties, both claimed that the children remained in ms powell's care and that the parties arranged between them time for mr rice to see the children. ms powell claimed that mr rice invested little effort in seeing the children with any regularity, whilst mr rice claimed that he saw the children on an almost daily basis. both also agree that the relationship between them deteriorated when ms powell and mr powell commenced a relationship and it was at this time that the family court process was initiated, apparently by mr rice and in order to implement a fixed arrangement for him to have the children. 211. i understand that final orders were made in late 2018 for the children to remain in the primary residence of ms powell, with a nine/five day arrangement with shared parental responsibility. ms powell has applied again to the family court alleging that mr rice is non-compliant with the orders, that he has withheld the children from her care on a number of occasions and that he has fabricated, and forced the children to support, allegations that mr powell has treated them abusively. ms powell also claims that mr rice will not communicate or cooperate with her in relation to the children. mr rice on the other hand, claims that he communicates with ms powell actively and openly about his concerns for the children but that she dismisses these. he also expressed concern for the children's welfare in ms powell's home, which he attributes to mr powell's abusive behaviour, his apparent concerning boundaries around x in the bathroom and the reportedly disparaging comments that mr powell makes about him to the children. on the basis of concerns for their safety, mr rice acknowledged that he has withheld the children on two occasions but he denied manipulating the children in any way to favour his residence. 212. both children were willing to talk with me as part of the assessment process but both expressed strong fears in relation to the possibility that their mother (and presumably also mr powell) might find out what they told me, as a result of which both requested that the content of their disclosures not be released to their parents. y could not articulate why he wanted this but x stated that her mother has been angry with her and said nasty things to her in the past for x expressing concerns to others, in addition to stopping her from seeing her friends. 213. both children were upset and tearful at interview with me. y claimed that this is because he misses his maternal grandfather who recently passed away but i note that y was also unwilling to discuss any concerns with respect to mr powell's behaviour with me. rather, y spoke in generally positive terms about all members of his family, including mr powell and he expressed a desire for shared care with a week about arrangement. i am aware that y has been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, which has made school difficult for him but i am also aware that y has been reported to have engaged in aggressive behaviour with others at school, as well as stealing and lying and presenting as sad and prone to emotional dysregulation. according to the school principal, y's behaviour is more difficult when in his mother's care and she claimed that y has made a number of allegations over the years of being treated poorly and abusively by mr powell. i note that mr powell was charged with assaulting y in or around 2017 but this charge was eventually dismissed, for reasons about which i am unclear. 214. x expressed concerns about mr powell's behaviour to me and in particular, she claimed to have observed him assaulting y before. further to this, x reported feeling unsafe at her mother's house as a result of mr powell's behaviour. she also claimed to feel dismissed by her mother, whom she perceives does not have time for her. x also described her mother as generally angry and upset and she claimed to find the household with her mother chaotic and rather stressful. x also reported to be made to be overresponsible in the home, with having to care for her brothers while her mother is at work and this makes it difficult for her to get her homework done. 215. x described being upset in her mother's house and she claimed to have started running away in an attempt at making others listen to her concerns about ms powell's household. to this end, x stated that she wants to live with her father on a full-time basis and she wants nothing to do with mr powell in any capacity. moreover, although x told me that she would like to see l and m, she claimed that she would not miss her mother if she did not see her. 216. ms powell has applied to the family court and she told me that her hopes for this process involve mr rice being punished and held to account for his behaviour, which she considers is not compliant with the orders and also manipulative and damaging for the children. she did not express any desire in relation to residence but recognises that mr rice and the children should see each other. she wants full parental responsibility. in contrast, mr rice expressed that he wants whatever the children want. however, when pushed, he believes the children's best interests are served by them residing with him on a full­ time basis but seeing their mother in some capacity. further to this, even if the children should live with him on a full-time basis, mr rice believes it is appropriate that parenting responsibility be shared. 217. in sum, it is my view that this is a case in which the children are suffering and this is evident in their behaviour and "cries for help". the current orders are not working in that the children are being exposed to risk and their behaviour and emotional state is being adversely affected. the reasons for this will be discussed in reference to the various allegations before the court. 218. firstly, the primary concern expressed by both mr rice and the children is that mr powell's behaviour towards the children is abusive at worst and rejecting at best. ms powell denies this but i note that she was raised in a family in which harsh parental discipline was exercised and she also struggles to empathise with her children on the basis of their experience. on the basis of the information available to me, whilst i cannot say for certain that mr powell has acted as alleged, i place some weight in the claims of the children, which is reflected in their behaviour and consistent disclosures over some period of time. it is my opinion that mr rice has tried to act protectively with the children, in addition to trying to discuss his concerns with ms powell, who has dismissed him and the children in deference to supporting her husband. as such, i am of the view that the children are likely at risk both physically and psychologically in ms powell's home as a result of mr powell's behaviour, in addition to being emotionally at risk by their mother's failure to act protectively. 219. secondly, ms powell has alleged that mr rice is working to manipulate the children to want to live with him, in addition to which he has withheld the children inappropriately in the past. i do not see any convincing evidence that mr rice is seeking to manipulate the children and rather, the information available to me suggests that he has tried to be balanced, has tried to reason with the children to go with their mother and has expressed distress at the fact that his children have to be in an environment that he considers unsafe. he has however, acknowledged withholding the children on two occasions. i also note that mr rice spoke positively about ms powell and about her parenting, he did not malign or disparage her but rather, commented that she made a poor choice in partner and he expressed concern that she appears to be afraid around mr powell, which worries him for her. in contrast however, there are claims that mr powell, and ms powell to a lesser extent, have been disparaging of mr rice to the children. it also seems that ms powell has made inappropriate comments to x about the family court process and the consequences of her actions that would likely be distressing and intimidating for a child of x's age. ms powell seeks to blame mr rice for the present situation and there is no apparent recognition of the impact of her behaviour or possibly that of her husband on the situation or the children. 220. thirdly, i am concerned about x's experience in her mother's home. she reported to be overresponsible for her siblings, whilst her mother is at work. i also note that ms powell reportedly resides in a three bedroom home, which must be a challenge with four children, three of whom are young, active boys. terms of reference: 221. you requested that the following terms of reference be addressed specifically in this report: • whether the children are at risk of being exposed to any physical or psychological harm or from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence - it is my opinion that y and x are at risk of physical and psychological harm in the care of ms powell and mr powell. this risk is a function of mr powell's reportedly excessive and inappropriate approach to discipline, in addition to his allegedly critical, rejecting and disparaging interactions with the children. i am not of the view that y and x are at risk of physical harm by their mother however, there is a risk of emotional abuse and psychological harm through her dismissal of their experience and through the way in which she interacts with the children around their father and the court process. i also have concerns about the emotional impact on x of being so over-responsible in ms powell's home. i am not of the view that there is any significant risk to the children in their father's care. • any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as maturity and level of understanding) that may affect the weight to be accorded to those views - both children expressed strongly that they do not want their mother to be informed about what they told me at interview. it is also noted for the court that y was not informed that x did not want her mother to know about what she told me. whilst y could not articulate why he was resistant to his mother knowing, x expressed fear that her mother would be angered by her disclosures and that she would express this anger to the children. y expressed generally positive views in relation to his family and he told me that he would like to live in a week about arrangement between his parents, although i am aware that his behaviour at school would suggest some distress in his mother's home. in contrast, x expressed feeling unsafe in her mother's home and she told me that she would like to reside on a full-time basis with her father, although it is important to her to continue to see m and l. given x's age and the consistent clarity of her statements to this effect, it is suggested that significant weight should be afforded to her view, whilst the weight accorded to y's view should be tempered by his age and maturity. • the relationship between the children with each of their parents and any other relevant persons in particular, the parent's partners - both children described having close relationships with their father and stepmother, with this being more so for x. y described his relationship with ms powell as being positive and to a lesser extent, similarly with mr powell. x stated that she does not like mr powell and wants nothing to do with him in any capacity. further to this, whilst she has some bond with ms powell, x described that this is not close and that she would not miss her mother if she did not see her. x also told me that she feels as if her mother does not have time for her and does not take her concerns seriously. • the willingness and ability of each of the children's parents, and of the parents' partners to facilitate and encourage a close and continuing relationship between the children and the other parent- mr rice expressed a positive view of ms powell as a parent and the role that she plays in the children's lives and it appears that he has worked to encourage the children to go to their mother's even when they are distressed. as such, i believe that he will work to continue to encourage the children to have a relationship with their mother, even though he does not believe they are safe with mr powell. ms powell, on the other hand, appears to have a fixed and negative view of mr rice and the way in which he is dealing with the children around the family court process. further to this, ms powell believes that mr rice's dislike of mr powell has caused stress for her and her husband and therefore, she would prefer that he has limited contact with the children and is not involved in the responsibility for making decisions about the children. for this reason, i would expect that ms powell will be less willing to facilitate the children's relationship with their father. i was unable to speak to ms k or mr powell as part of this assessment, so i cannot comment on their position of this issue. • the likely effect of any change in the children's circumstances, including the likely effect on the children of any separation from either of the parents or any other person with whom the children have been living - the children have been living effectively with both their parents for their whole lives, although they have always spent more time with their mother, whilst it seems that they are more comfortable in the care of their father. consequently, i am of the view that any change to the children's circumstances that results in a separation from mr rice will be distressing and destabilising for y and x. there would also likely be some distress at any change that results in a reduction of time with ms powell, especially for y, but given the reported concerns in the household with mr powell, i would expect that any change to this effect would be less destabilising and distressing for the children. x has no reported bond with mr powell so a disruption in their contact will probably be experienced positively by her. i also note that ms k apparently has a close connection with both children that they have been able to maintain even though she is now residing in canberra for work. • the capacity of each parent to provide for the needs of the children including the emotional and intellectual needs - i do not have concerns for mr rice's ability to meet the various needs of the children across all domains. whilst it is apparent that ms powell can provide for the physical and intellectual needs of the children, i have concerns about her ability to consistently and appropriately meet their emotional needs, for the reasons outlined above. • the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the children's parents (or any other relevant person in particular the parent's partner) - both parents express love for their children and a commitment to caring for y and x. however, in my opinion, mr rice has been more consistently able to demonstrate his commitment to discharging these responsibilities in the best interests of the children. in contrast, ms powell appears to prioritise her needs and those of her husband, over the children on a regular basis. i cannot comment on this for either mr powell or ms k. • the effect on the children of any psychological or physical harm to which they may have been exposed- in my view, both children are suffering. x is sad and distressed, she feels as if her concerns are not being heard or treated seriously and she has run away at times to make this point to others. she reported to feel unsafe at her mother's house and there have been consistent claims that she does not want to be forced to be there. y is also demonstrating his distress through dysregulated and destructive behaviours and he, too, seemed sad when i spoke to him, although he attributed this to grief at the loss of his grandfather recently. • the effect on the children of spending equal time, or substantial or significant time, with each parent having regard to the parent's current and future capacity to: implement such an arrangement, and communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise there seems to be little effective communication between the parties in relation to the children. ms powell blames mr rice for this but mr rice's account would suggest that this is largely been made difficult by ms powell's dismissal of concerns for the children. ms powell believes that mr rice will not comply with court orders, although the evidence available to me suggests that he has largely tried to be compliant. when matters between the parties relate to superficial issues, it appears they can be cooperative but in relation to more serious matters, such as choices in school or concerns in relation to mr powell's alleged behaviour, there is little ability for them to work together in the children's interests. for this reason, and taking into account other risks in this case, i believe that equal or significant time with both parents is not in the children's best interests. • if the expert is able to comment, the impact on the expert's recommendations, as to who the children live with or spend time with if the court makes a positive finding that the children have been subjected to physical and psychological harm from one of their parents - if the court is of the view that the children have been harmed in either of their parent's care, i believe this needs to be taken into account when making recommendations in this case as to protect the children and inoculate against their experience of further distress or difficulties. i have considered this in making my recommendations, as outlined below. • the mental state of both parents in so far as it relates to parenting issues - neither parent is assessed as presenting with a diagnosable psychological condition however, i note that both disclosed the experience of anxiety with the primary triggers being related to the family court process. this anxiety will, no doubt, impact on their interactions with the children around the court issues. for mr rice, this anxiety seems to increase his desire to protect the children and advocate for their wishes to be heard. for ms powell, this anxiety seems to result in her making inappropriate comments to at least x but possibly both children about the court process and the possible ramifications for their father. further to this, ms powell's anxiety is also expressed in her contention that mr rice has fabricated allegations against mr powell, which have been damaging to the children. • the mental health/needs of the children - both children in this case have vulnerabilities with respect to their mental health. y has been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and has been reported to have some concerns with respect to his affect and behaviour regulation, in addition to difficulties socially. x, on the other hand, is seemingly depressed. i believe both children require treatment, which will be discussed further below. any other matter that the expert considers relevant- there are no additional matters of relevance in this case that have not already been discussed elsewhere in this report. recommendations: 222. on the basis of the information available to me in this case, including the interviews with relevant parties, psychometric test findings and a review of the documentation provided to me, i make the following recommendations as being in the best interests of y and x: • that the children's primary residence be with their father, mr rice. • that the children spend time with their mother and younger siblings, m and l, every second weekend and during the day light hours. they should not spend overnight time at their mother's house. they should also not spend day light time at their mother's house if mr powell is present. rather, any such contact between the children, their mother and half-brothers, should then occur in a public place, such as a park, play centre, shopping centre and the like. • that y and x have contact with their mother by telephone or video call during the time that they do not see her. it is recommended that this could occur twice during the week that they do not see her and once during the week that they see her on the weekend. • that the children have no contact with mr powell in any form. • that the primary responsibility for the children be retained by mr rice for day-to-day matters but that for significant issues, such as health and education, responsibility should be shared between the parties. this may require the involvement of a third party, such as a mediator, to prevent unnecessary conflict. where the parties are unable to reach an agreement through a formal process, mr rice should be able to make the final decision. • that ms powell be provided with information as to the children's functioning and wellbeing by the school or any services working with the children. • that communication between the parties should be limited, ideally through email/text or a parenting application on their mobile phones. • that the children engage in psychological treatment with an appropriate service in their local area to assist in managing their mental health needs. this may also include a referral to a child psychiatrist or paediatrician for consideration of psychotropic medication for y. • that both parents participate in a circles of security programme to better understand their children's experience. it is my view that this is most important for ms powell. • ideally, ms powell would also gain from engaging in psychological therapy to gain in self-awareness and understanding of emotions and in order to assist her in developing insight into the consequences of her childhood on her. this should also allow her to develop an understanding of healthy relationships and emotional coping. however, this intervention is not necessary for the aforementioned recommendations to occur. even so, at a minimum, i would recommend that ms powell have contact with any therapist the children work with to gain greater insight into the children's experiences and needs and to develop an appropriate plan to manage the time they spend together without putting unnecessary emotional pressure on the children for the situation.
dr j’s oral evidence
76 for current purposes, it is sufficient to note that there was no wavering in dr j’s oral evidence from what she had written in her report. without attempting to summarise her oral evidence, and at the risk of over-simplifying things, dr j was of the view that, regardless of whether there was any actual abuse of any kind in the mother’s household, the children (x in particular) clearly believe there to be a risk.
77 i note the following by way of overview of dr j’s evidence given by video-link at the trial.
78 dr j confirmed that x told her a number of times that mr powell had been abusive to her. however, in relation to y, she confirmed that he did not wish to discuss any similar matters. she said she formed the impression that this was because of some fear that he had that there may be some negative consequence for either him or his mother. dr j confirmed y’s firm view of his preference to live in a shared care/equal time arrangement. she said y did make some general disclosures to other people about various allegations involving mr powell.
79 it was dr j’s view that y stressed his wish for an equal time arrangement because he did not want to be separated from his mother. she confirmed that y values the relationship with his mother.
80 of particular significance was dr j’s comments regarding x as to whether or not she actually believed the various allegations that she makes (historically and otherwise) against mr powell. dr j said that, based very much upon her manner and the consistency of her account of events, either the events were true or certainly she believed they were true.
81 on the subject of “risk”, dr j said that this included x’s experience of her mother of largely ignoring or disbelieving x’s reports of abuse from mr powell. she said that x experiences the maternal home as an “unpleasant environment” and where the mother’s response to her concerns/claims are found by x to be distressing.
82 in relation to the alleged risks involving mr powell, dr j said that her assessment was based on what she described as a “holistic picture” of the evidence she was provided with, which primarily related to x’s account of allegations, y’s various disclosures, the behaviour of x and y, information provided by the father, and her view of the documentation she had seen.
83 in my view, very curiously and unfortunately, dr j said that her inability to speak to mr powell had no significant impact upon her analysis. as the central person against whom multiple allegations have been made over many years, it is quite extraordinary that such a view was held that speaking with him “had no significant impact” on the multiple allegations against him.
84 in a somewhat similar vein, dr j said that the mother’s view that the events/allegations made by x and y against mr powell did not happen, and that they were making these things up to please their father, which is likely to have a negative impact upon the children, particularly in relation to any protective action regarding them. for example, dr j said that it could result in the children feeling that their emotional and other experiences were dismissed by the mother, and even that the children could be punished for being honest, and that it could effectively silence the children and limit their ability to seek relevant support. all of these matters, she said, could ultimately place them at some risk. among many things that could be observed here, it is perhaps sufficient to note that (a) there is no evidence that the children have been silenced or cowed in any way regarding reporting any allegations, and (b) the frequency of allegations of abuse against mr powell have continued unabated.
85 dr j said that in her experience, children do not often fabricate allegations of abuse but that they sometimes exaggerate it. she confirmed that really all that mattered here was that the children believed these things happened, namely the events recounted involving mr powell. again, regrettably, it is extremely unfortunate that dr j was not taken through the two earlier reports of ms f and ms e, or the various other healthcare and other records, none of which support the children’s allegations.
86 dr j again returned to the issue of, in her view, the children’s problematic relationship with the mother, on the basis that her purported lack of response to any of the allegations placed a strain on the children’s relationship with her, which in turn has led to the children seeking emotional relief elsewhere. she said that the lack of response from the mother led, or could ultimately lead, to x having a lack of trust in the ability of her mother to be supportive and/or protective. in turn, this has led to x “acting out”, among other things. dr j said that if the children continued to live with the mother with mr powell present, it was likely y could become more disengaged and aggressive and that x could become more distressed.
87 in a most curious piece of evidence, it was observed by dr j that y consistently spoke positively of mr powell. in this regard, mr j said it was not that mr powell was a source of attachment, but rather that he was just a friend, there would be no significant loss, in her view, if that relationship was disrupted.
88 based upon the children’s accounts (again, without reference to independent evidence to the contrary), dr j said that mr powell was likely a source of risk to the children psychologically and physically, and that his continued presence placed pressure on the mother and caused conflict for the children. in her view, it made it difficult for the mother properly to care and provide for the children. even more bluntly, dr j said that she did not see any value in the relationship of the children with mr powell. she commented further that the relevant risk in relation to mr powell and y was mainly to be that the children were not “adequately managed” when he was present.
89 regarding the relationship between x and y, dr j said that there is something of a love/hate relationship, and that x has some desire to protect y. in her view she said that the siblings should not be separated. she also said that in her view, assuming that both children lived primarily with the father, spending every second weekend with the mother during daytime hours only was sufficient to maintain their relationship with her. this said, she acknowledged that such a significant diminution in y’s time with his mother would very likely result in mixed responses from him, such as a sense of relief, on the one hand, but on the other a certain sense of loss and guilt. she said that this could be managed through “therapeutic support”.
90 regarding a change in residence of the children, and equally a change in schools, dr j acknowledged that there would likely be some distress in these respects but that the benefits of the move outweighed the costs of it. she did not think that any of the proposed changes to the children’s living and other arrangements would impact adversely upon y’s diagnosis with adhd. she said really all he needed was support.
91 again, dr j said that, in her view both children are in “urgent need of support” and in this regard, it was concerning that (in her view) the mother minimises the concerns that the children have presented. she said that this, in large measure, reflected the mother’s approach whereby she tends to “get on with things” and not infrequently dismisses other issues in her life. dr j said that the mother thinks that psychology has a “minimised value”, which has led to the mother being less than willing, or relevantly forceful or active, to engage the children in services outside of the home. it could also reflect that the mother does not want the children’s allegations being disclosed.
92 again by way of comment, in my view this was a very curious remark or assessment precisely because the children have readily and consistently, over a significant period of time, unhesitatingly reported matters to all manner of authorities, including police, care and protection services, and hospital staff. all of this is to say that reticence has not been a prominent feature, particularly by the father or the children, to voice and ventilate their concerns about mr powell.
93 dr j remarked that the father makes attempts to communicate with the mother about the children’s needs. from the totality of the evidence before the court, in my view this assessment would need to be significantly qualified.
94 in answer to questions from counsel for the father, (all of the above comments obviously, thereby, were responses to questions from counsel for the icl) dr j said that if the siblings were split or separated that could pose a risk of a breakdown in the sibling relationship between x and y. she repeated the view also that, on the reports and documents provided to her, the mother seemed to prioritise her relationship with mr powell over the relationship with the children. i do not accept such an assessment for the detailed reasons given here.
95 for the most part, given her usual clarity, expertise, experience and robust approach, i accept dr j’s evidence. my reservations about accepting her evidence unequivocally arise primarily because of her very high and positive regard of the father generally and of his parenting in particular. as earlier noted, dr j was not provided with documents and records that showed that no independent authority (courts, police, or care and protection authorities) over a number of years, has found anything untoward regarding mr powell. and the one time that he was charged, resulted in a not guilty verdict. but the father relentlessly, and in my view inappropriately, pursued mr powell year after year. the father believed the children, even in the face of clear, independent evidence that showed it to be incorrect, and sometimes false. as also noted, my assessment of the father’s evidence was based not only on what he said at trial, but particularly my observations and engagements with him regarding what he has said and done over many years. dr j did not have the benefit of that history.
other matters (including earlier reports)
96 the following matters of evidence, which for the most part were not addressed by anyone, are taken from the father’s affidavits since the commencement of the litigation. it will become readily apparent how consistent and persistent the accusations made by the father, primarily against mr powell, have been. yet, as earlier noted, consistently until the most recent times, the father has settled the proceedings with the mother by consent. such settlements would usually be understood by independent observers (including me) to suggest that the concerns raised were not as grave or dramatic as claimed, or perhaps were simply part of a “game-plan” to achieve his long-held goal to have the children (or at least x) live primarily with him. otherwise, why settle? surely a parent would not resolve a matter in which they have significant concerns about the safety and well-being of their children?
97 some questions and comments, albeit preliminary, are apposite here.
98 first, if there was a risk of the kind dr j outlined in her report and in her oral evidence regarding mr powell, how and why has y so consistently said that he wants to keep spending equal time between the two households of his parents? this question was never properly or fully addressed. i understand that, to a degree, he may simply be trying to please both of his parents. however, given the consistency and seriousness of the accusations against mr powell, it is nonetheless surprising how consistent, unqualified and unfiltered y’s wishes have remained to spend equal time in each household.
99 secondly, as i set out below, what is particularly puzzling, as well as surprising, is how consistent the accusations against mr powell have been since the litigation began in 2016. yet, summarised here, it is only in this last report, from dr j, that there is any recommendation regarding a change in residence for the children. this is against a background where: (a) charges against mr powell involving y were not established in 2018, (b) the clear bill of health (so to speak) regarding the mother’s household from care and protection authorities in 2019, (c) police records confirming their belief that the children had been coached (which could really only have been by the father), and (d) following the release of a detailed report from ms f in november 2017 seemingly if not inevitably led to the matter being resolved by consent. ms f’s observations and comments are quite different to those of dr j. i note her comments briefly later in these reasons.
report of ms f
100 as just noted, in november 2017, the matter settled on the first day of the final hearing. for this reason, the report of ms f (dated 11th november 2017) was not formally admitted into evidence. obviously it was released to the parties, and to the icl, who was then ms hansen. accepting the date of it, because (a) of it having previously been provided to the parties, albeit quite some time ago, (b) ms f interviewed both mr powell and ms k (while dr j did not for reasons previously noted), and (c) of the historical allegations being raised by the father and ms f having considered them in her report, for more abundant caution i will admit ms f’s report as exhibit sc1. summarily, i note the following from it.
101 what is perhaps most striking, both noted in her report and in the father’s material, is that since 2016, the father has consistently sought that (a) the children live primarily with him, and spend substantial and significant time with the mother, and (b) to have some restraint imposed upon mr powell. yet, almost as consistently, the father has regularly resolved the parenting matter by agreeing to (i) the children remaining in the mother’s primary care, (ii) the children spending significant and substantial time with the father, and notably, (iii) no restraints being imposed on mr powell. as earlier recorded – more than once – this has been the consistent cycle since 2016, until october 2021, but with the complaints remaining, in large measure, exactly the same. true it is that there have been some variations, but they are variations on a theme. indeed, wrongly, much of the material in the father’s documents filed, and in much of the cross examination of the mother, was based on claims and documents that pre-dated the 2017 orders. this should not have occurred because of the final consent orders in november 2017 which effectively closed off all matters prior to the date of those final orders.
102 true it is that the father’s “relocation” application essentially took the matter out of, or over, the rice & asplund hurdle, but the ongoing, relentless allegations by the father against mr powell have remained consistent, and with little variation. old history was largely and consistently “re-cycled.”
103 giving every allowance to the number of years since her report, ms f’s assessment of the father is strikingly different to the assessment of him by dr j. thus, at par.20, ms f noted that the father was a “very determined, anxious man”, which is quite a contrast to dr j finding him to having a sophisticated understanding and approach to parenting. as an observation only, clearly his determination has remained (a) to pursue the mother and mr powell using essentially the same material that has been around, and reviewed by police and care and protection services, since 2016, and (b) to secure a change in residence of the children. notwithstanding that he has run essentially the same argument on every occasion in this court since proceedings began in 2016, thus far it has been without success in terms of the orders he has obtained.
104 for my part, i have to say that i found the father to be an earnest, determined but still, a quite diffident witness. he was also, in my view, and from long discussion with him over many court appearances over many years, not a scrupulously discriminating person. i intend no major criticism but more that he seemed consistently to believe and accept unquestioningly the accounts of events or stories told to him by the children. either that or he was completely and utterly unrelenting in his pursuit to “win” the litigation and achieve the change in residence of the children, whatever the stakes or cost to all.
105 on the other hand, i found the mother (who said very credibly that the children were regularly “creative” in their accounts of events) to be genuinely engaging and focussed, while still being quite at sea, so to speak, because of being quite recently legally unrepresented. nonetheless, she did remarkably well in very difficult circumstances. if it ever came to a contest, which it did not here, i would more likely than not prefer the mother’s much more spontaneous and candid evidence to the overly cautious and obviously more calculating and somewhat one-dimensional evidence of the father. this is also in circumstances where (as earlier noted), apart from the mother and the father, i am the only other person involved in the litigation who has observed the parties over the whole period of the parenting contest since 2016. my observations are not, therefore, based on some fleeting assessment. i acknowledge that both parents love their children dearly and unreservedly, and equally that they have very different approaches to parenting.
106 at par.26, ms f also recorded the mother to be “very anxious”, and unsurprisingly “very drained and worn out by the current dispute.”
107 pars.47 – 57 of her report deal with allegations of family violence and abuse.
allegations of family violence and abuse 47. allegations made by mr rice concerning mr powell are central to this matter. mr rice said that there was never any violence between him and ms powell and assured me that he and his wife got on well together with no violence in their relationship. mr rice also considered that mr powell was violent towards ms powell, conceding that this was just speculation. he alleged mr powell had also threatened suicide in front of ms powell’s friends. ms powell categorically denies that mr powell directs any violence to her or the children. 48. concerning mr powell, mr rice said the first incident that took place was when he and his partner met ms powell’s partner, mr powell, in junee and he began yelling at him. mr rice said that the second time he was concerned was when one of the children told him that mr powell had threatened to cut his arms off. he alleged that y told him that mr powell got a knife from the cupboard and waved it at the children, telling them to take their elbows off the table or he would cut them off. after this, mr rice said that y began stuttering really badly. by this time, the children were spending five nights a fortnight in two blocks with him. mr rice sought advice from the police about what to do about what he had been told and began court proceedings. mr rice said he approached the then department of family and community services (facs) to no avail. according to mr rice, the children had also told him that when they could not sleep, mr powell would go into their rooms and smack them. 49. mr rice said he had retained the children on three occasions, once after the reported incident with the knife, and a second time after y told him that mr powell had threatened to pick him up by his hair and throw him on the ground. on the second occasion, mr rice said the children were only in his care for a few days because their mother got a recovery order. he said the last time he retained the children was when y came over with “a massive bruise” on his ear and estimated this was two or three months ago. mr rice said that y told him that mr powell had picked him up by the ear, carried him through to his room, and thrown him onto his bed. after this, the children were again returned to their mother’s care. mr rice said that he again spoke to the now department of family and community services (facs) but said they did not intervene. 50. mr rice said that ms powell and her family were previously living with her father. according to mr rice, this man had told him that things had happened at his house that were not appropriate. mr rice said that family and friends had tried to get help ms powell leave her situation. 51. mr rice discussed the apprehended domestic violence orders (advos) that had been taken out against mr powell. he said the last incident that happened had been reported to the police who took out the advo. mr rice went on to discuss problems that had arisen at the day-care centre. he also showed me material that x had put on her own computer for a school slideshow. she talked about how “mr powell” (mr powell) had got cranky with her for losing a slipper and said that mr powell had told her that if y taught l to be naughty, then he would leave their mother and take l with him so that they would only see him at weekends when she was at her father’s. 52. on her computer, x discussed mr powell threatening their mother about the knife incident and discussed how when their mother was in the toilet, mr powell had threatened y, telling him that he would cut his arms off if he did not take his arms off the table. x complained that only her mother and ms k believed her. however, x then went on to say that her mother still would not believe or admit what had happened, claiming to be at the table with them. x went on to say how mr powell would have a cranky look when he was serious and on this day had a cranky look. x then referred to the incident on 28 october 2016 saying that she had thought she heard someone screaming so peeked into her mother’s room where she thought she saw mr powell pick y up by the neck. when she saw mr powell push her mother, x said he did not know she was there. 53. in her notes, x went on to refer to another incident when mr powell had apparently picked y in the kitchen and sent him to his room. 54. ms powell assured me there was no violence involved in her relationship with mr rice, rather describing them as having been best friends. after l was born, ms powell said that the facs turned up on her door without notice. she believed that mr rice had alleged she was mistreating the children, that she was drunk all the time and was doing drugs, allegations she denied. after this, ms powell said the dispute just escalated to the point they were at now. 55. ms powell definitely asserted that mr powell was not violent towards y. if mr powell ever raised his hand to her or any of her children, ms powell assured me she would leave immediately. she said she could be a single mother again. ms powell assured me she would act protectively if there was any reason to do so. 56. ms powell said that on the day that mr powell had allegedly picked y up by his ear and taken him through to his bedroom, she had not actually been at work as alleged. she said she was actually at home at the alleged time. ms powell went on to point out that if you picked someone up by the ear and carried them in this manner, even though she was not a doctor, the person would have much more severe injuries than the bruise y apparently had. indeed, ms powell said that the doctor did not report that y had any marks or bruising at all and rather said he appeared to have an old injury. indeed, ms powell said y had not returned to his father for five nights after the time of the alleged incident. however, she said her ex-partner and ms k had actually seen y on the saturday at sport and at church on the sunday and not noted any injuries on either occasion. 57. ms powell vehemently denied any allegation that mr powell had hurt her in any way. before she had any of the children, ms powell said she had been in a violent relationship. because of this, she said she would certainly not remain in a relationship with mr powell. ms powell went on to say that if she and mr powell ever did have an argument, they were the type of people who would just not talk to each other.
108 those paragraphs should be taken to be incorporated into these reasons. notably, at pars.54 and 55, ms f recorded the mother’s assurance that there was no family violence in her household and that if mr powell “ever raised his hand to her or to her children, ms powell assured ... that she would leave immediately.” this protective attitude was strongly disputed more recently by others, obviously contrary to the mother’s evidence here from this earlier report.
109 the sections from ms f’s report regarding discussion with the children (pars.58 – 67) should also be taken to be incorporated into these reasons. so too should the paragraphs regarding ms f’s interviews with ms k and with mr powell (pars.72 – 85).
children x (10 years 2 months) 58. initially x said she did not know why she had to talk to me, before engaging readily with me. she then surmised that it was so that she could feel better explaining that she needed to feel better about what had been going on. x queried why she had to talk to me rather than to her counsellor. x told me that, “people had been mean and rude,” explaining that at her mother’s house, they did not accept her whereas it was different at her father’s. x went on to say that at her mother’s house they liked y but did not like her and said she was unsure why this was. x based this on her mother and mr powell always talking to y and said that they “never talk to her at all”. x said that it was different at her father’s house. 59. in terms of how many days she wanted to spend with each of her parents, x suggested that the current arrangement was reversed so that she spent more time with her father than with her mother. she suggested that she stayed with her mother until mondays and then return to her father staying with him until the following monday when she would go back to her mother’s overnight, the opposite arrangement to the one she was doing now. when i asked x if she would miss her mother if she adopted this arrangement, she responded, “well, i miss dad when i’m with mum,” and said she did think that she would “kind of miss mum still”. however, she said she would be happy because she would see her father more because now she did not see him at all. x said that she wanted her father to have more time with her because her mother had had more time with her ever since they separated when she was three. 60. x told me that mr powell, her stepfather, was not very nice to y. she went onto say that mr powell was not that nice to y and he physically hurt him. she told me that a couple of months ago, mr powell picked y up by the ear, saying that she heard this even though she did not see it. x showed me where y had a mark and said y had told their father and ms k what had happened. she said that they went to the police. at the time of the incident, x said she was sitting at the dinner table and did not actually see what happened. x said she did not do anything and said that at the time of the incident, her mother was at work and was not in the house. 61. when asked what were the good things at her mother’s house, x told me that she got to see her mother and said the bad things were “physically everything else that isn’t good”. when asked what was good at her father’s house, x responded, “everything,” and when asked what was bad, said “it’s not really about dad. i share a room with my stepsister u and i try to clean up our room and she messes it back up again.” 62. if she had three wishes, x said she would wish “to live at dad’s forever” and said she did not really know what her other two wishes would be. during the test process, x told me that her stepfather was sometimes violent to their mother as well. at these times, x said she could not do anything although she did tell her father and ms k. usually, x said that she hid in her room. y (6 years 5 months) 63. y was a helpful little boy who was keen to please. he offered to get his sister at the end of his individual time with me. y understood he had to talk to me because his stepdad had been hurting him and being mean to him. he added that his stepfather had been getting him into trouble. when i asked what his stepfather did to him, y told me that he went on that his stepfather would “sometimes smack us and sometimes throws us onto our bed and turns us to the wall”. y said that his mother responded by just helping him up when he got hurt. often after an incident, y said his mother and mr powell would have a fight. according to y, mr powell would hurt his mother. y went on to say, “mum’s having a baby. sometimes mr powell hits mum in the belly.” he said his mother did not like this. y told me that he had a little brother, l, who was three. 64. when i asked how much time he wanted to spend with each of his parents, y told me he wanted to have two sleeps at his mother’s house and then four sleeps at his father’s house. when i asked him why he wanted to have less time than he did now at his mother’s, y responded, “because dad doesn’t want me to get hurt.” y went on to say that he did not want to get hurt either. y said he did not want to go to his mother’s if mr powell was there. 65. y told me he was in kindergarten at z primary school. 66. when asked what were the good things at his mother’s house, y told me that the good things at his mother’s house were that his mother was nice to him. he went on to say that, “mr powell doesn’t be nice to me”. when asked what were the bad things at his mother’s house, y responded, “mr powell hurts me.” when asked what were the bad things at his father’s house, y said that the bad things were that he might get into trouble for not telling the truth. he told me that, “ms k and dad don’t smack me.” he said they did not send him to his room but said that if he told the truth it would be nice. 67. if he had three wishes, y said he would wish for “mr powell be nice to me.” he said this was his only wish before going onto reiterate that he wanted mr powell to be nice to him. y told me that mr powell was never nice to him. y assured me that ms k was nice to him. collateral information interview with ms k - mr rice’s wife and the children’s stepmother 72. ms k impressed as genuinely concerned about her stepchildren. she is strongly aligned with mr rice in her observations and concerns and very supportive of his wishes. ms k did not appear to be being malicious when expressing her concerns. 73. when x and y were staying with them, ms k said that the family went “pretty good”. she said they had a very structured routine within their household anyway, particularly to suit her oldest child who had autism. ms k enjoyed working in her own business as a tradesperson, assisted by her father. ms k outlined her work schedule which allowed her to take the children to school in the mornings. 74. when i asked ms k how she would feel about caring for extra children for more nights a fortnight, she commented that her concerns were more about the children’s safety. ms k assured me that she and mr rice were not motivated by wanting to have the children all the time, but were rather motivated by wanting the children to be safe. ms k was aware of the disclosures y had made to day-care and vacation care. ms k said it had been difficult because ms powell had made allegations about her in front of the children to the vacation care staff which she had to follow-up. ms k said she had been hurt by the allegations made against her. 75. ms k said she would never say anything negative about ms powell in front of the children. she said both she and mr rice tried very hard not to say anything in front of the children. ms k noted that the children had nightmares sometimes at their house and said they had therefore had included photos of their mother, l and grandparents on a photo wall at their house. ms k said that she was originally childcare trained and so had dealt with such issues with other people. 76. ms k criticised ms powell for not taking y to the doctor for some school sores on his ankle treated. ms k rather said she and mr rice had recently taken y to the doctor about these and said y had been delighted that they had now healed. she said his mother had not taken him to the doctor for this condition. ms k said that ms powell had also alleged that y had carpet burns after returning from their house. ms k said that y subsequently sustained more burns at school. because of another skin condition he had, ms k said that y had to bathe alone but believed he had not been doing so at his mother’s. she said the doctor requested that the children just have a shower. interview with mr powell – ms powell’s partner and the children’s stepfather 77. mr powell impressed as concerned and distressed about the range of allegations that have been made against him during the previous two years. he said none of the allegations were true. mr powell said he did not have a criminal history for any violent behaviour. 78. readily, mr powell told me he had had some mental health help for depression both before he met ms powell and about three years ago when ms powell was pregnant with l and he was not working, and was being rejected from houses. mr powell said he was diagnosed with situational depression. mr powell was not aware of any family history of mental illness. 79. mr powell told me that his relationship with y used to be really good. he said when y and he first got together, they were inseparable and said at the time, mr rice was being offered time with the children but was refusing it. he said that even at times when he was offered the children, mr rice would just take x because y was still in nappies. mr powell said things changed when mr rice got with his current partner and commented that it was really good that he now wanted to be an active part of the children’s lives. 80. nowadays, mr powell described his relationship with y as “very stale and very cold”, saying that y just did not know whether he was “coming or going”. mr powell said that once upon a time, he and y would cuddle up on the lounge room and watch television together during the evenings and might even fall asleep. nowadays, mr powell said, “he struggles to even be in the same room with me.” mr powell dated this change since y started spending every second weekend with his father. 81. sometimes, mr rice said y would relax and forget and they would get back to how they used to be. however, he said that whenever y came back from his father’s, it would be two or three days before y “warms up a bit and comes out of his shell”. appearing upset, mr powell said he felt hurt by what was happening and said, “i used to be really close to the little guy.” now, mr powell said he had told ms powell that he did not feel comfortable being alone with y because he did not know what the next allegation was going to be. mr powell noted that all the allegations seemed to be about something he had allegedly done to y. 82. mr powell went on to say that he could not imagine what it was like for mr rice to see his son doing things with another male and he said he thought it would be very hard to see your son interacting with another male. mr powell said he could not deal with any of his children calling another man “dad” and he said he certainly would not expect any of his stepchildren to ever call him “dad” although he said they would be more than welcome to if they wanted to do so. he said he certainly did not push them to do this because he was not their dad and was rather “mr powell, i’m their mate.” to a certain extent, mr powell said he did see step-parenting as being the children’s mate and said he thought the role of a step-parent was to offer guidance to their stepchildren and being a role model to them. he thought a step-parent could also represent a shoulder to cry on to children and someone to talk to. clearly, mr powell said any discipline was up to ms powell and was not his place. 83. mr powell said he could not understand the allegation that he picked y up by his ear. he said that this was the first accusation that there were police called to and said at the time he was not alone with the children. mr powell said that the police filed an apprehended violence order (avo) against him and said that there was a current avo with assault charges pending. in response to my query, mr powell said that he was petrified about this court hearing. 84. mr powell was very concerned about the impact of any avo on any future working with children check he might seek pointing out it would affect his ability to coach or be involved with his children’s sport. mr powell denied the allegation made, saying that he was not at home alone with y at the time. mr powell denied that there was any violence perpetuated by him towards his current partner, ms powell and said that if any such thing happened, it would only once because she would leave him. in the event that they did have a disagreement, mr powell said that he and ms powell did not yell and scream but rather talked things out. mr powell said that he had a pretty normal childhood in city g. he said that there was no violence between his parents. 85. mr powell appeared upset saying that he felt hurt. he said he was distressed that he was being presented as some sort of abusive monster. mr powell said he was also concerned about reducing the stress on his pregnant partner and was concerned about the impact of the dispute on the children.
110 among other matters noted by ms f from other sources included references to police records that indicate, in their view, the children having been coached by an adult about what to say to the police. also as noted earlier, this could only have been by the father. this also included the police noting that the language of the children regarding the complaints did not accord with their ages at the time.
111 the whole section of the evaluation section of this report should be taken to be incorporated into these reasons. this included, at par.100, comments taken from ms e’s s.11f report (dated 14th september 2016, there is a later memo also, dated 30th january 2019) to the effect that the father may be “inculcating fear and rehearsing a negative and false view of the mother’s partner to the children and/or is subjecting them to a fearful and anxious emotional environment associated with the stepfather and their time and relationships with him.” i come back to ms e’s memoranda in due course.
112 in the same paragraph (set out in full), ms f went on to state (underlined emphasis added):
ms e, in her cic memorandum raises concerns “whether or not the father is inculcating and rehearsing a negative and false view of the mother’s partner to the children and/or is subjecting them to a fearful and anxious emotional environment associated with stepfather and their time and relationships with him”. based on the interviews held, my observation (albeit brief) of the children with mr powell and their mother, the decision of facs not to take any action, the subpoenaed material including the police comments (see para 90), in my opinion, mr rice is influencing the children against mr powell, based on genuine misinterpretations. ms e referred to mr rice inappropriately instigating a “code” for x to alert him of problems at her mother’s house and thereby reinforcing a sense to the child that she was at some risk. he was also probably encouraging x to please him by raising such concerns.
113 in the light of her report, observations and documents reviewed, ms f recommended that the current (in late 2017) 9:5 regime remain in place.
ms e’s s.11f memoranda
114 as a matter of historical record, i note the following from ms e’s first cic memorandum, dated 14th september 2016. for the same reasons given earlier in relation to ms f’s report, i will admit both of ms e’s memoranda (the second was dated 18th january 2019) into evidence as md1 and md2 respectively.
115 first, under “risk factors” (par.5) in her first memo, ms e set out details of the long-traversed contentions about mr powell throwing y and that he hit, kicked and/or flicked x. five years later the same accusations were being bandied about again. ms e noted however that the children were both interviewed by facs at the time and by the police but no charges were ever laid against mr powell.
116 secondly, at pars.6-7, ms e noted the respective allegations or concerns expressed by the parents against the other. they remain now as they were then. pars.10 – 19 set out at a little length, including discussions with both mr powell and ms k, details of the co-parenting relationship. this section also included, at par.13, confirmation by ms e of x lying to the family consultant, and at par.19, about how mr rice confirmed that he had set up a “code” when speaking to x to ensure that she is “okay”, and or whether he needed to check up about her welfare in other ways. this led ms e to note: “during discussion with the family consultant, mr rice said that he had not realised that his behaviour may be felt by the child as reinforcing a sense that she is at risk and he would not continue with the practice.” so much for sophisticated and insightful parenting.
23. when asked about her time with each parent, x said that it is “good” with her mother and “good” with her father. in relation to the present arrangement, x said “it’s good and i’m used to it”. x said, however, that she misses her father when she is living with her mother and that she would like to see more of her father. x said that she sees more of ms powell than mr rice and that it is “not fair” that she sees less of mr rice. 24. x said “i don’t really like mr powell (mr powell)”. when asked why not, x said that mr powell sometimes “flicks” her with his fingers on her leg. 25. x stated that she would “probably like to go home today” with her father. she added that she had noticed at the cic that mr rice “looks upset and he wants to see me today but mum won’t let me”. aa said that when walking up the stairs she noticed that her father looked upset. (the mother and her partner and the children spent most of the period of the cic in the downstairs area of the registry as they did not wish to be in close proximity to mr rice). x said to the family consultant that when she (the family consultant) was interviewing mr powell, she (x) walked upstairs and said “hello” to mr rice and “he said that he misses me and wants me to come home with him and i felt upset and i told him that i wanted to”. when asked, x reported that she worries very much about mr rice and the reason for this is that she cares about him. she said that she also worries about ms powell but not to the same extent. when asked, she said that she did not know why she worries about her parents. during the mother’s, father’s and the father’s partner’s subsequent interviews, the family consultant was informed that, at no stage, during the day did x walk up the stairs on her own and speak with mr rice. they reported that x had not spoken with her father and the only contact they had consisted of a wave. (both children were noted to hug and kiss their father at the end of the cic when the parties where leaving).
117 from ms e’s most recent memo, dated 18th january 2019, which arose from the mother wanting to change the consent orders because of the father’s repeated non-compliance with them, in her view, i note the following.
118 first, at pars.3 and 4, ms e recorded:
2. at the s. 1if, mr rice indicated that he was not aware that it was feasible for the parenting arrangements to be changed considering the parents had final court orders. he said that he had not considered future parenting arrangements and he had hoped to resolve the matter with ms powell, via family dispute resolution. 3. mr rice reported that he is not to blame for x running away from ms powell and her being unwilling to return to her care. he indicated that he is unable to physically compel x to spend time with ms powell, if she is unwilling. ms powell said that mr rice has considerable influence over x and that he is a malign influence causing emotional and psychological harm to both children. she alleged that they are at ongoing risk of significant harm if there is not a change in the family situation.
119 i simply observe here that it is curious that mr rice stated to ms e his hope to resolve the parenting issues with the mother. i say “curious” because, still at this stage, the same allegations that were used in the 2021 hearing against mr powell were largely well known at the time of his discussion with ms e, but the father was still intent on resolving the matter.
120 next, in relation to “child abuse allegations”, ms e recorded the following at pars.7 – 10 (emphasis added):
7. essentially the mother's concerns about the father relate to the following: that the father has had a pattern of withholding the children from her care, that he has made false reports and allegations to the police and child protection about the children's safety and wellbeing in her care (and her partner's), that when they were young children he took them to the police to make statements, that the children have been subjected to numerous interviews by police and child protection personnel, and that the children's moral development and mental health and wellbeing is at risk in the father's care. 8. ms powell reported that on, 22 october 2018, the police came to her home, late evening, after a report was made to police by the father's partner that x had said that they had a gun under their bed. she said that the police needed to check her home for a weapon/s. she stated that while the father's partner made the report, she believes the father was party to this. 9. ms powell indicated that, in november or december 2018, facs came to her home and interviewed her after it was reported that she used inappropriate discipline on the children. she indicated that facs went to the children's school where they were taken out of their classrooms to be interviewed. ms powell said that the concerns were not substantiated by facs. she said that the facs caseworker expressed concern to her about the father's behaviours and his evident influence on the children and that they may be at risk of emotional harm in his care. 10. mr rice reported that he has held a longstanding belief and continues to believe that ms powell's partner is abusive towards the children and that ms powell is a victim of controlling family violence by him. he stated that he is a protective parent and that when the children come to him with reports of mistreatment and abuse he feels that as a responsible and protective parent he needs to contact authorities. when asked, mr rice stated that he had reasonably believed that it was possible that the mother and her partner had a firearm in their home but that it was his partner who made the police report.
121 notwithstanding the final consent orders in october 2017, the earlier sworn denial of abuse by mr powell (and likewise by the mother), inquiries by both police and care and protection authorities that found nothing untoward against the mother and her husband, an unsuccessful prosecution against mr powell involving an allegation of assault on y, ms e’s 2016 memorandum, and ms f’s 2017 report, it will be readily apparent that the father’s views regarding the mother, and of mr powell, have been steadfastly negative, albeit primarily based on unsubstantiated reports and comments by the children. the assessment by statutory authorities across the board, and over a significant period of time, have carried not a lot of weight for the father.
122 in my view, this was one of the most astonishing facts of this matter, and which has been consistently ignored or glossed over in every relevant respect. the father’s lack of attention to the reports of authorities, including hospital and the police, is a cause of very grave concern to the court. it shows a remarkable lack of insight on his part in every proper respect. it is no less concerning that it caused no one else involved in the matter any relevant concern either. such lack of attention (or lack of proper attention) to the reports from authorities was procedurally unfair to the mother, and much else besides. it was also an exercise calculated to damn mr powell, both without proper evidence and without proper attention to procedural fairness to him.
123 regarding the co-parenting relationship, ms e stated, in my view tellingly, at par.13 (emphasis added):
when asked to consider different hypothesis, mr rice stressed that he firmly believes that the children are at risk in ms powell’s care, particularly from her partner. when asked, he refuted that the children could be at risk of emotional and psychological harm due to his behaviours. he presented with little or no insight into the potential harm to the children if his position is incorrect. he was unwilling to give any serious consideration to different hypotheses that may explain the family situation.
124 the same concerns noted here by ms e were also raised by ms f. it will be recalled that on that earlier occasion ms f recorded that the father seemed to acknowledge the risk his actions may have posed to the children, albeit that it had to be pointed out to him because he lacked the insight to see such risks from his behaviour.
125 the comments of the children recorded by ms e were as follows (pars.18 & 19):
18. x indicated that she accepts that running away may place her safety at risk and she has been informed about this and would not do so, in the future. x said that she had run away because ms powell "is mean to me". she said that ms powell favours y and her younger half siblings, over her. she said that she had wanted to stay permanently with mr rice. she reported that she has continued to spend time with each parent and that things had been going okay. 19. y indicated that the problems in his family relates to that at ms powell's home, she makes him "stand with my back against a wall for a week or two", as punishment. he said that he would prefer to live with mr rice. y asked if the interview could be ended, and the family consultant agreed to this. ms powell indicated that facs had investigated the allegation that she uses inappropriate discipline, including that she makes the children stand for lengthy periods, as punishment, which she denied is the case.
126 finally, ms e’s summary recommendations at pars.20 – 23 were as follows:
20. on the limited information available to the family consultant, from ms powell's account, the provisions provided in the final orders that the children not be retained by mr rice and that she and the children not be subjected to ongoing police and child protection reports and subsequent interviews, has not proven successful. 21. it is not apparent that the allegations and concerns raised by the father about the mother and her partner have been substantiated, at any stage, but this may need to be clarified for the court's benefit. 22. an interim hearing may be required in this matter, to consider the mother's proposal that the children spend more restricted time with mr rice during the interim and at least until the issues are able to be explored more thoroughly. this may offer the children a reprieve from malign influences in the father's household, if the mother is correct. 23. in the family consultant's view, a chapter 15 expert report to be completed by an experienced forensic clinical psychologist would be appropriate in this matter, prior to a final defended hearing. if the mother is correct, the children have been subjected to ongoing emotional and psychological harm in the father's care and their moral development may be in serious jeopardy if they are supported/encouraged to continue to make false reports against the mother and her partner. if the father is correct, the children are subjected to physical ill-treatment and abuse in the mother's household by her and her partner placing them at risk of emotional and physical harm.
127 to state the obvious, the consistency between the reports of ms f and ms e are critically important. tragically, no one referred any of them to dr j. nor were any of them referred to at the final hearing. again, these were critical, indeed crucial, omissions.
128 in short, during the trial, allegations of long-standing since 2016 were rehearsed and repeated, almost dressed up for the most part as recent allegations. overwhelmingly they were not. but in pressing these allegations, deliberately or otherwise, no one considered the almost or much more contemporaneous reports from ms e and ms f. this was a significant and unfortunate omission and oversight.
129 to state the obvious: two long experienced family consultants, as well as police at an earlier point in time, independently came to the same conclusion regarding the dynamic between the children and the father, and the impact upon them of the serial and unsubstantiated complaints against mr powell. more colloquially: throw enough mud and it will stick.
130 the conclusions of ms e and ms f stand in stark contrast to the conclusion and recommendations of dr j. but no one put these matters from the earlier reports to her. it may simply be the case that the dynamic recorded by ms e and ms f, especially regarding the father’s anxious but unrelenting misinterpretations, particularly over time, have worn down the children such that, certainly in x’s case, she is now at an age where she believes (or perhaps has convinced herself, and/or she has been “conditioned” by the father) of the risks in the mother’s home and that mr powell is the black sheep of the family to whom all manner of accusations simply needs to keep being attributed, whether true or not, and whether accurate or not.
131 as already noted, regrettably, (a) neither ms k nor mr powell were interviewed by dr j. this is not a criticism of her but it resulted in a very unfortunate and important gap in the evidence, (b) much of the evidence regarding accusations against mr powell was clearly historical and prior to the parties agreeing to final orders by consent in november 2017, and (c) essentially the same accusations were relied upon for the most recent final hearing. any historical allegations prior to november 2017 should not have been raised at the hearing in october 2021. the only matter of substance in this line of country was the mother’s confirmation that mr powell had recently kicked y, details of which were set out in the affidavits of the parties and confirmed with the mother in her cross examination.
132 the omissions in the hearing, and equally so the omissions in submissions, to refer at all to the three reports/memoranda of ms f and ms e, were very significant, bordering on tragic and procedurally unfair. nobody blinked an eye-lid regarding raising accusations against mr powell. and nobody bothered to check the accuracy of any of them, or the checks that had been done by police, care and protection, and equally hospital records. guilt and slander by innuendo seems to have been enough.
father’s submissions
133 the father’s submissions, filed 17th november 2021, were as follows (emphasis in original):
1. the father agrees to the following orders proposed by the icl contained in annexure a to the icl’s submissions filed on 2 november 2021, namely, orders 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21. 2. the orders sought by the father are marked with the letter “a” at page 3-6 of this document. spend time with orders 3. the father does not agree with orders 7, 8 and 9 as proposed by the icl. in lieu of this, he proposes orders 7, 8, and 9 in the orders that he seeks (namely, that subject to the restraints placed upon the mother in relation to mr powell pursuant to order 17 of the father’s proposed orders, x spends time with the mother in accordance with her wishes, y spends time with the mother on each alternative sunday (but suspending on one half of the school holiday each year), special days, and changeover occurring in city g), the basis of which is explained below. 4. the mother’s evidence is that she works on weekends at times (see paragraph 33 of the family report) so she may not be able to take weekends off to supervise the children. 5. there is no utility in making orders for the children to spend time with their mother on weekends and during school holidays when her evidence was that she will not utilise such time if it means mr powell cannot be present. 6. the mother’s evidence was clear that she will not remove herself from mr powell’s presence for weekends or school holidays to spend time with the children. 7. the mother also made it clear that she would not travel to the canberra/city b area to spend extended time with the children. 8. there was nothing in her evidence to suggest she would even drive half-way to collect/return the children. 9. if, however, the mother were to have a change of heart in the future and be willing to spend weekend or holiday time with the children in the absence of mr powell, the court would be satisfied that the father will facilitate it. 10. putting in place the “spend time with” arrangements proposed by the icl are doomed to failure and will result in the father not being able to make holiday plans for the family and possibly lead to children being disappointed when the mother does not utilise the time made available to her. 11. the father’s proposal is that he will take the children to city g and stay the day while they spend time with their mother. if the mother is not required to travel far, she may be more willing to make the effort to spend time with the children. 12. it is hoped that in time the mother would at least see the benefit to the children, including l and m, of spending time together and she may relent and agree to their spending the day together. 13. limiting the time to a few hours may make it easier for her to be able to justify her absence from the home to mr powell. 14. suspending the alternate sunday visits during half of the school holidays gives the father’s family the ability to plan holidays together. communication 15. the father proposes that order 10 of the icl’s minute (regarding video conferencing) being limited to only y if x does not agree to engage. x is old enough to decide what communications she will have with her mother and to implement those wishes. 16. x has made complaints about the way she was treated by both mr powell and the mother, and it would not be in her interests to force her to engage with her mother contrary to her wishes. 17. the father will encourage x to spend time with, and communicate with, her mother but he does not want to risk a contravention application if x refuses to engage with the mother. d families 18. given that the mother rejects totally the allegations made against mr powell, it is not clear what the icl expects/hopes may come out of forcing the parties to attend at least 2 facilitated parenting meetings a year as set out in her order 13. the father does not include this order in his set of proposed orders. 19. if the parties are not prepared to engage in that process on a voluntary basis, there is little point in making an order that they have to attend. submissions 20. other than the matters where the icl and the father are apart in the orders they seek, the father respectfully adopts the submissions of the icl.
mother’s submissions
134 the self-represented mother’s submissions, filed 18th november 2021, were as follows (emphasis in original)::
the mother agrees to the following orders proposed by the icl in submission filed 2 november 2021. orders a(pge 8) 2,5,6,8 a/b/c/d,12,13,14,15,16,17,19,21 a/b/c. the orders sought by the mother are marked with the letter “a” which is located on pages 3-5 of this document. parental responsibilities: the mother does not agree with order 3 proposed by the icl. shared parental responsibilities should continue for both children. if the father relocates to canberra (to which his wife and he have moved into their new home already) then continuing to put the children first it shouldn’t be an issue to still be able to make a joint decision even when living in different towns. there are still phones and so still able to communicate to make such decisions together. issues of risk: the mother does not agree with orders 4,5,6 and 7 proposed by the icl. these “issues of risk” being suggested to be mr powell my husband still have no real evidence to rely on apart from dr j’s opinion in her report and what x disclosed to her during interview. there are no charges on mr powell, no evidence proven to be true of any kind. so why should such unrealistic and impossible restrictions be put in place regarding time i am able to spend time with the children. time spent: the mother does not agree with orders 9, 10 and 11 proposed by icl. although on the first day of the final hearing i did say that x should live with her father and siblings shouldn’t be separated. i do not think x (aged 14 years old) should have full “reign” of when she “chooses” to spend time with her mother and half siblings. i believe y and x being separated is something the court should seriously consider. y has expressed enjoying time spent with both of his parents, and also hasn’t been distressed at all while spending time away from sister previously during interim orders. also, x has expressed on numerous occasions her true feeling of her brother y and hasn’t been concerned of his “safety” before now. y being separated from his mother and half siblings i believe will be more distressing for him. i believe in y’s best interest separating from someone such as his mother to whom his bond is very strong would do more harm than good. once again dr j’s recommendations on restraining mr powell from any contact with the children and for the mother to have time limited unless her husband mr powell isn’t present, is going to put a huge unnecessary strain mentally and financially on the mother and each of her relationships within her family. something not necessary nor acceptable to ask with no concreate evidence. the mother does not agree to orders 7,9,10 and 11 in section a which will be explained in orders seeking.
icl’s submissions
135 the icl’s submissions, filed 2nd november 2021, were as follows (emphasis in original):
1. the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) seeks orders as set out in attachment “a”. the majority of these orders are the same as those sought by the father, but with the following differences: that the children spend time with the mother as agreed in writing between the parties, but failing agreement: every second weekend from after school on friday until 5:00pm on sunday, and half of the nsw gazetted school holidays. that the children’s time with the mother occur at a location nominated by the mother, and that the parties agree to a location roughly half-way between the father’s residence and the mother’s nominated location for handover. that the parents use an agreed parenting app (such as my family wizard, talking parents or similar) to communicate in relation to the children. that the parents attend a facilitated parenting meeting facilitated by d families or other agreed organization at a frequency agreed between the parents, but failing agreement, at least 2 times per year, with the cost of such a meeting being facilitated will be shared equally between the parents. for the purposes of this order the parents will forward a list of issues for discussion (if any) to the other parent via the parenting app no fewer than 7 days prior to the scheduled meeting. 2. it is understood that orders set out at (c) and (d) above are agreed in substance by both parents, counsel for the icl having put this to each of them in cross-examination. parental responsibility 3. the icl supports orders in relation to parental responsibility as sought by the father. both parent’s evidence in relation to communication was, in summary, that despite them having difficulties engaging with one another they have managed to communicate by text and email and sometimes by phone in relation to the children and can generally make this work. the icl submits that it is in the best interests of the children for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility. if orders are made that involve the children living substantially with the father, then the icl submits that dr j’s recommendation that the father have final say in the event that the parents are unable to reach agreement would be in the children’s best interests. this is particularly to ensure that any medical recommendations in relation to treatment for y in relation to adhd (or an alternative diagnosis if one is forthcoming) can be implemented. the benefit of this order for “final say” if the children are to spend equal time or substantial and significant time with each parent are less clear to the icl. issues of risk 4. the independent children’s lawyer does not submit that the mother herself poses a risk to the children in terms of their care independent of mr powell, though some work may be necessary to repair and strengthen her relationship with x. the risk identified in relation to the mother is an inability or unwillingness to protect the children from mr powell, who is identified as a risk by the children, the father, and dr j. this is set out further below. accordingly, should the mother be willing and able to spend more time with the children in the absence of mr powell she should be able to do so. there are no risks identified by the icl with the father or his partner, ms k’s care of the children. 5. the court has an obligation under s60cg(1)(b) to ensure that orders made do not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence, and may (s60cg(2)) include in the order any safeguards that it considers necessary for the safety of those affected by the order. this involves the court making a finding that there is a risk of family violence. the icl submits that this finding can be made. a finding as to risk does not have to be predicated on each allegation of family violence being made out to the point where a positive finding about that particular allegation can be made (see m v m (1988) 166 clr 69 at [76], johnson & page (2007) flc 93344). in b and b [1993] famca 143, (1993) flc 92-357 at 79,778 the full court stated “where the court makes a finding of unacceptable risk it is a finding that the risk of harm to the children in having access with a parent outweighs the possible benefits to them from that access” 6. in discussing the enquiry to be made by the court in cases where an unacceptable risk is alleges the full court in n & s & the separate representative (1996) flc 92655 at 82,713-4 (per fogarty j) (cited with approval in johnson & page, stott & holgar & anor [2017]) stated: “in asking whether the facts of the case do establish an unacceptable risk the court will often be required to ask such questions as: what is the nature of the events alleged to have taken place? who has made the allegations? to whom have the allegations been made? what level of detail do they involve? over what period of time have the allegations been made? over what period of time are the events alleged to have occurred? what are the effects exhibited by the child? what is the basis of the allegations? are the allegations reasonably based? are the allegations genuinely believed by the person making them? what expert evidence has been provided? are there satisfactory explanations of the allegations apart from sexual abuse? what are the likely future effects on the child?” 7. the icl submits that the children are at an unacceptable risk of family violence from mr powell and supports there being a restraint in place preventing the mother from bringing either of the children into contact with mr powell. the evidentiary basis for this order is as follows: both children assert to multiple people (including their father, stepmother, police, teachers, and dr j) that mr powell has been physically and verbally abusive to them. they have made these allegations of a number of years – at least from 2015. the children allege that mr powell has physically disciplined them in a way that could be considered excessive and engaged in verbal put downs or expressions of anger and frustration that the court would find, if true, to be inappropriate, especially when directed at a child. the nature of the allegations, involving as they do both physical violence and remarks that would be potentially very psychologically damaging to x, are serious in nature. the mother conceded in cross examination by counsel for the father that on 5 october 2021 mr powell “kicked y up the bum” and that she considered this appropriate discipline. when the father spoke to her about what y told him had occurred on 5 october it is an agreed fact that the mother did not tell the father that while she did not agree that what y had reportedly told him was true, that he nevertheless had in fact been kicked by mr powell and that she had seen this happen. her evidence in cross-examination in relation to what occurred in her household on that morning was confused and variable. the icl submits that this behaviour cannot be considered acceptable discipline. the mother’s failure to acknowledge this in the context of the long history of allegations made in these proceedings is of great concern. the evidence of dr j, the court expert, is that there is a risk of physical and psychological harm for the children in the presence of mr powell. dr j did not resile from or modify this position in cross-examination. under cross-examination by counsel for the icl dr j expressed the opinion that it did not matter whether the things asserted by the children were in fact true, whether they were only partially true, or entirely fabricated, because there was “nothing to suggest that their father encouraged them” and that it was nevertheless worrying if they had repeatedly made these things up over such an extensive period. the mother’s evidence as to why she thought the children made these things up was that it was “to make their father happy.” there was no evidence offered at trial that would lend any real support this interpretation. dr j gave evidence that if things were to continue as they presently are that the children are likely to keep making reports (even if untrue), that y is likely to continue of his current trajectory of becoming more disruptive and less engaged (in school), and that x is likely to become more distressed and more likely to engage in risk-taking behaviour. she stated that “x runs away and self-harms because of a lack of trust in her mother.” it has been uniquely in the mother and mr powell's power to provide reassurances or first-hand evidence in relation to these allegations, but mr powell did not participate in the family report process, and he is not a witness in these proceedings. it must be acknowledged that the mother said on the first day of trial that mr powell was prepared to give evidence but had not filed any material, and the fact that the mother was representing herself may go some way to softening the jones v dunkel inference, but it cannot be overlooked that mr powell has not provided evidence to the court in any of the ways open to him. the mother's evidence has been unequivocal that she does not believe the risk in relation to mr powell exists, that the children know that she does not believe them when they report the things, they say he has said and done, and that she will not agree to a restraint on the children coming into contact with him. this must be seen in the light of her now acknowledging that earlier this month she did in fact witness mr powell physically discipline y, but still refuses to accept that he did so on the other reported occasions. while it is certainly possible to have sympathy for her position in terms of the practical difficulties of keeping him apart from the children, it is submitted that in the circumstances her ability to act protectively should something occur again in the future is seriously called into question. she was unable to prevent y from being inappropriately physically disciplined by was of a kick on 5 october, mere weeks before the trial. the willingness of the children to report to her that something has occurred is also significantly reduced in circumstances where they are aware that they are not likely to be believed. it is submitted that the court does not have sufficient evidence to make a positive finding that the individual incidents as asserted from time to time by x or y in fact occurred. the icl submits that the underlying issue is the same if the event occurred at all, as stated, or in some other way: that their relationship with mr powell is so fractured and problematic that to spend time with him puts them at risk of at least psychological but, if true, potentially physical harm. this is compounded by the risk that the mother may be unable to act protectively or that the children may choose not to report. the icl submits that there is limited value to the children in having a relationship with mr powell. dr j’s evidence was that “i do not see any value in the relationship between mr powell and the children.” he was “not a source of attachment” for y “just a fun bloke.” live with and spend time arrangements 8. this is a difficult matter where it is acknowledged that the state of much of the evidence is not such that positive findings can be made. the icl acknowledges that mr powell has only been charged in relation to the allegations on one occasion, and was not convicted, and that the relevant child welfare authorities have not substantiated allegations or taken any action in relation to them. this does impact on the court’s ability to assess and make findings about risk. it is compounded by the fact that the primary risk identified is posed by mr powell, who is not the parent, but that this gives rise to different risks for the children in the care of their mother when he remains part of her household. 9. by the conclusion of the first day of the final hearing the mother had conceded that x would live with her father. this is x’s clear preference. x is at an age where her views should be given significant weight. she has, on more than one occasion, run away from her mother’s care into the care of her father. that she may do so again should orders be made that are not in accordance with her wishes is a risk. x has engaged in self-harming behaviours that have been associated (at least in part) in her mind with her distress associated with the care arrangements. dr j elaborated in cross examination by counsel for the icl that “x experienced the maternal home as being distressing.” the icl submits that it is in x’s best interests to live predominantly with her father, but that she should spend time with her mother and half siblings. 10. the matter is also complicated by what appear to be the different situations for each child. the icl supports y having as much time with his mother as is safe and x doing the same, providing it is not contrary to her wishes. the icl acknowledges that the evidence before the court does not support the children being separated such that they spend time with their parents in a different pattern unless they themselves express a wish to do so. while the evidence of y’s views suggests that he might be either more willing or better able to cope with greater exposure to mr powell, the evidence of each parent, and of dr j, is that they do not think that the children would cope well with being separated from one another. dr j’s evidence was that y’s expression to her that he would like a week about arrangement was “in my opinion more a desire not to be separated from his mother.” she gave evidence that x has “a strong desire to protect y” and that should they be separated “x would be worried” about him. 11. even despite dr j’s evidence, should it be safe to do so, the icl would support an arrangement where the children spend time with their parents in different patterns, however this is complicated by several factors: both parents do not want this to occur if it can be prevented, it is not desirable to cause either child any further distress, and there is some evidence that separating them could do so, the icl accepts that the evidence is that mr powell is a risk to the children and should be restrained from coming into contact with them, an arrangement that saw the children spending any more than every second weekend with the children is impractical is mr powell cannot be present and if there is significant travel distance between the parent’s residences. relocation 12. the father’s application for relocation came late in the proceedings, but before trial material was filed. while the father is not required to demonstrate compelling reasons to do so (morgan v miles [2007] famca 1230) his desire to move to live with his wife and her children is understandable. dr j gives evidence that while they might encounter some challenges that ultimately there is nothing to suggest that the children would not cope with a change of school. she suggests the benefits of the overall “package” would outweigh these challenges. the father, however, gave evidence that if he could not move he did not think this would create significant issues in his relationship and he would continue to live in city g to facilitate any orders made if this was necessary. on balance, the icl supports the relocation in circumstances where she considers it in the best interests of the children to be restrained from seeing mr powell, that this would necessitate them spending less time win their mother’s care and where it is agreed that x is to live with her father, and it is not preferable that the siblings be separated.
outline of principle
136 in mazorski v albright, in the light of, and by reference to, relevant full court authority, brown j conveniently set out an overview of principle in relation to part vii of the act. respectfully and gratefully, i adopt brown j’s comments:[4]  the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))
137 her honour also made important observations about the term “meaningful”, as used in part vii of the act, in the context of what is comprehended by a “meaningful relationship.” at [20] – [26], her honour outlined a range of considerations. i set them out below, and again respectfully (and gratefully) adopt brown j’s observations:[5] ] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s 60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.  ] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.  ] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):  6] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.  ] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitivef [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
consideration & disposition
138 apart from the important, indeed signal, matters set out from ms f’s report and ms e’s s.11f memoranda recorded above, to the degree that it is apposite in the light of those earlier reports, i otherwise generally agree with and adopt the submissions of the icl.
139 given that both parents now agree that x should live with her father, i will make that order by consent. she is to spend each alternate weekend with her mother. also given her age and the unfortunate if not sorry history of x’s views – often variable as they have been – it might be a case of being careful what you wish for! i do not say this in any pejorative or hyper-critical way. certainly, the court cannot make any formal finding about the matters raised in ms f’s report and ms e’s memorandum regarding the father’s misunderstanding of what the children have been saying to him over a period of time, nor in relation to the father’s “coaching” of the children. nonetheless, such things are all part of the rich albeit somewhat sordid history of the matter and the father’s “laser-like” focus to get x, by almost any means, to live with him, and the consistently besmirch the reputation of mr powell at any and all costs. it reflects very poorly on the father.
140 it is certainly a matter to note with concern that recently, on the mother’s own evidence, mr powell kicked y shortly before the trial. this clearly comes within the definition of “family violence” under the act, and is a relevant consideration for the purposes of s.60cc(3). while not condoning physical discipline, the mother said that y deserved it at the time. this is also in the context where there have been very significant – in number and type – of accusations against mr powell over many years. nothing has been established. it is almost as if the mere repetition of such accusations is enough, without more, to establish relevant risk. it should again be noted that there have been a number of instances where there has been relevant investigation, including by care and protection authorities, which have resulted in a so-called “clean bill of health” for the mother and all in her household. such matters were recorded generally by ms e as long ago as her first s.11f memo, dated 14th september 2016. but the relentless accusations, and on ms f’s account, including the father’s determination, have finally worn down certain levels of resistance. if this be the case, it is a very sad day for all. effectively, to speak metaphorically, the father has used the unrelenting litigation effectively to bludgeon the mother and mr powell, as well as the children, into achieving his goal of a change in residence for x and y. this is not sophisticated or insightful parenting. it borders on the obsessive, if not worse.
141 as a general observation, given the history of the matter, which remarkably and unfortunately seems not to have been considered at all by anyone other than to use historical allegations as part of a pattern of besmirching evidence (aka “evidentiary mud-slinging”), ms f’s assessment (together with the comments by ms e) in my view has a greater degree of authenticity about it. dr j could only deal with the evidence and records with which she was provided. she was not provided with the reports by ms f or ms e or the earlier material from care and protection, from the police, or medical records. another unfortunate if not almost calamitous circumstance.
142 the father should not have recounted in his latest trial affidavit what he described there as mr powell’s historical abuse of the children. the same comment applies to ms k’s trial affidavit, which simply repeated the same evidence. this was both procedurally unfair and completely inappropriate, particularly those matters that had been the subject of investigation by (a) care and protection authorities and found lacking, (b) the police (who concluded that there was “nothing to see here” and that there was evidence of coaching of the children), and (c) an abject lack of medical evidence regarding a range of assaults for which there should have been significant injury and medical record. there were no such records. but rather blithely and slinging much historical mud, the father went on his way, relatively unhindered. this bordered on a procedural and evidentiary travesty. such evidence should have been excluded because of its ongoing prejudicial nature under s.135 of the evidence act 1995 (cth). it was particularly in these circumstances that the mother’s lack of legal representation showed the risks of, and from, the father’s unchallenged evidence and attack. the court and the icl should have stepped in during the trial much more than occurred.
143 again without being hyper-critical, had the original icl been re-appointed (why this did not occur has also been lost in the mists of time), her historical knowledge, particularly of the earlier reports and investigations, would very likely have saved everyone but most particularly the mother and mr powell from the continuing barrage of historically unfounded claims. this is not to challenge some of the more recent evidence, notably from ms k and her conversations with x. however, how much was fact and how much was fiction in x’s recounting the court will never know, especially given the instance of x lying to ms e that is recorded in the earlier s.11f memo. everyone has essentially been worn down by the incessant claims and accusations. likewise, how much, as suggested by ms f, was fomented by the father’s consistent misunderstanding of what he was being told by one or other of the child and his using of this to foster his ever-deepening mistrust of the mother and mr powell, the court also will never know.
144 notwithstanding the difficulties between the parties, surprisingly, they have generally been able to make the more major, long-term decisions regarding the children. accordingly, there should be an order for equal shared parental responsibility.
conclusion
145 as lamentable as all the circumstances laid out here are, i propose that, in general terms, the orders as sought by the icl should be made because, on balance, they are in the best interests of the children. as noted earlier, there is no optimal outcome here. there are flaws and difficulties on all sides of one kind or another. the basis of saying this is, primarily as well as simply, because of x’s age and her consistent views about wanting to spend more time with her father. how much they have been influenced by the father over time cannot be reasonably or properly assessed. her views seemingly have been at least strongly encouraged by the father for a long time. this is also in circumstances where there must remain significant doubt about the reliability of x’s views, notably but not only because of the questions and doubts posed by ms e as long ago as 2016, and the doubts and concerns by the police about the children being coached.
146 because there have been so many investigations into or against mr powell, with so little to show for it apart from the distress of all (for differing reasons of course), i do not propose making the restraint against the mother and/or mr powell as sought by the father and the icl, other than that he is not to physically discipline the children in any way and that the mother is to ensure that this does not happen. for the protection of all, including mr powell, there is to be another adult substantially present at any time that the children are in the mother’s household. put in the alternative, the children are not to be left in mr powell’s sole care, for the same reasons, not least to protect him from further allegations.
147 i make the orders as indicated notwithstanding y’s ongoing preference to live in a week-about arrangement. however, at this stage, in my view, it is inadvisable to separate the children. the exceptions are: (a) the school holiday time between y and his mother shall be half school holidays on two occasions, and for all the school holidays, otherwise. the full school holidays shall not be during the christmas/new year long holidays, (b) the spend time with arrangements shall be each alternate weekend from 5pm on friday afternoon until 5pm on sunday afternoon, and (c) the mother is to ensure that mr powell does not physically discipline the children at any time. the assessment of relevant risk involving mr powell by dr j, in my view, must be tempered by the historical facts, recorded over a significant period of time, of the assessments by the police, by medical personnel, by care and protection, and by ms f and ms e, all of whom independently came to significantly different conclusions.
148 in this regard i note that, in accordance with the full court’s comments in sigley v evor, it is always for the court, and not for any particular expert, to determine what is most likely to lead to a meaningful relationship between parents and children.[6]
149 in making these orders i am also conscious that there are siblings of x and y in both households – older or similar-aged siblings in the father’s, and two younger brothers in the mother’s household. this is another significant consideration under part vii of the act.
150 the following general observations are important. the children have a generally good relationship with both parents, qualified to some degree by x’s “flexible” approach towards her mother and her household, as well as in relation to truth-telling. unsurprisingly in the circumstances, the views of the children have a degree of flexibility or malleability about them. whether one or the other of them have been coached or more subtly influenced, is difficult to say, although the comments of the police, and the earlier family consultants, would strongly suggest that the father has been exerting some influence – subtle or not – for some time, especially in relation to x. any such influence or pressure is very poor parenting. it is manipulative and not to be recommended at all.
151 in general terms also, the attitude of each parent toward their responsibilities as parents is, at least, variable given the history of litigation and relentless allegations by the father against the mother, but primarily against mr powell.
152 another consideration under s.60cc(3) is that there will be issues of practicality and cost for the parties with a change in residence and the constant travel back and forth between the canberra region and the city g area. whether this was a factor in the father’s unusual “offer” to remain in country new south wales to facilitate the time-with arrangements with the mother is unknown.
153 there is no easy or ideal solution. in no pejorative or derisory way, but certainly with a serious concern if not a lament, i simply note again how often accusations have been made against mr powell, nearly all of which have been investigated and found to be without substance. nonetheless, the father, and to some degree, x, have relentlessly pursued mr powell and used these unproven claims almost to harass the court to change residence. clearly, they believe their own accounts of events notwithstanding the investigations by police, care and protection authorities, and two family consultants. in certain respects, the court’s orders will rest on their shoulders. how and why none of the earlier reports of ms e and ms f, and by care and protection and police, were provided to dr j, or referred to by anyone during the trial, remains both a mystery and a concerning regret regarding how the matter was conducted. perhaps it was simply the wretched confluence of circumstances where the mother’s long-time legal team withdrew, the father had new legal representation, and a new icl was appointed, thus leading collectively to time and effort being solely focussed upon dr j’s report. finally, the father had the report that he wanted and needed, the earlier material was either over-looked or otherwise not examined or considered.
154 i request two things of the icl: (a) that she, and not the parents, explain the orders to the children, and (b) that she remain in the matter for the next 9 months so that on two occasions, perhaps at 4 monthly intervals, she meet with the children to see how they are going. if, for example, y is struggling, it may be that the parents might agree that he return to live primarily with the mother and spend each alternate weekend with the father. by the icl staying in the proceeding, it might just give y a degree of assurance that not all ships have sailed and, unlike various explorers throughout history who burned their boats to motivate the remaining crew, he is not marooned and can return to his mother’s residence.
155 two final observations.
156 first, in his evidence the father said that if he could not formally relocate to the canberra region (which occurrence arises because of his partner’s move to this region for work purposes), he said that he would otherwise make it work, meaning that he would likely stay in the city g region. as somewhat altruistic for the sake of the children as this might seem, again in no hypercritical way, it struck me as a tad odd for the simple reason that, if you claim to be committed to your partner/spouse, this would usually mean a shared life together. it would not usually mean some sort of bifurcated couple with dual residences and occasional but regular time together. just a comment, particularly regarding the seemingly long-suffering ms k.
157 secondly, given the historical evidence canvassed in these reasons, highly contentious that it is including the determination by ms e that (a) x had lied to her about certain events, and (b) the code then used by the father with x, which suggests a significant level of both manipulation and deception on his part (accepting that such matters were not formally tested), it could ultimately lead to x forming a view that deception and lies can secure what you think you want. i make no formal findings in this regard. however, if such a conclusion was even partly true, it would not only make a mockery of these relentless proceedings, it would also effectively be a form of moral or ethical corruption of the foundations of the life or lives of a number of people involved in them, even (to some degree) including one or both children. part of this “moral corruption” involves the father condoning and encouraging x to lie. this was and is reprehensible.
158 finally, having regard to the geographical distance between the residences of the parents noted earlier in these reasons, the practical reality of distance and travel time readily satisfies the criteria set out in s.65daa(5).
associate: dated: 18 february 2022
dated: 18 february 2022
[1] m v m (1988) 166 clr 69; johnson & page [2007] famca 1235; (2007) flc 93-344; slater v light [2011] famcafc 1; (2011) 45 fam lr 41.[2] i note that in his minute of orders sought, the father initially had proposed that the children be separated, with x to live with him and y to live primarily with the mother. his oral evidence was, therefore, inconsistent with his earlier orders sought.[3] see 1 kings 3,16 – 28 regarding the famed wisdom of solomon.[4] mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[5] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. more recently still, a further full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[6] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.