last updated: 28 april 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
russell & brookes [2022] fedcfamc2f 115
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
1. that the applicant father, mr russell (“the father”) and the respondent mother, ms brookes (“the mother”) have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, x born in 2011 and y born in 2012 (“the children”).
live with and time spending arrangements
2. that the children live with the mother.
3. that the children spend time with the father as follows:   on each alternate weekend from the conclusion of dance class on saturday (or 9.00am if dance class is not in session) to 5.00pm on the following sunday, and (b) at other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   at other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.
4. in the event that time pursuant to order 3 hereof cannot occur due to serious illness or injury to the children (or either of them) then:  the mother is to provide a medical certificate to the father within forty-eight (48) hours of the mother notifying the father that the time spending pursuant to order 3 cannot occur, and (b) makeup time must occur on either the saturday or the sunday from 9:00am to 5:00pm on the following weekend (unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing).   makeup time must occur on either the saturday or the sunday from 9:00am to 5:00pm on the following weekend (unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing).
special occasions
5. for the purpose of the christmas period (24 to 26 december) only, orders 3, 8 and 9 of these orders be suspended and the children shall spend time with each of the parties as follows:  with the father in 2022 and in each alternate year thereafter from 10.00am on christmas eve to 10.00am on christmas day, (b) with the mother in 2022 and in each alternate year thereafter from 10.00am on christmas day to 10.00am on boxing day, (c) with the mother in 2023 and in each alternate year thereafter from 10:00am on christmas eve until 10:00am on christmas day in 2023, (d) with the father in 2023 and in each alternate year thereafter from 10:00am on christmas day until 10:00am on boxing day.   with the mother in 2022 and in each alternate year thereafter from 10.00am on christmas day to 10.00am on boxing day, (c) with the mother in 2023 and in each alternate year thereafter from 10:00am on christmas eve until 10:00am on christmas day in 2023, (d) with the father in 2023 and in each alternate year thereafter from 10:00am on christmas day until 10:00am on boxing day.   with the mother in 2023 and in each alternate year thereafter from 10:00am on christmas eve until 10:00am on christmas day in 2023, (d) with the father in 2023 and in each alternate year thereafter from 10:00am on christmas day until 10:00am on boxing day.   with the father in 2023 and in each alternate year thereafter from 10:00am on christmas day until 10:00am on boxing day.
6. that such times in orders 3, 8 and 9 be suspended in order to enable such special occasion time to be agreed between the mother and father in writing, and failing agreement, as follows:  for mother’s day, if the children are in the father’s care, the children are to spend time with the mother from 10:00am to 5:00pm on mother’s day. (b) for father’s day, if the children are in the mother’s care, the children are to spend time with the father from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day.   for father’s day, if the children are in the mother’s care, the children are to spend time with the father from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day.
time spending from 1 january 2024
7. that not before 1 january 2024, at the father’s discretion and election only and upon providing written notice to the mother at least seven (7) days beforehand, order 3 herein shall be suspended and order 8 shall be implemented.
8. that the children spend time with the father during school term time as follows:  on each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 5.00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday (or 9.00am if a non-school day), and (b) at such further or other occasions as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   at such further or other occasions as may be agreed between the parties in writing.
9. that in the event the father exercise the election conferred upon him by order 8 hereof and at any stage beforehand, he be a liberty to engage whatever suitably qualified therapist, including ms b, to conduct re-unification therapy between him and the children as the therapist so engaged considers appropriate at the father’s sole expense.
school holidays and christmas from 2024
10. from 2024, the children spend time with each of the parties during the short and christmas school holiday periods on a week about basis from the conclusion of school on friday (or 5:00pm if a non-school day) until the following friday at 5:00pm noting that if the children do not spend seven consecutive nights with the father during school holiday periods, then the time prescribed by orders 3 or 8 shall continue in any event.
handover
11. unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, all handovers that do not occur at the children’s school do occur as follows:  c centre, d street, adelaide 5000 in the event that the children’s time with the father commences at the conclusion of dance class, (b) otherwise, in the car park of the e hotel located at f street, suburb g noting that either parent be at liberty to nominate a third party to effect handover.   otherwise, in the car park of the e hotel located at f street, suburb g noting that either parent be at liberty to nominate a third party to effect handover.
miscellaneous orders
12. the father and mother each be identified as enrolling parents and emergency contacts at the children’s school and for the purposes of extracurricular activities.
13. the children’s school, and other care providers be authorised by operation of this order to provide all information and documents about the children to the mother and father, including but not limited to the children’s progress, newsletters, reports, photographs and details of any school activities.
14. that each parent be at liberty:  to discuss matters relating to the care, welfare and development of the children (or either of them) with any representative of the children’s school and other care providers, (b) to attend any school events, and extracurricular or sporting events to which parents are ordinarily invited, (c) to obtain any information whatsoever from any medical practitioner treating the children (or either of them) or any hospital at which the children have been admitted or treated subject to the discretion of the treating practitioner at all times and production of this order shall suffice as authority for each parent to obtain such information.   to attend any school events, and extracurricular or sporting events to which parents are ordinarily invited, (c) to obtain any information whatsoever from any medical practitioner treating the children (or either of them) or any hospital at which the children have been admitted or treated subject to the discretion of the treating practitioner at all times and production of this order shall suffice as authority for each parent to obtain such information.   to obtain any information whatsoever from any medical practitioner treating the children (or either of them) or any hospital at which the children have been admitted or treated subject to the discretion of the treating practitioner at all times and production of this order shall suffice as authority for each parent to obtain such information.
15. each parent must advise the other of:  any significant illness, accident or injury suffered by the children (or either of them), (b) any significant medical or dental treatment provided to the children (or either of them), (c) any medication that the children are to take whilst the children in the other’s care including the dosage of such medication.   any significant medical or dental treatment provided to the children (or either of them), (c) any medication that the children are to take whilst the children in the other’s care including the dosage of such medication.   any medication that the children are to take whilst the children in the other’s care including the dosage of such medication.
16. that the parties be restrained and an injunction granted restraining each of them from:  denigrating the other parent, or their respective partner, family or friends, directly or in the presence of or hearing of the children and each parent is to use their best endeavours to ensure that no-one else does so and they shall remove the children from any environment where such denigration is occurring, (b) from passing information or messages through the children to the other parent.   from passing information or messages through the children to the other parent.
17. the father be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the following persons and/or entities:  the children’s school, (b) the children’s treating medical practitioners and allied health professionals (when and if applicable).   the children’s treating medical practitioners and allied health professionals (when and if applicable).
18. in the event the either party brings an application to the court as a result of non-compliance with these orders, then the registrar of the court is requested to re-list the matter on an urgent basis.
19. that all extant applications be dismissed and the proceedings are finalised.
reasons for judgment
judge brown:
introduction:
1 mr russell (“the father”) and ms brookes (“the mother”) are the parents of x born in 2011 and y born in 2012. these reasons for judgment are directed towards resolving controversies regarding final parenting arrangements for x and y.
2 the father wishes the children to come and live immediately with him and spend no time with their mother, in the short to medium term, whilst they are, in effect, compulsorily required to re-engage with him, away from what he would categorise as the negative and alienating influence of their mother, who is emotionally abusing them.
3 it his case that it is the court’s fundamental obligation to protect the children from this abuse and ensure their right to have a meaningful level of relationship, with him, is upheld. underpinning his case is his view that the mother has been given ample opportunity to mend her ways and start being supportive of his relationship with x and y but is incapable of doing so – hence the need for extreme action from the court.
4 for obvious reasons, the mother is vehemently opposed to such an outcome, which she contends can only result in the children suffering an inordinate and unacceptable level of trauma, with which they will not be able to cope or understand and which has the potential to stunt their emotional development with serious and long term consequences for each of them.
5 it is her case that the father is a compromised and un-insightful parent, who is not capable of managing the children’s complex needs. in these circumstances, she asserts that the children are responding to the understandable level of antipathy, which they hold for their father and which stems from their largely negative experience of him in recent years.
6 she denies that she has either consciously or unconsciously been engaged in any process of alienating the children from their father. she asserts that although the relationship between them is obviously fraught with difficulty, it can still be maintained, with some form of expert therapeutic assistance. in this regard, she promotes, ms b, a child and adolescent psychologist, who in turn was recommended by the writer of the family report in this case, ms r, a family consultant and social worker, by profession.
7 during the case, on numerous occasions, ms brookes has indicated to me that she strongly desires that x and y have some form of relationship with their father and she is not the cause of the difficulty in this case. on the other hand, it is the father’s case that any logical analysis of what has occurred in the four years or so the case has been before the court indicates otherwise.
8 in these circumstances, he comes to his final position with a heavy heart. it being his case that it would be, by far, his preference that the court not take the extreme course currently advocated by him and remove the children from their mother. rather, as was his position at the outset of the case, he would prefer to have a regime which saw x and y continuing to live with their mother and spending regular periods of time, on weekends and school holidays, with him.
9 however it his positon that he has come to the sad realisation that unless extreme action is taken, it is inevitable that the children will have no viable form of relationship with him, during the remainder of their childhood, as the mother simply cannot be trusted to do what she promises to do in respect of restoring his relationship with the children. rather, for reasons related to her antipathy for him or for some other factor or factors unknown to him, she will continue to do whatever is in her power to undermine his relationship with x and y.
10 there is no controversy that the mother has been the children’s main provider of care for many years. the care of the children, particularly x, is not without its challenges. she has been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (“asd”), which renders her liable to have difficulties in social situations and to be highly reactive, when roused. a developmental disability psychiatrist, dr j has opined that x’s special needs have the potential to cause her “some confusion and anxiety which has led to behaviour problems”.[1]
11 notwithstanding, these difficulties, the mother is able to secure the children’s attendance at a mainstream school and at various extramural and therapeutic activities. they also visit members of the maternal family and their friends, without apparent difficulty. the children’s reports, from k school, are positive in their tone.[2] the school is located in suburb l.
12 however, the parties, with or without professional assistance, have encountered extreme and extraordinary difficulty in getting the children to go into their father’s care or enter his home and particularly his motor vehicle. a variety of intermediaries have been used, including the children’s school and trained social workers and psychologists, with little success.
13 at handovers and when the children do on occasion come into their father’s care, each child displays a range of dysregulated behaviour. this has included running away, undoing their seatbelts and attempting to exit his motor vehicle, whilst in motion, spitting and kicking at him, and abusing him. all this behaviour occurs in concert with both children vehemently asserting their apparently shared desire not to spend any time with him and dislike of him.
14 when the children have spent extended periods of time with their father, each has declined to eat any meals provided by their father or to sleep in the beds provided for them, preferring to sleep on the floor under the beds. it is the father’s evidence that he finds this behaviour deeply upsetting. he has deposed that he has no desire to further exacerbate the children’s distress but, at the same time, does not wish to abandon his relationship with them.
15 accordingly, the case creates a dilemma. more the children from their parent, who has been their primary provider of care, over many years and run the risk that, at worst they will lose the possibility of having a relationship with their father, as they grow to maturity or, at best, that they have only a fraught and truncated relationship with him or place them in the care of their father, where there must be a significant risk that their oppositional behaviour will become worse and they become distraught at being separated from their mother.
16 it is an extremely difficult case, which provides no obvious solution. clearly, the court must be guided by what it thinks will be the outcome, which best serves the interests of the children. their interests are multifaceted and have both short and long term implications. the possibly short term trauma of being placed in the care of their father, balanced against the long term implications of possibly having no paternal relationship.
17 whatever is the ultimate outcome it will create difficulties for the children. there are significant risks that the children will lose their relationship with their father and members of their paternal family, particularly their paternal grandmother, ms m.
18 given the vehemence of the children’s previous reactions to their father, placing the children in his care can only regarded as being fraught with significant and perhaps as yet inchoate perils. then there are the difficulties of how and when the children are to be re-engaged with their mother and what will be the implications of this. will the children again reject their father or will some other hitherto unseen problem or trauma emerge?
19 all these problems have to be considered in the context of what are the parties’ limited means. they will not be able to access skilled professional help easily, to assist with problems as they arise. in addition, it is hardly likely that they will be able to cope with these problems in a cooperative fashion. at present, the parties communicate with difficulty and their relationship is characterised by mutual antipathy and mistrust.
20 having heard evidence from both mr russell and ms m, i have no doubt that each of them loves x and y deeply and therefore, for the children to lose these relationships with their paternal family, will be greatly detrimental for them as they grow to maturity. in essence the children will be deprived of an important ingredient of their individual identity through no fault of their own.
21 on the other hand, to ensure the children have some form of relationship with their father, the court may be compelled to take extreme steps, which have the potential to cause the children great emotional trauma and axiomatically will be fervently opposed by the children’s mother, who has provided the vast majority of the children’s nurture, in both a physical and emotional sense.
22 for obvious reasons, ms brookes is hardly likely to be cooperative in the implementation of any extreme measures directed towards the reinstatement of the children’s relationship with their father and, as a consequence, any regime directed to maintaining the children’s relationship with their mother, in these challenging circumstances, is also highly problematic.
23 in short, the case is an imbroglio of competing considerations. in such circumstances, it is somewhat misguided, in my view, to mouth platitudes about what is in x and y’s best interests. there is nothing positive for them arising from the current proceedings. rather, the court must choose between unpalatable options and consider of these what is the least bad one for the children.
background
24 the father was born in 1984. the mother was born in 1981. the parties have never married. they began to live together in 2008 and initially separated in february 2014, later unsuccessfully attempting to reconcile in the early part of 2015. between the first date of separation and the commencement of the proceedings, the parties had an uneasy and muddled relationship with one another.
25 each party asserts that the other was coercive, controlling and physically violent towards him or her, during their relationship. the father alleges that the mother pushed him into walls and hit him and on a few occasions threw kitchen utensils, including a knife at him and these heated arguments and fights took place in the presence of the children.
26 the mother deposes that these allegations are untrue and improbable because of the size differences between the parties. she asserts that when the parties did argue, which was frequently, the father would overpower her and hold her down. she alleges that the father threw the children’s meals on the ground, on one occasion in 2013, when he lost his temper.
27 these issues are difficult to resolve on the basis of an assessment of credit alone, as there is no corroborating evidence. the one exception relates to an incident after separation in january 2015, when the mother attended at mr russell’s sister’s home, where he was living at the time. she threw a brick through a window and climbed into the house at approximately 11.00pm. the children were with her.
28 the father described the mother as hysterical and demanding that he come and talk to her. it is his evidence that he attempted to disengage but the mother would not leave the scene, so police were called at about 1.00am the following early morning. ultimately the mother was arrested and charged with aggravated criminal trespass. the mother ultimately pleaded guilty to the charge and an intervention order was made against her in the father’s favour.
29 in her trial affidavit, the mother deposes that she broke the window accidentally and the father then invited her into the house to help her clean blood off herself, where she had cut herself. thereafter, due to the violence in the parties’ relationship, she asserts that she had no alternative other than to plead guilty to the charge against her and agree to the intervention order. this does not ring true to me.
30 after separation, x and y continued to live with the mother, at the parties’ former family home in f street, suburb g. mr russell moved in with his mother and has lived with other relatives. it is the father’s case that, notwithstanding the intervention order, he moved back into the house for a few months in early 2016 to assist the mother and to be able to spend time with the children, as he asserts that the mother would not allow him to see the children without her supervision.
31 the parties agree that the father finally left the home in april 2016, although they disagree about the circumstances leading to his departure. thereafter, it seems relatively uncontroversial that he did not see the children at all. this led him to institute proceedings in mid-july 2017. it is his case that he did not bring proceedings sooner because he had to save up to hire a lawyer to prepare the case for him.
32 the parties have been involved in tortuous and bitterly contested litigation in the four years which have followed. this litigation has involved input from several professionals but regrettably to no avail. rather, as time has passed, the positions of the parties have become more and more polarised, until the court is left only with the unpalatable dichotomy described above, which seems incapable of compromise.
33 the parties are not wealthy individuals. during the parties’ relationship, the father was the family’s main bread winner. he worked as customer service officer and at an office and more recently, he has been employed as a tradesman. the mother has a congenital heart defect. as a result, she is entitled to a disability pension. she was not in paid employment during the parties’ relationship.
34 the father’s income is a modest one. he currently earns a salary of around $52,000.00 per annum. he has re-partnered. his current partner is ms n. they commenced living together in october 2019 and are now engaged to be married. they are expecting their first child in early 2022. she is a professional, earning around $67,000.00 per annum. mr russell and ms n have purchased a home in suburb o, they have a mortgage.
35 mr russell is funding the current proceedings which have cost him well in excess of $30,000.00, which he has borrowed from his mother. the case has also left him emotionally worn out. as such, his counsel mr anderson contends that he cannot afford to continue on with the proceedings and he wants them to be finalised. this is relevant in the context of the mother’s proposal for some form of reunification counselling to be undertaken, which if ordered may lead to the case being adjourned.
36 due to her limited means, ms brookes is legally aided in the proceedings. she is in favour of ms b being engaged, prior to any change of residence being considered. in these circumstances, she is not opposed to the case being adjourned as this will not have any immediate financial implications for her. however, she is not in a position to make any contribution to the cost of ms b’s involvement with the family and, in her evidence, ms b has indicated that her fees are not capable of being claimed under a publically funded mental health care plan or subsidised by medicare.
37 mr russell recognises that it will be extremely challenging for the children to be placed in his immediate care. he describes his current employer as being supportive of the familial responsibilities of its employees and, as such, prepared to offer him flexibility in his working hours. he could also take some leave but would have to return to work for financial reasons. ms n is proposing to take extended maternity leave. how she and the father would cope with both a new baby and the responsibility of parenting x and y in their new and challenging circumstances must be a matter of conjecture.
38 ms brookes submits that these combination of factors axiomatically can only have the potential to end in chaos for all concerned, particularly x and y and therefore be destined to fail, particularly when other practical consideration relating to factoring travelling times between the children’s school in suburb l and the father’s home in suburb o and his place of employment in suburb p are factored into the equation.
39 one major source of regret i have in the management of this case is the failure to appoint an independent children’s lawyer for x and y. in a large part this omission is due to the manner in which the case has unfolded. throughout the proceedings, mr russell has been prepared to act in an extremely gradual and patient manner. it being his position that, with time, the family would adjust the trauma arising from the separation.
40 in addition, at least during the early phase of the proceedings, ms brookes’ major concerns relating to the father centred on the fact that mr russell had been diagnosed with narcolepsy in november of 2013. he became consulting a respiratory medicine and sleep disorders physician dr q. it has been mr russell’s position that his condition poses no risks to the children and the mother has consistently over-stated her concerns.
41 in these circumstances, he was hopeful that if the court was provided satisfactory evidence in this regard, the parties would be able to work through the issue and his relationship with the children normalised. in this regard, his optimism has proved to be spectacularly misplaced. in her evidence, the mother has indicated that she believes that the father’s condition remains a potent threat to the children and the father himself has a cavalier disregard for its seriousness.
42 in this context, it is interesting to note that one significant aspect of the children’s dysregulated behaviour, as reported by the father and ms n, relates to their refusal to get into his motor vehicle and their attempts to escape it, even when the vehicle is moving.
43 obviously, the children themselves are incapable of making any rational or subjective assessment of the level of risk their father’s narcolepsy poses for them. the mother ostensibly remains convinced that it is a potent problem. accordingly, it would seem probable that, in some way, either consciously or unconsciously, at least so far as y is concerned, their behaviour stems from something relating to their mother.
44 dr q first provided a medical report in september of 2017, in which he indicated that he had no concerns regarding mr russell’s narcolepsy or his capacity to care for x overnight. mr russell has disclosed the condition to the driving licence authorities and holds a driver’s licence, which was issued after he undertook a maintenance of wakefulness test.
45 ultimately, dr q was called to give evidence and i will comment on this evidence in due course. at this stage, it is the father’s position that the mother has seized on his narcolepsy as a pretext to interfere with his relationship with the children and has either consciously or irrationally exaggerated it as a risk to the children, which they, in turn, have either consciously or unconsciously taken up.
standard of proof
46 in these reasons for judgment, findings of fact are made on the balance of probabilities, from my observation of the demeanour of each of the witnesses concerned.[3] i have tried to reach my conclusions on credibility and reliability ‘on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and importantly, on the apparent logic of events’.[4]
47 in addition, i bear in mind section 140(2) of the evidence act 1995 (cth), which indicates that in applying this standard of proof, i am entitled to consider the nature of the subject-matter of the proceedings and the gravity of the matters alleged.
48 i found mr russell to be a gentle and unassuming person. he did not seem to me to be motivated by any feelings of ill-will for the mother. when he indicated his view that she was a good mother, i did not think that he did so in any attempt to ingratiate himself with the court or to create a good impression of himself to it. it was not a self-serving statement.
49 in these circumstances, i accept that he genuinely comes to his position – that the only mechanism through which he can have any semblance of a normal relationship with x and y is if the children are immersed as quickly as possible in his care – with a heavy heart and not because of any ill-will he feels towards ms brookes. i also accept that he fervently loves the children.
50 clearly, the evidence available in this case indicates that the behaviour of both children, but particularly x, is extremely challenging and necessarily has the patience to be trying for even the most level tempered of individuals. this is one of the central evidentiary issues in the case. it being ms brookes’ case that the father is essentially disinterested in the children and little capacity to engage with them in a patient and child-focussed manner.
51 interestingly, in this case, i have two videos of the father interacting with the children on 1 september 2019 and 22 december 2019 taken by the children, whilst playing with mr russell’s phone. accordingly, it cannot be said to have been staged. rather both videos appeared to be spontaneous in nature. i also have a longer video, taken by either mr russell or ms n at a handover on 15 august 2020.[5] i will refer to this latter video, when i come to it in the relevant sequence of events.
52 what strikes me about these videos, is the patience and love displayed by mr russell for the children and his obvious delight in being with them. more significantly, in my view, it shows the children having fun with their father, a phenomenon also observed by ms r, a family consultant who has been engaged to oversee visits between the father and the children and more recently to compile two family reports.
53 the overall effect of mr russell’s evidence is of a person capable of enormous levels of forbearance and patience, which has been sustained over many years. this has not been helpful to him as his hope that the case will sort itself out has been misplaced and has led to it being greatly delayed.
54 mr russell does not strike me as a vindictive person. at this stage, i accept that he comes to the position that the children need to be removed from their mother genuinely believing that it is the best outcome for them. if i have any criticisms of him it is that he may have under-estimated the level of difficulty this will involve and the opposition that it will inevitably precipitate in ms brookes.
55 regrettably, i did not find ms brookes to be an impressive witness. rather, i was left with the impression that she would say whatever she considered would be helpful to her position. i do not accept her evidence that she wants the children to have a more normal relationship with their father. in my view, her actual conduct points in the exact opposite direction.
56 for reasons and motivations about which i can only conjecture, i assess that ms brookes will remain ill-disposed towards mr russell for the indefinite future. i have grave reservations, despite what she may say to the contrary, that she will ever change this view. more significantly, i am concerned that she is more than capable of manipulating the children in order to harm mr russell in the most immediate way she can.
57 having indicated these things, i have no hesitation in writing that i have no doubts that ms brookes loves x and y very much indeed and apart from her singular incapacity to support the children having a relationship with their father is a well-motivated and capable parent. the children are her life.
58 mr russell’s evidence that the mother is liable to sabotage interventions directed towards securing him having a more normal relationship with the children is support by the evidence of ms n, ms m, ms r and her trainee, ms s. each of whom i assess to be a sensitive and considered witness.
59 the danger implicit in this case can be easily stated. it is the children’s best interests which are paramount, not the desires or aspirations of their parents. as such, the children are not to be awarded to one parent over the other, as a reward for good behaviour or to penalise bad. the outcomes in this case can be twisted, like the surface of a rubik’s cube, to achieve a perfect outcome. some cases are incapable of having a satisfactory end.
sequence of events
60 the father commenced these proceedings on 14 july 2017. he sought the parties be equally conferred with parental responsibility for x and y. on a final basis, he proposed that the children continue living with their mother and spend time with him, during school terms, on alternate weekends, from after school on friday until the commencement of school the following monday and, in the other week of each fortnight, overnight on each wednesday.
61 at the time, he conceded that he had not interacted with the children for a period of around 18 months. in these circumstances, on an interim basis, he proposed being reintroduced to the children on a gradual and incremental basis, commencing with 3 hours on each saturday and sunday.
62 although it was not his preference, he did not oppose the time being supervised. in addition, on both an interim and final basis, he had proposals to spend time with the children on special occasions and during school holidays and for him to be involved in making decisions regarding their education and medical treatment.
63 in his initiating affidavit, mr russell indicated that his income at the time was $42,000.00 per annum. he had been assessed to pay child support on this income but was also paying the children’s private school fees to attend t school in an amount of $5,500.00 per year.
64 the children no longer attend this school, which from mr russell’s perspective was beyond his means. this remains a source of significant recrimination, so far as ms brookes is concerned. she was upset at what she perceives as the father’s high handed decision to end the children’s education at what she regards as an excellent school, to which both parents had committed during their relationship.
65 mr russell explained the delay in commencing these proceedings in the following terms:
after leaving the house in april 2016 i enquired with the legal services commission regarding my eligibility for a grant of legal aid but unfortunately i was not eligible due to the means test as i was working full time. i began enquiring with family law firms around adelaide and soon discovered that engaging a solicitor was a very expensive exercise and unfortunately i did not have the funds necessary to engage a solicitor nor did i have sufficient ability to engage in a payment arrangement due to my annual wage of $42,000.00 per annum. i decided to save money over the past 12 months to come up with the funds necessary to engage a solicitor, hence why i am only initiating proceedings now.[6]
66 in addition, attached to his affidavit, were copies of text messages, commencing in august 2016 from him to ms brookes, in which he requested to spend time with the children, along with her waspish replies, rebuffing his overtures. the correspondence confirms my impression of each of the parties, garnered as a consequence of my lengthy exposure to them, whilst being cross-examined in the witness box.
67 the father strikes me as an even-tempered and unassertive person, who is measured in his communication style, whilst the mother is querulous, self-absorbed and lacking in empathy and insight. she continues to be bitterly disposed towards mr russell for a variety of reasons but chief among them is her perception that his behaviour has disadvantaged her financially.
68 the mother responded to the father’s application on 14 august 2017. on both a final and interim basis, she proposed that she have sole parental responsibility for x and y. on an interim basis, she proposed that the father have professionally supervised time, with the children, at a children’s contact service. thereafter, on a final basis, she proposed that the children have only three hours on alternate sundays, with their father, to be supervised by the maternal grandmother.
69 one of the main planks, of her case, at this stage, was her assertion that the father’s narcolepsy represented a significant danger to the children, particularly if he was driving a motor vehicle or fell into a deep sleep, from which he could not be roused, whilst the children were in his care, in the absence of another adult.
70 in support of her case, she asserted that mr russell had fallen asleep at the wheel on many occasions and his narcolepsy was so severe that he often could not be roused, once he was asleep, by either her or the children. in my view, mr russell has gone to significant lengths to dispel ms brookes’ anxieties in this regard. as already been noted, one of the significant features of this case is the apparent anxiety the children have displayed to enter or remain in mr russell’s motor vehicle.
71 in addition, in her responding affidavit, ms brookes also placed significant emphasis on her view that mr russell was not able to manage the behavioural manifestations of x’s asd, particularly given the child’s propensity to have meltdowns and to become absorbed, for lengthy periods of time, in simple activities such as brushing her teeth. the implication of ms brookes’ evidence being mr russell lacked the patience and insight to calm x down and was likely to lose his temper with her.
x’s autism
72 it seems clear that mr russell was not involved in the process leading to x being diagnosed with asd. the diagnosis was made, after the parties separated, by dr j in early 2016. dr j considered that x met five of the ‘a’ criteria and three of the ‘b’ criteria for a diagnosis of asd. the a criteria being as follows: abnormal social approach, exhibited by difficulty with one on one play and more so in groups, a lack of initiating or response to social interaction. one of the consequence of this was that y was more advanced in social interaction than her older sister, a failure to be able to hold back and forth conversation, manifested by a difficulty in comprehending social cues, a propensity for repetitious use of language and to become over excited in her communications. this had the potential to other children seeing her as odd, a reduced sharing of interests, emotions and responds with others. this led x to be difficult to calm down and to have protracted meltdowns over minor things, difficulties in developing, maintaining and understanding social relationships.
73 in respect of the three b criteria, these can be summarised as follows: repetitive patterns of behaviours, interests and activities, highly restricted and fixated interests that are abnormal in their intensity and focus. in x’s case, this was manifested with pressing buttons on bank machines, hyper or hypo-reactivity to sensory experience, such as having her hair or teeth brushed or her nails cut. she apparently feels uncomfortable, when a car seat belt is put over her body.
74 as a consequence of dr j’s involvement, x was referred for an assessment as to the treatment, which would assist her. in october 2015, it was recommended that x have individual weekly speech pathology and occupational therapy sessions and she and her parents receive regular family therapy “to help them understand social emotional development and how best to support x in her social emotional journey”. from mr russell’s perspective, he has had limited, if any, involvement in this process.
75 the speech pathologist and occupational therapist, who provided this treatment plan, in october 2015, concluded their report with the following statement:
x needs a complex, and only by taking on a holistic, family based approach will we be able to facilitate her development so she feels safe, secure and competent in the world.[7]
76 ms brookes has provided a brief report dated 27 august 2020 from ms v, who is a senior occupational therapist, who has been providing fortnightly therapy to x since february 2019.[8] she noted the importance of routine for x as she was likely to be upset by changes which she would find difficult to process.
77 ms v also recommended the use of positive reinforcement strategies to manage her disruptive behaviour as opposed to the use of punishments, which she characterised as restrictive practices, which included what she termed aversive restraint, which had the potential to do more harm than good. this section of the report is controversial in the light of a technique, known as the bear hug, which mr russell has utilised to restrain x when, in his view, her behaviour has put her at risk of suffering harm.
78 significantly, in the context of the current issues in dispute between the parties, ms v wrote as follows:
at x’s age and with her level of understanding and development, i believe x should have a right to voice where she wants to spend her time and what activities she engages in (within reason, i.e. attending school is non-negotiable). in an ot session, x reported to me that she does ‘naughty things’ because she doesn’t want to be somewhere or with that person because they are mean to her. if x is actively making bad and dangerous decisions, i do not believe this is beneficial for her emotional, mental and physical wellbeing and she should have a choice in the matter. if x is put in a position where she physically feels unsafe or doesn’t want to be there, then it is detrimental to her development and wellbeing. if visitation is occurring in an environment or place where x feels unsafe and wants to abscond from, it should be considered being done instead in an neutral environment (i.e. park, playground, café) and remain there until x is comfortable moving elsewhere. it may also be beneficial to have minimal people present too.[9]
events after the instigation of proceedings
79 the case came into court, for the first time, on 21 august 2017. on this occasion, orders were made for mr russell to begin to spend time with x and y, for two hours on alternate weekends, at the suburb w children’s contact service “ccs”.
80 given the waiting time for this service, pending the implementation of this time, it was directed that the children spend time, with their father, at a children’s play café, from 1.00pm until 3.00pm, subject to the supervision of their maternal grandmother or another person, mr z, who was a nominee of the mother. mr russell was also directed to provide a medical report in respect of his narcolepsy.
81 between august 2017 and early-december 2017, mr russell was only able to spend time with the children on five occasions. difficulties were experienced by the nominated supervisors in getting the children to leave motor vehicles and enter the play café. other problems arose when the maternal grandmother had to have surgery and mr z was unavailable.
82 mr russell deposed that, on the occasions when he was able to spend time with the children, his interaction with them was positive. however, he also complained that both children made comments, which he considered inappropriate and likely to have originated with their mother. in particular, y mentioned that “mummy has no money because [the father] took the money away [and] mummy doesn’t have the money to replace broken toys” and x indicating as the reason why she withdrew from playing with her father “because mummy says we’re not allowed to play with you”.[10]
83 overall, the effect of mr russell’s evidence is that after a first successful visit, with the children in late august 2017 the time gradually became more problematic. one visit was aborted because x refused to leave her mother’s car and y would not go to her father without her older sister.
84 concurrent with his updating affidavit, mr russell provided a report from dr q, which indicated that mr russell’s gp had proscribed him with dexamphetamine – an amphetamine based wake promoting agent – to assist him with wakefulness. in addition, dr q had conducted a maintenance of wakefulness test on mr russell, which was found to be normal. in these circumstances, whilst mr russell maintained his medication, dr q had no concerns regarding mr russell’s ability to operate a motor vehicle or care for his children vis-à-vis any issue relating to his narcolepsy.
85 on 5 december 2017, the father time with the children was extended to a maximum of three hours. again the time was at the neutral location of a children’s play café and subject to the supervision of the maternal grandmother. the father’s impression was that y was excited to see him but x was more reserved until she saw y playing enjoyably with her father.
86 in the lead up to christmas, the parties fell into dispute as to what was an appropriate gift for the children. the mother contending that they had asked for a bicycle rack. the father contending this was unlikely to be the sort of gift children aged five and 6 would request. from the father’s perspective, the issue is reflective of the mother’s lack of child focus.
the involvement of professionals with handovers and supervision
87 the professionally supervised time ordered by the court to take place at a children’s contact service, was scheduled to begin on 28 january 2018. x did not separate from her mother on the first ccs visit, whilst y did. however, at the conclusion of her time, y indicated to the relevant supervisor that she had had a good time and wanted to see her father again.
88 on the second ccs visit, x again declined to spend time with her father, whilst y was willing to engage with him. the same pattern followed on each of the subsequent visits. the final visit was on 22 april 2018. the relevant report concludes as follows:
the worker asked y how the visit had gone and she said, “good. fun.”. the worker asked what she did not like about the visit and y said, “none”, and talked about the cutting activity. y ran to ms brookes and they hugged. ms brookes said, “did you have a good time”, and y said, “no”. ms brookes asked y did not respond.[11]
89 it had been envisaged that the ccs time would proceed in tandem with the father spending periods of around three hours in duration, with the children, at the play café, to make up for time lost whilst the paternal grandfather had been indisposed. this time did not occur as the mother indicted the children did not want to go.
90 the case returned to court on 26 april 2018. from the father’s perspective the time in question had been far from problem free, particularly so far as x was concerned. in these circumstances, given the end of the ccs sessions, the parties agreed to engage either a social worker or psychologist to oversee at least three play sessions, of one hour in duration, between the children and their father. initially, the expert agreed upon was ms aa, an experienced social worker and child and family consultant. she engaged with the father and the children on 3 june, 10 june and 17 june 2018.
91 during the first visit, y engaged with her father, albeit in a boisterous manner. x’s behaviour was more challenging. ms aa reported her hitting her father and throwing uno cards around. y indicated to her father that your brain is broken...you fall asleep when you drive. she also questioned the suitability of his car seats.
92 during the second visit, x again displayed challenging behaviour. her father asked her to desist from throwing toys and ripping up the playing cards. x responded that she didn’t care and left the playroom and returned to her mother outside. y played with her father, at times in a rough house manner. x later returned to the playroom but was disruptive again. a similar pattern occurred on the third visit.
93 from the father’s perspective, the time with ms aa was frustrating and inadequate. it is his view that the presence of the mother outside the playroom inevitably led to x, in particular, being distracted from engaging with him. the implication of his evidence being that the mother was well aware of the effect that she was having but was unwilling to leave ms aa’s rooms for the short sessions involved.
94 after the end of ms aa’s involvement, it had anticipated that the father would begin to have unsupervised time with the children for periods of three hours on alternate sunday afternoons. the first scheduled visit did not occur as the mother indicated the children did not want to go to their father. similar problems arose in respect of subsequent visits.
95 ms aa was either unwilling or unable to continue to assist the family after her initial involvement. when the case returned to court in mid-august 2018, the parties agreed to engage another child and family consultant, ms r, to assist them with handovers. ms r has been significantly involved in the case thereafter.
96 ms r’s initial brief was to supervise the exchange of the children between the parties at her office. the mother was directed to leave the office immediately she had delivered the children there and ms r was authorised to give each of the parties’ directions, in order to facilitate the handover process. thereafter, it was envisaged that the parties would then move to their own handover, either at a play café, with which the children were familiar, or at their music therapy class or on occasions when they were attending occupational or speech pathology.
97 at a later stage, when it became apparent that ms r had not been able to alleviate the handover problems, it was agreed that she would be engaged to assist handover at a variety of neutral locations, including a park in suburb l, the museum and the botanic gardens. she was also asked to report on her involvement with the family.
98 in the first session, as was the case with ms aa, the father struggled to manage the children’s behaviour and ms r had to intervene when the children were hitting and kicking their father. x consistently referred to her father as mr russell and indicated that he was not the children’s father, rather he was mr russell, a statement with which y would agree.
99 for obvious reasons, mr russell is upset by how the children refer to him and believes that this appellation is more likely to originate with ms brookes than the children and be reflective of her deep-seated animosity for him. i agree.
100 the second session was broadly similar. x was reported to spit on her father and generally both children behaved poorly, shutting both ms r and their father out of ms r’s room. x said on a number of occasions that she wanted to go home. at the end of the session at ms r’s rooms, both children declined to go to the park with their father.
101 on the third session, ms r locked all the doors, at her rooms, apart from the waiting room, to avoid the children behaving in the same manner in which they had on the previous visit. during the visit, x was described as moving around the room, whilst engaging in defiant behaviours. again, the children declined to go to the park with their father.
102 the fourth visit occurred at a park in suburb l. the visit began with the mother handing the children over to ms r, who walked hand in hand with them to the father. the children were not distressed by this process, in ms r’s view. thereafter, the visit, for the first time, appears to have been successful. in this context, ms r reported as follows:
the consultant observed the father to have warm and connected interactions with the children playing on the play equipment, playing with the ball the father brought and sitting and eating food that the father had packed for them. the children at no times were observed to demonstrate behaviours that indicated feelings of distress and discomfort. in fact, the children’s affect was animated, they often laughed, made eye contact with the father, ask for his help and were attentive and actively engaged in their interactions with their [father] and each other. the consultant observed the father to be gentle and patient with the children. he either chose not to attend to certain behaviour or did not notice this behaviour.[12]
103 the next visit, at the adelaide botanic gardens, was also reported by ms r in positive terms. she described the father as being patient with the children and taking the lead in playing with them. the next visit, which ms r oversaw, took place on 6 october 2018, at the adelaide zoo. again, the visit went well, with ms r reporting as follows:
the dynamic and interaction between the father and the children was not noticeably different from other family groupings moving through the zoo. what this means, is that the consultant observed the interactions between the children and the father to be unremarkable. there was no evidence of distress in their speech or in their body language. the consultant observed the children to laugh and seek contact with their father. the consultant’s farewell, after an hour, caused no noticeable disruption to the dynamic between the children and the father. furthermore, there was an absence of the children hitting, kicking, or talking negatively about the father as had been previously noted by the consultant in the earlier appointments.[13]
104 the next fortnightly visit occurred at a bowling alley. it was decided that ms r would not be directly involved in handover and the required transition would occur between the parties themselves. in this context, ms r observed a tense and awkward exchange between the parties, which ms r regarded as potentially problematic insofar as future exchanges were concerned. nonetheless, once again, the visit went well, with the children enjoying bowling with their father and often laughing animatedly with him.
105 the final visit, of this tranche, occurred at the south australian museum on 4 november 2018. at handover, the mother was reported to ignore the father. y was observed to be reluctant to leave her mother. however, apart from handover, the visit again was reported in positive terms by ms aa as follows:
at the time of the handover the children stayed close to their mother and avoided making eye contact with the father or move from the mother to the father. although, the consultant observed that the children separated from their mother with minimal behaviour that would indicate emotional distress, it is the opinion of the consultant that the relationship between the parents continues to impact the children moving freely from the mother to the father. during the session the consultant observed that the children interacted with the father with positive and warm regard. specifically, they sought physical contact with their father and engaged him in curious conversations about their environment...there was an absence of the children hitting, kicking, or talking negatively about the father as had been previously noted by the consultant in the earlier sessions.[14]
106 the import of this aspect of ms r’s evidence is, in my view, readily apparent. the children are capable of having a positive interaction with their father and he is capable of managing their behaviour, albeit for limited periods of time. it also seems apparent to me that the mother remains highly antipathetic towards the father and the children are well aware of this and act out in response to it.
107 against this more positive background, on 14 november 2019, orders were made for the father to begin to spend time with the children, on a fortnightly basis, on the sunday of the first week from 9.00am until 4.00pm and in the other week from the conclusion of school on friday until 5.00pm that evening. it was envisaged that, if all went well, the time would be extended in 2020.
108 in order to ensure that there were no glitches at handover, these were directed to occur at the paternal grandmother’s home, with the mother to exit her vehicle and remove the children from her car and then depart. the father was to remain 10 metres away, until this occurred. the location for other handover was either the regular play café or music therapy sessions. the aim of the orders was to remove the mother as having any emotional impact on the children at handover.
109 by this stage, proceedings had been on foot for a period of around eighteen months. in these circumstances, they were fixed for trial in the following june and ms r was directed to prepare a family report, which was released to the parties in late february of 2019, after interviews and observed interactions which occurred in early february.
the first family report
110 in interview, ms r described the father as earnest and amiable. significantly, he described ms brookes as a great parent, who was child focussed. at this stage, he conceded that the children did not really know him. he identified as a significant problem, at the stage of the report, being the children’s unwillingness to get into his car. ms r assessed mr russell as prioritising the children’s needs.
111 ms brookes was also assessed as being earnest and amiable. however, she was not similarly well disposed towards mr russell as he was apparently towards her. she described him as a terrible partner and father, significantly lacking in parenting and planning skills. she doubted to ms r that mr russell was seriously interested in the children at all.
112 ms brookes raised issues of significant family violence to which both children had been exposed during the parties’ relationship. both children reported some indication of being aware of conflict between their parents and y reported that mr russell had slapped x when she was three years of age, when she had spat toothpaste on him.
113 in interview, y expressed that she feared her father might take the children away from their mother. she also said she knew that her mother only wanted her to spend one or two minutes with her father. x was described as being wary. ms r described the interaction she observed between the father and the children as follows:
the three sat in close proximity playing. mr russell rubbed y’s back in comfort when she was upset at her sister changing the rules of the game and when y hit her sister, mr russell held her hand gently and calmly said “you can’t hurt your sister”. after packing up the game the[y] moved onto another. the consultant observed x making eye contact and smiling at mr russell. the consultant noticed mr russell responding in kind. the consultant noted that for most of the observed observation the children frequently laughed, had bright affects and were playful with mr russell. when there was rupture, due to teasing between the siblings, mr russell was observed to manage the situation calmly and was able to de-escalate the situation and assist the child to self-regulate. y was observed to spontaneously sit in her father’s lap and both children demonstrated proximity seeking behaviour towards mr russell. however, when it came time for the children to leave, neither of them hugged their father good bye.[15]
114 in her evaluation of the family, ms r noted the volatility of the parents’ relationship, with each of them accusing the other of being abusive. ms brookes was regarded as the children’s primary carer over the course of their lives to date, with mr russell having no opportunity to build a strong connected relationship with x and y, given his lack of opportunity, up to this stage, to actively parent them.
115 although concerned about ms brookes’ account of violence and the children exposure to abuse, ms r viewed the children’s accounts of this behaviour to have a rehearsed quality to them, given the lack of emotionality attaching to them. she therefore doubted their reliability. it is clear that ms r was significantly influenced by how she observed the children interacting with their father. she reported as follows:
given that the children said they felt alright with the idea that both ms brookes and mr russell would know what they had spoken about with the consultant, and that the children were observed to demonstrate proximity seeking behaviour towards mr russell, the consultant’s concern regarding the children being at risk of physical abuse is low. the children did not demonstrate behaviour during the observation which indicated they were fearful of mr russell. another indication that the children felt safe in the care of their father is the fact that the children demonstrated non-compliant behaviour. over compliance in children can be indicative of children who are afraid of the ramifications if they were to misbehave. furthermore, ms brookes acknowledged that the transitions of the children to the care of mr russell were becoming easier with time and what that meant to her was that they were feeling more comfortable spending time with mr russell.[16]
116 in summary, ms r recommended that the father’s time with the children be increased so that their relationship with him might be strengthened, which would lead she hope to the children becoming more confident about spending time with their father. of concern to ms r was the mother’s consistent negative narrative concerning mr russell and the risk that he children were being, either inadvertently or indirectly influenced by their mother’s opinion of their father.
117 in all the circumstances, ms r recommended a transition, over a period of six months, to the children spending a long weekend, each fortnight, with their father, as well as time, overnight, during the other school week, with him. with transitions to be managed by a family consultant. she further recommended a further family report prior to the final hearing.
118 ms r’s view that transitions were becoming easier has not proved to be the case. however, in the aftermath of the report, the parties, ostensibly at least, were prepared to take her recommendations on board, after attending a family dispute resolution conference. in these circumstances, they agreed to postpone the final hearing and to move to the time recommended by ms r, with ms r to facilitate handovers, at the paternal grandmother’s home, at the father’s expense. orders to this effect were made on 11 june 2019.
119 following the vacation of the june 2019 trial, the case was called over and refixed for hearing in early may of 2020. no doubt the father hoped he could be able to build his relationship with the children over this period, as ms r recommended. regrettably this has not proven to be the case. rather, the effect of his evidence is that the opposition of the children to spending tie with him has become more entrenched over this period.
events between june 2019 and mid 2020
120 ms m is a retired educator. she lives in suburb bb. she is in her early 70’s and enjoys good health. besides x and y, she has two other grandchildren, whom she regularly babysits, including for sleep overs. i accept her evidence that her home is a child-friendly place with plenty of toys, books and games suitable for children.
121 as a consequence of x and y’s refusal to get into mr russell’s motor vehicle, by default, ms m’s home has become the location for many of the children’s visits with their father. in addition, prior to him and ms n cohabiting, mr russell was staying at his mother’s home.
122 as previously indicated, i have found ms m to be a truthful witness, who has the normal aspirations of most grandparents, namely to be involved with their grandchildren, whilst not taking over a parental function. she presented as being frustrated with what she perceived as being the mother’s ridiculous opposition to such an unexceptional outcome.
123 clearly, as a consequence of the dynamic between the parties, there is no affection between ms m and ms brookes. as such, there is no communication or trust between the two women. in these circumstance what the children say to their mother about their interactions with their father and paternal grandmother is capable of either conscious or malicious misreporting. it concerns me that the mother appears incapable of questioning the children or reframing them. rather she will assume the worse.
124 ms m was cross-examined about an allegation, raised by ms brookes, that she (ms m) had chased the children around her home with a broom in december of 2020. the implication being that this had been done to terrorise them. as with all of the mother’s allegations that the children have been mistreated either by the father, ms m or later by ms n, the mother has no personal knowledge of what occurred but has relied on what x primarily has told her.
125 i am concerned that x may not be a reliable reporter and ms brookes may be inclined to overstate what she has said and disinclined to question x’s accounts. ms m responded to the allegation put to her as follows:
it was in the garden, not in the house, and it was in response to the children’s behaviour towards me and in order to lighten the tense situation and make it into a game in which the children engaged immediately. the situation i refer to is the children yelling abusive words at me and using the word “witch”. so i spotted an outdoor broom leaning against a wall and played witch, we played chasey.....it was fun.
126 ms m was also accused of having deliberately squirted the children with water from her hose. ms m was vigorously cross-examined about this incident, in the following terms:
the children told their mother, specifically: they squirted us with the hose and said “get inside”. do you remember that occasion occurring? --- i do not. i do remember that the garden hose was an object that the children would regularly try to get to, to the point where we needed to turn off the mains – and we did as a result of an incident involving the children having run out of the house and into the garden, grabbed the house, turned it on full blast, squirting it into my house and onto the direction of my bookcases. and that made you cross? --- it made me turn the water off. yes. and it made you cross with the children for behaving that way? --- no. well, you sound cross? ---no. i’m telling you that there was a – a strong incident that required immediate strong action. yes. and that immediate strong action was, according to the children, squirting them with the house---? ---no.
127 the evidence available to me abundantly demonstrate that the children are capable of being extremely naughty, when in their father’s care. that certainly is the tenor of not only mr russell’s evidence but also that of ms r and ms n. why the children behave in this way, in the context of spending time with their father, is a more complex issue.
128 i am satisfied that ms m’s response to the episode of behaviour involving the children turning on the hose was both appropriate and measured. what is more concerning to me is that what appears to be a common place incident, which was dealt with appropriately, becomes a mechanism by which ms brookes criticises the father and those associated with him, a process in which the children appear also to being engaged.
129 i am concerned that, either consciously or unconsciously, the children have been led to believe that they have their mother’s imprimatur - or even direction – to misbehave, when in their father’s care. he has to deal with this behaviour on a perennial basis. undoubtedly this is extremely challenging for him. he must continually resist being provoked into over-reacting to the children’s naughtiness and indeed their taunting of him and ms n.
130 of an aborted visit scheduled to occur in february of 2020, ms n deposes as follows:
the girls were also volatile and destructive in their behaviour, including throwing their thongs, throwing dirt, spitting in our faces and calling us idiots.[17]
clearly, this is extraordinary behaviour on the part of children of the ages of x and y, notwithstanding x’s special needs.
131 as previously indicated, i have seen a brief vignette of how mr russell manages the challenging behaviour in the context of the video footage taken by one of the children with his mobile phone. he deals with it patiently and humorously, as ms m did, when she elected to adopt the role of the witch.
132 however, necessarily, a possibly unguarded reaction to these types of behaviour creates a potentially volatile situation. no person has limitless stores of patience. necessarily, there must be a risk that the children’s behaviour may become more extreme and indeed dangerous, if there is a change in their care, to which they are diametrically opposed and mr russell and ms n will have to deal with it, whilst having a new born baby.
133 for obvious reasons, mr russell is not in a position to know what the mother tells the children, when they are in her household. however, i have grave reservations that she would be disinclined to discipline the children, for bad behaviour, with their father, if she became aware of it. rather, her natural inclination is to believe whatever negative things the children say about their father and then magnify them.
134 one central finding, which i believe is open to me in the case, is that the children are extremely susceptible to being negatively influenced against their father by their mother and to act out accordingly. the mother is likely to view the father negatively for a number of reasons. these include financial ones and the fact that he initiated the separation between the two. what is striking is that there has been no diminution of the mother’s hostility for the father notwithstanding their lengthy separation.
135 regrettably, i do not consider it beyond the bounds of possibility that the children consider that their mother wishes them to misbehave, when they are in their father’s care. in a legal context, this raises the issue as to whether this can be considered a species of abuse, to which the children are exposed. ms r is of the view that it is.
136 it is the effect of mr russell’s evidence that ms brookes, whilst the parties were utilising ms m’s home for handovers, made it as hard as possible for the children to leave her car and transition into his care. he deposes that she would park down the street away from the entrance and would wound up her windows, prior to texting him that the children “don’t want to go”.
137 in these circumstances, as he was entitled to do pursuant to the orders of june 2019, mr russell again engaged ms r, at his expense, to assist with transitions. in this context, ms r reported as follows:
the consultant has attended several handovers between ms brookes and mr russell. the mother was observed to verbally encourage the children to leave the car to go with their father. however, it was the opinion of the consultant that her efforts were lack lustre. she didn’t get out of the car and there was no boundary setting, consequences or minimal reassurances provided by the mother to the children.[18]
138 ms r has been engaged in handovers at ms m’s house on eight occasions between june of 2019 and march of 2020. in a summary she prepared in march of 2021, ms r summarised her experience of the mother as follows:
typically, ms brookes would arrive at the paternal grandmother’s house. she would park across the road from the house and would remain in the driver’s seat. ms brookes generally appeared to struggle with ms r’s friendly overtures, mostly giving one word responses. ms brookes, would, at times, make positive comments about spending time with the father, but these comments lacked context or conviction.
139 notwithstanding ms r’s criticisms of ms brookes, it is mr russell’s view that ms brookes is more resistant to the children spending time with him when she (ms brookes) is not subject to external scrutiny from her. it is his evidence that on the occasions ms r was not available, on a number of occasions, neither he nor the mother were able to get the children to leave their mother’s car and ms brookes did nothing to assist.
140 in this context, it is his perception, from what the children have said to him, that the mother has informed the children that they will not be able to take part in a play date or outing because they have to spend time with their father. he also deposes that, when he has taken the initiative and opened the door of the mother’s car and has greeted the mother, ms brookes declines to respond to him but will look away and ignore him.
141 it is the effect of the father’s evidence that if he is able to extricate the children from their mother’s car and get them inside, he is able to engage with them in appropriate activities such as colouring in and playing games. they are frequently extremely boisterous in their behaviour. he denies ever having hit them or inappropriately disciplined them, particularly that he had locked them into a room. i accept his evidence in this regard.
142 the children do not eat, when they are in the care of their father. it is his evidence that this is not due to a lack of food provided by him. to the contrary, he provides fruit, vegetables sticks and biscuits, which the children refuse to touch. on one occasion, when the father produced a box of honey flavour weet-bix, x tipped up the box because mr russell had touched it. if the children did leave their mother’s car, they frequently run away from their father, up the street.
143 the father’s perception was that arrangements for him to spend time with the children were going backwards. in these circumstances, he amended his application on 15 march 2020 seeking the children live with him and not spend time with their mother for a period of approximately eight weeks. for obvious reasons, this application did nothing to reduce tensions between the parties or relief handover difficulties.
144 unfortunately, due to the pandemic emergency which began in march of 2020, the trial scheduled to commence in the following june could not take place. medical evidence indicated that, due to her congenital heart defect, ms brookes was at particular risk if she contracted covid-19.
145 in these circumstances, time between the father and the children was suspended by mutual agreement and the father began to have telephone communication with the children. this was ineffective in mr russell’s view. to the mother’s great credit, she agreed to the father resume spending face to face time with the children on 15 may 2020
146 mr russell sought advice from ms r as to how to cope with x’s incidents of extremely violent behaviour, when she would punch or kick out at him, ms n and ms m. ms r recommended that the child be held immobile in a bear hug to the chest. the technique being devised to prevent a child from self-harm or injury by providing, in ms r’s words: deep sensory pressure, which engages the vagus nerve which then counteracts the sympathetic nervous system and provides regulation and calmness.
147 it is ms brookes’ view that this is a barbaric practice and one which has been rejected by x’s occupational therapist, ms v as inappropriate. ms v did not give evidence and so what was not asked to specifically comment on the technique as delineated by ms r.
148 a fair reading of ms v’s report is that she rejected aversive restraint in the context of punishment being directed towards x. in this context, she recommended the use of rewards to shape the child’s behaviour. i suspect ms r would be inclined to agree. it seems to me that the bear hug technique, although obviously restrictive in nature, is not a punishment per se.
149 although ms v did not give oral evidence, i value her opinion. however, i must be careful about placing undue weight on it. certainly, she may well not be appraised with all the subtleties of this extremely challenging case. however, the notion that x does naughty things when she does not want to go somewhere struck a chord with me. clearly, she frequently does behave poorly in the context of spending time with her father.
150 what is also interesting to note (and was an issue which could not be put to ms v) was that she recognised that regardless of x’s opposition to them there were somethings which should be non-negotiable regardless of x’s idiosyncratic preferences. one such thing was attending school. this concept of non-negotiability in a parent/child relationship encapsulates the central dilemma in the case.
151 ms brookes recognises the non-negotiability of the children attending school and indeed a myriad of other activities. in fact, the children seem to have an extramural engagement on most days of the week. these include therapy-based piano, occupational therapy, horse-riding, music lessons, and play therapy.
152 in addition, ms brookes conceded that she was able to facilitate the children’s attendance at social occasions with their maternal family and friends, including attending birthday parties and the like, without disruption. ms r agreed with the father’s counsel that, given the challenges incumbent in parenting x, a parent who was able to accomplish these things should be regarded as a relatively high-functioning parent. the evidence available to me does not indicate that ms brookes is of the view that the children having a relationship with their father is to be regarded as non-negotiable.
153 the evidence with which i have been provided does demonstrate that x is capable of extremely erratic and potential dangerous behaviour, both to herself and others. as such, i accept that it is likely to be necessary, from time to time, for her to be restrained to protect herself and others.
154 accordingly, i do not consider that i am in a position to criticise the father for using the bear hug technique, which from his perspective, is not intended to punish the child but rather to protect her and is only utilised in extreme circumstances for short durations. certainly, i do not think any such criticism can be justified on the basis of ms v’s report.
155 it is the mother’s case that the children do not want to go to their father because he hurts them. i do not accept that there is any cogent evidence to indicate that this has occurred. in this context, the video record of the failed handover of 15 august 2020 is germane. it shows the mother and children walking up to the father’s front gate. x repeatedly says i’m not going before running off. she refers to her father as an idiot and asserts that he hurts her. her tone is somewhat flat.
156 mr russell and ms n, from inside the premises, offer surprises, food and games inside. they offer a trip to the park. their tone is neutral and engaging. ms brookes, with her hands in her pockets, is essentially silent. she walks away. she does nothing to encourage or direct. she is passive in her behaviour. after viewing the video one cannot help but be reminded of the oft-quoted paragraph regarding the obligations of custodial parents provided in stevenson & hughes as follows:
...the implied obligation of the custodian to take reasonable steps to ensure that the access stipulated in an order takes place. words and actions have meaning in context and affect. it is not a sufficient discharge of custodian’s obligations, express or implied, to point to words and actions and say, in effect: “you see i tried. but the child does not want to go” and thereafter to figuratively fold their arms as if they were an end of the matter. theirs is an active role with an obligation to positively encourage access. it is not a discharge of their duty to set up access to fail. that is to say, it is not sufficient to make a token effort at compliance by the utterance of a few phrases which, in the main, are designed to impart to the child not positive encouragement to go on access, but to convey the burden on both the child and the custodian of compliance with obligation.[19]
157 in my assessment, nothing in ms brookes’ conduct can be regarded as either active or encouraging. it corroborates the evidence and opinion of ms r referred to above. it is also consistent with the evidence of ms s, who stood in for ms r at a handover, on one occasion in june of 2020. in order to help the transition, ms s took a therapy dog with her.
158 ms brookes initially refused to cooperate with ms s, mistaking her for a friend of ms n and therefore not formally authorised to be involved. y readily engaged with the dog, x did not. notwithstanding the presence of the dog, the children declined to enter ms m’s house where the father was. ms s describes how she broke the deadlock in the following terms:
the children refused to go to the house on a couple of occasions despite my encouragements. ms brookes did not do or say anything to help encourage the children to spend time with their father. she and the male companion stood there watching as i tried to encourage the children to come to their father’s house. i suggested to ms brookes and her male companion to go in the car to get on with their day and started walking towards the house encouraging the children to take charge of leading the dog to the house, they responded.[20]
159 the case returned to court on 26 august 2020, on which occasion ms r was asked to up-date her family report, which she did so on 20 november 2020. later the final hearing was re-fixed in april of 2021. regrettably the three days allocated for the hearing proved inadequate to accommodate the hearing of all the evidence required.
160 in addition, the hearing process resulting in more issues arising in the case and for the need for another expert, ms b to be engaged. as a consequence, the hearing process continued in june and october of 2021.
ms n’s evidence
161 ms n is a key feature of the father’s case, as she would be integral to providing support to him and care for the children, if they come into mr russell’s care, against ms brookes likely strident objection. currently, she is employed as a professional. she earns a salary slightly larger than mr russell.
162 currently, ms n works a nine day fortnight from 8.00 am until 5.00 pm. she can change her hours in order to do some school runs. she is also studying part time for a graduate diploma. this occupies one evening per week. it seems that mr russell will be reliant on ms n to assist him with caring for the children. necessarily, the demands on time will increase exponentially, when her and mr russell’s child arrives.
163 she and mr russell met in 2019 and began to live together in 2019. they purchased their current home together and moved in during february 2021 in suburb o. it is on a large block and has four bedrooms and a swimming pool. the pool has been a safety concern so far as the mother is concerned. mr russell has deposed that it is appropriately fenced.
164 the necessary mortgage payments are a significant commitment. in addition, given he is not legally aided, in contrast to ms brookes, mr russell has a significant exposure to legal fees in respect of these lengthy proceedings. in addition, it is he who has paid for the involvement of the various experts, who has assisted at handovers, from time to time.
165 ms n first met x and y in early 2020 and she has spent time with them regularly over the past two years. this has not been a process without difficulty and the relationship, if it can be called that, which she shares with ms brookes, is difficult to say the least. it is the effect of ms n’s evidence that the children are often upset at handovers, but calm down when their mother leaves.
166 my impression of ms n’s evidence is that she has not attempted to guild the lily in her description of the difficulties which she and mr russell face in parenting the children. she deposes as follows:
the girls are generally poorly behaved with us, destructive in their nature, rude in their speech and lack social etiquette and manners. the girls lack boundaries and things like you’re not my parent so you can’t tell me what to do.[21]
167 ms n has deposed that the children refuse to eat any food which she or mr russell prepare at their home or even have touched. when out, they are prepared to each hot chips and fruit from a menu. she deposed that she and mr russell do sit down and eat meals, and they won’t join us. like, we offer them cereal for breakfast or the pick of the pantry for breakfast –pancakes, everything. no, they won’t eat. same at lunchtime, same at dinnertime. because of the children’s refusal to eat, it is sometimes necessary for the children to be returned early to their mother.
168 notwithstanding these issues, ms n had indicated her willingness to support mr russell in becoming the children’s primary carer because, in her words, she would like them to enjoy a loving childhood and have a meaningful relationship with their father. i do not doubt the sincerity of this commitment. what concerns me is the potential for ms n to have under-estimated how difficult it is likely to put into practice.
169 ms n vehemently denied that either she or mr russell had ever smacked the children, although the children’s behaviour she acknowledged was frequently challenging and a great deal of time was spent in the management of their behaviour.
170 she described this behaviour as being a real hyper-destructive state quite often – that they’re about to damage something, or themselves or us. it was this type of behaviour, which in ms n view necessitated the use of the bear hug, which had the effect of calming them back down. however, significantly in answer to a series of questions i asked of her, she indicated the children’s behaviour in her household was unacceptable and it was getting worse. she conceded that she had no authority with the children.
171 it is ms n’s view that the children will cope, if there is a change in their principle living arrangements, once they become accustomed to her and mr russell’s routine. she proposes that the children would receive psychological support from someone such as ms r to help them adapt.
172 however, regardless of such support, it is axiomatic that the vast majority of the burden of managing the children’s transition (and ensuring that they remained physically safe, given that presently they need 24 hour supervision) would fall on mr russell and ms n. it is also abundantly clear that they would receive no support whatsoever from ms brookes, who in my assessment, is likely to do whatever lays within her power to sabotage such a transition.
173 ms n’s view is that what is currently happening (as at april 2021) was untenable and had to be changed. she deposed the children abused her, spat on her, were violent and destroyed property. y followed the lead of her sister. in this context, i asked the following questions:
the impression i got from your evidence – it may be quite wrong, i don’t know – was that the children – and they’re children, i know they’re innocent children – but they are attempting almost to provoke a response?‑‑‑yes, it seems that way. it’s like they – i don’t know if it’s because they think we will send them home because they’re naughty or – yes, i really don’t know. but do you think they are trying to precipitate some sort of extreme response from you and mr russell?‑‑‑i would think so, because i guess we’ve seen the side of them where they will just play and be kids, and do the normal thing of going outside together and creating things, and then there’s other occasions – it’s like they show up and they’ve got an agenda ‑ ‑ ‑ they’ve got an agenda?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ and it’s, like, “okay. i’m going.” yes. where do you think the agenda comes from?‑‑‑well, i can only assume their mother or – yes – yes.
174 the central issues for the court are whether a change in residence will change this type of behaviour in the children, how long such a process will take, what will be the consequences when the children are re-introduced back to their mother, what are the logistical implications of providing therapeutic support for the children, and what is the durability of the resolve of mr russell and ms n to carry through with the process, once begun, given they need to maintain a life. these are not easy questions to resolve.
175 in his evidence, mr russell is corroborative of that provided by ms n. essentially, it is his position that arrangements for him to spend time with x and y became significantly more difficult once ms brookes became aware that he was in a committed relationship with another person.
176 from his perspective, this correlated with the mother failing to deliver the children and an escalation in their defiant behaviour, culminating in their refusal to eat, which necessitated their premature return to ms brookes’ care to ensure that they were not discomforted by being hungry.
177 difficulties began in early december of 2020. the father asserted that the mother stated to ms n that she was not to touch to the children and, if she did a report would be made to police. the father’s view was that the mother’s conduct was agitating the children. the mother apparently later complained to police of misconduct relating to the father’s behaviour, which resulted in police conducting a welfare check but no further action was taken.
178 in these circumstances, the father requested that the handover location be changed to his home in suburb o, which the mother declined. accordingly, handovers continued at ms m’s home, with all the difficulties which this entailed.
179 in my view, the escalation in the children’s difficult behaviour is more likely to relate to the mother’s views about ms n rather than the children’s own personal experience of her. ms n agreed that she found x’s behaviour challenging and in the context of an incident in which she had tipped up a bottle of liquid soap and poured it on the bathroom floor, she indicated that it was sometimes better to let the behaviour go rather than draw attention to it.
180 ms n also conceded that, if she did ever lose her composure with the children, because of naughtiness of this kind, the first person likely to hear of it would be ms brookes and she would be unlikely to adopt a conciliatory approach to it. in fact, in her affidavit, she alleges that x told her that ms n told her to clean this up right now and forcibly handled her to do so.
181 what the incident indicates is that there is no common ground in how the parties are likely to approach incidents of this kind and their disclosure by the children is likely to lead to conflict with the mother automatically assuming that the father or ms n are in the wrong, whilst they, for their part, will assert they have had to deal with some particular incident of domestic crisis, involving the children’s misbehaviour, as best they can.
driving and the evidence of dr q
182 as a consequence of he and ms n buying their home and handovers continuing at ms m’s home, it became necessary for mr russell to drive the children in his car. the drive takes about 40 minutes. problems relating to driving, up to the time of judgment, continue to be an unresolved issue. the children alternately refuse to get in his car or, once in it, refuse to leave it.
183 in the car, the children attempt to remove their seatbelts and leave the vehicle or to move around the vehicle. attempts have to be made to restrain the children from behaving in this way, by holding onto their hands. chiefly, either mr russell or ms n sit in the back of the car, between the two children, and, as best can be done, attempt to keep or get the children properly restrained again. this usually takes up the entire drive.
184 thankfully, it would seem, child proof central locking has prevented any serious mishaps thus far but the potential for harm must remain. it is also the effect of the father’s evidence that the children have continually complained about the effectiveness of his seatbelts and of the risk that he will fall asleep because he is not a good driver or because there is something wrong with his brain. in mr russell’s words, it almost seems as if they’re scared of being in the car with me other than anyone other than their mother.
185 in answer to questions from me, mr russell indicated his belief that the children’s apparent fear of driving with him originated with ms brookes and the children had been programmed to be as difficult as possible in the hope that mr russell would become frustrated enough to send them home. from his perspective, the source of such programing could only be ms brookes. in her report, ms r also noted that the children raised issues to do with airbags and the correct seats in mr russell’s car.
186 in this context of these issues and those relating to them, mr russell agreed with the proposition that ms brookes was unlikely to accept any outcome in respect of the children, which was contrary to what she wanted. it was also the effect of his evidence that he believed ms brookes had consistently manipulated the children’s emotions since he commenced the proceedings and would continue to do so, if she thought it suited her own ends, regardless of any emotional harm this might do the children.
187 mr russell is also of the view that x, given her asd, is more easily manipulated, in this way, than y, but being younger, she invariably follows her older sister’s lead in how she behaves. it is the father’s preferred position that he should interact with the children on alternate weekends, during school holidays and on special occasions but otherwise the children live with their mother.
188 he would be content, if he could interact with the children in a relatively normal and un-hysterical manner, on this basis but doubt this will occur, hence his current application. he candidly indicated that the mother’s likely response to a change of living arrangements scared him a lot, given the only weapon she had to hand was the children.
189 ms brookes has consistently voiced her concern that the father’s narcolepsy constitutes a significant risk to the safety of the children. whether she genuinely believes this to be the case is hard to assess. in my assessment, it is not an objectively reasonable fear. however, it would seem to be the case that the children share it in some way. the only source of this apprehension can be ms brookes and it seems to me to be improbable that she is either able to shield the children from her fears or willing to reframe them.
190 more recently, ms brookes has relied on the fact that mr russell has unilaterally withdrawn from using prescribed dexamphetamine to assist with the maintenance of wakefulness. she asserts that this has rendered his driving still more problematic. these were issues canvassed in depth with dr q, the father’s treating sleep disorders physician. dr q last consulted with mr russell in november of 2020, during which mr russell was frank that he had ceased his medication in the six months prior and was feeling much better, more awake and alert, whilst taking minimal nap opportunities.
191 mr russell deposed that he had taken this step, in consultation with his general medical practitioner, because he did not like the idea of being on a potentially addictive drug for the remainder of his life and he was feeling better. significantly, mr russell also found the side effects of the drug to be unpleasant. dr q confirmed this to be the case. the side effects are life long and include moodiness, blood pressure and cardiac issues.
192 dr q doubted the likelihood of narcolepsy resolving to normality naturally but conceded that this was not unknown. he accepted however that mr russell’s symptoms had significantly abated. the risk being that some narcoleptics are unaware that they have, in fact, fallen asleep, during periods they have regarded as being ones of wakefulness.
193 the only true test that can indicate whether a subject is or is not asleep, independently of subjective interpretation, being a mslt (multi-sleep latency test), which involves the application of electrodes to the head and which cannot be cheated. dr q recommended that mr russell undergo such a test to resolve the issue of spontaneous remission but indicated that due to constraints in the public system, mr russell would likely have to wait for between three and seven years to have such a test.
194 dr q regarded this wait as scandalous, given his view that there was a pressing need for this diagnostic tool and asked me to do what i could to publicise the problem. the best i can do is include his concerns in this judgment. it is open to mr russell to pay privately for such a test but this is expensive and still entails a wait of around six months, as only one hospital provides the service in south australia.
195 mr russell had undertaken a mslt in 2012, a time at which the test was more widely available. he had passed this test. given that he did not doubt mr russell’s history, dr q supported his decision to cease dexamphetamine. he did not think it an irresponsible decision. i accept this evidence. in addition, dr q continued to be of the view that mr russell satisfied the applicable regulatory criteria to be issued with a driver’s licence.
196 dr q considered that the most dangerous driving environment for a narcoleptic was one involving long, unstimulating drives, in darkness such as presented on a country road. in contrast, there was less danger if there was a constant stream of stimulus and the drive was shorter and during daylight.
197 in all the circumstances of this case, in objective terms, i do not consider the fact of mr russell’s currently un-medicated narcolepsy represents an unacceptable risk to the safety of the children given he is likely to drive the children over fairly short distances, is likely to be subject to constant stimulation and significantly he is aware of his condition and, in my view, does not approach it cavalierly.
the second family report and the evidence of ms r
198 the context in which ms r was to provide her up-dated report are uncontroversial. mr russell reported to her his view that ms brookes was sabotaging his relationship with the children, which was detrimentally impacting the children’s emotional well-being.
199 whilst ms brookes reported that she had never experienced any difficulties in managing the children’s behaviour and therefore any difficulties experienced by mr russell were likely to be due to his poor parenting, lack of attunement with them emotionally, their antipathy to ms n, and the fact that he and ms n physically restrained the children.
200 although she has an under-graduate qualification in psychology, ms r’s expertise is as a social worker. i accept that she has significant expertise in family therapy. in this context, i have some concerns regarding her expertise to provide opinions regarding the implications of x’s asd and its relationship to her conduct, particularly whether that can be attributed directly to the machinations of ms brookes.
201 however, the fact remains, ms r noted, as do i, that notwithstanding x’s asd, she attends a main stream school and is able to engage in a wide variety of other activities, both provided by medical and quasi medical personal, as well as lay people. accordingly, the major areas in which x’s interaction with the world outside of her home is when she is called upon to interact with her father. this was a major source of comment, so far as ms r was concerned.
202 ms r summarised the mother’s case in the following terms:
ms brookes stated that she has never had a problem with the children and that she has never had to reprimand them. she said that they are always well behaved for her. she said she does not have difficulty taking them anywhere. she also commented that the children were advanced in their speech and that they engage in a wide variety of extracurricular activities. ms brookes asserts that she has been highly supportive in promoting and preparing the children to spend time with mr russell. she believes that the reason for the deterioration in his relationship with the children is attributable to him introducing his new partner to the children and that, at times, he has restrained the girls.[22]
203 in interview with both x and y, ms r reported that they spoke fondly of their mother. both children expressed significant levels of negativity about their father and ms n. x reported as follows: he would prefer to spend 2 – 3 hours with her father at a playground. she spoke about enjoying going out to places with her father but does not want ms n to come with them. she said she enjoyed being out in public with her father because being around other people helps her feel safe as she knows her father won’t hurt her if there are other people around.[23]
204 y expressed similar preferences. however, in ms r’s assessment, the factors shaping these preferences echoed the concerns of ms brookes. in this context, ms r wrote as follows:
how would a child of y’s age have an awareness of her parent’s communication issues unless she has been included in or made privy to this information? similarly, is y’s knowledge about the father’s financial contributions. being exposed to this information is harmful to repairing and promoting a relationship between the children and their father. furthermore, the child’s belief that she cannot travel in anyone’s car, other than her mother’s, further impedes the children having a relationship with their father.[24]
205 in the observed interaction process, ms r was impressed with the mother’s capacity to engage with and manage the children’s behaviour. she described both x and y as being relaxed and animated with their mother, whom they each sought out. ms brookes was reported to skilfully de-escalate conflict between the children and to use redirection, warm admonishment and reasoning in her management of them.
206 this confirms my assessment, one which interestingly is also held by mr russell, that ms brookes is an excellent and skilful parent. it is noteworthy that she is able to manage the children’s behaviour, in the unfamiliar setting of ms r’s rooms with aplomb and in the manner approved of by ms v. something mr russell and ms r could not accomplish on an earlier occasion. it is also apparent that she is able to manage their behaviour in a variety of other settings, particularly therapeutic ones. equally noteworthy is the fact that she is disinclined to provide any such assistance to mr russell.
207 ms r was not able to observe the children interact with mr russell because they declined to meet with him at her rooms but rather ran away. in this regard, x was noted to strongly influence y and the process of running away to be more playful than anything else and certainly not a response to distress. in this context, x misbehaved and was rebuked by ms r firmly.
208 ms r’s evaluation of the family can be summarised as follows: it was imperative that the children were unfettered in order to experience a meaningful level of relationship with both of their parents, the current arrangement was not working and did not achieve any near such a beneficial outcome, the children were aware of their mother’s negative feelings for their father, this lack of relationship with their father could create a psychological crisis for the children, in order for the children to have the required level of relationship with their father, the current care arrangement needed to change.
209 for obvious reasons, such a change of care arrangements would, in ms r’s opinion, represent a significant step and, as such, should not be made lightly. necessarily, it encompassed significant dangers, which can be summarised as follows: ms brookes had been the children’s primary carer for the entirety of their lives. necessarily there would be a significant risk that a change of care would be emotionally traumatising for them, however, if the children’s attachment to their mother was a secure one, it was possible for the children to transition successfully and securely attach to their father notwithstanding the disruption, the success of such a transition was likely to depend to a significant degree on the insight of the father, his capacity to be reflective and attuned to the children and the availability of intensive professional support, in this context, the father was essentially untested and it may well be the case that the reality of full-time parenting may be more than he and ms n could manage, it was also unknowable whether the children would settle into mr russell’s care and impossible to predict whether they would settle into his care, x and y’s oppositional behaviour might settle, with a change in care but equally possible was the possibility that their defiant and destructive behaviours would escalate, given her asd, any change in x’s care was likely to be particularly problematic so far as she was concerned, given her need for predictability and structure in her routine, another significant risk factor was the danger that the children would harbour feelings of anger and resentment for their father at their perception that their mother had been abandoned through his agency. ms brookes was likely to portray herself to the children as the father’s victim in this regard, the children’s relationship with their mother remained of central importance to the children’s emotional well-being and sense of identity. how this could be managed effectively, given ms brookes’ essentially negative feelings for mr russell was highly problematic, as a consequence, the possibility of further conflict between the parties – emotionally hazardous to x and y – remained high.
210 at the end of this summary of pro’s and con’s, ms r opined that a change of residence was unlikely to resolve the issues in dispute between the parties, given the mother’s likely distress and opposition to it, which would heighten the children’s own emotional distress.
211 in these circumstances, perhaps counter-intuitively, she considered that a shared care regime might be the best mechanism to end the perennial dispute between the parties. she concedes that this would be far from ideal given the mother’s antipathy for mr russell. at best, this would result in a process of parallel parenting.
212 parallel parenting is a process in which the parents concerned have no direct interaction with one another and the children pass between them with as little emotional friction as possible. the aim being to ensure that the children concerned have as an equality of relationship with each of their parents. in this context, it is usually recommended that any information about the children’s care, which needs to be shared, be provided between the parents in a strictly formal or mechanical way.
213 ms r’s formal recommendations were as follows: for the family to engage in an eight week reunification programme. if ms brookes behaviour is observed to be unsupportive of this programme then this programme is to be abandoned and the children to be placed in the full time care of the father. the author would recommend ms b. at the end of this programme the children are then to reside full time with mr russell for a period of 8 weeks. during this time, the children to have daily supervised telephone calls with ms brookes for the first two weeks. for there to be no more than one phone call per day and for this phone call to last no longer than five minutes. it is up to ms brookes to terminate the call at the five minute mark. this phone call needs to be scheduled and clearly articulated to the children. these telephone calls are to be terminated if the mother is undermining of mr russell or of the care arrangement. for mr russell to engage with any specialists involved with the children during this time for support. after the 8 weeks, for the children to commencing spending alternate weekends in ms brookes care from the friday after school, or 3.15pm if a non-school day, to the monday morning school drop off, or 3.15pm if a non-school day. if the children’s behaviour indicates that they are managing this arrangement, then, after three months, that the children start to also spend the monday night in the care of the mother on that alternate week. for the days with the mother to increase incremental every three months until the care arrangement is equally split with the transitions day being friday. this needs to be overseen/reviewed and assessed by a child and family consultant, with the increase in the time the children spend with their mother only occurring if recommended by the child and family consultant. the author would recommend ms aa. if ms brookes sabotages or remains unsupportive of the children’s time with mr russell, then for her time with the children to be suspended indefinitely.[25]
214 essentially, ms r advocates that the children and their parents go through an intensive program with ms b, over an eight week period, to prepare for the shared care regime. the chief unknown factors being whether or not ms brookes would be prepared to acquiesce with such a process, if she did not, what would be the response of the children, whether ms b was open to providing the support recommended, and who would pay for it.
215 at the time of this recommendation, it was unknown what would be the mechanics of ms b’ involvement and indeed whether the parties themselves would countenance it. as previously indicated, the engagement of ms b to provide answers to these questions has further delayed the case.
216 in cross-examination, ms r agreed with mr anderson’s categorisation of the mother as a high functioning individual in the context of her parenting of the children, which had been observed in her interaction with the children and the fact that she was able to facilitate their regular attendance at school and at other activities. given her failure to easily provide the children to their father, ms r accepted that it was a possibility that this situation had come about because she was simply not prepared to do so.
217 later, ms r indicated her opinion that it was probable that ms brookes was malignly influencing the children against their father, the most cogent example of which was the children parroting to her of mr russell he’s not our dad, which was not congruent with other warm interactions which she (ms r) had observed between father and children.
218 in this context, ms r accepted that ms brookes was not likely to cease her actions in this regard or experience some sort of epiphany that her behaviour in this regard was helpful neither to herself or the children. rather, the prospect of her re-doubling her efforts, in this regard, was a possible outcome.
219 ms r, whilst indicating that she had seen plenty of extreme behaviour, from children, in the course of her practice, accepted that what she understood to be the behaviour of the children in this case, with their father, to fall into the category of extreme dysregulated behaviour. the question arising being why did the children behave in this way.
220 in this context, ms r indicated that the children in this case were very emotionally attuned to their mother’s feelings and so, by necessary implication, would be well aware of their mother’s deep seated animosity for their father. as such, she did not rule out the possibility that the children, in their misbehaviour, in the father’s home, were acting at their mother’s tacit direction.
221 in answer to a question put by me, ms r indicated that a parent who, either directly or indirectly, led a child to believe that he or she should behave badly towards the other parent was tantamount to child abuse. clearly the tacit condoning of such behaviour is not likely to assist a child to become an individual who is able to regulate his or her emotions in a suitable way to enable him or her to function in society. in addition, ms r considered it emotionally abusive in the sense of leading to the thwarting of a child’s right to have a positive relationship with both parents.
222 also in cross-examination by counsel for the father, ms r was of the view that y was likely to have sufficient emotional resilience to be able to transition to her father’s care, for the eight week therapy she had recommended in order to secure what could be termed a more normative relationship with her father.
223 x, because of her asd, was in a different category and ms r conceded that she would be extraordinarily distressed by such a change and, as a consequence she might act out in an extremely violent and dangerous way. as such, by necessary implication, ms r was less confident in this recommendation as it pertained to x. clearly, x is also able to influence y’s behaviour to a marked degree.
224 ms r was not in a position to predict when such behaviour would cease and, as such, it could not be regarded as improbable that mr russell would be forced to give up on the process and return the children to ms brookes, an outcome which ms r categorised as potentially damaging.
more recent events
225 as previously indicated, the three days set aside to hear the case were inadequate. as a consequence, the case had to be adjourned prior to ms r being cross-examined by counsel for the mother, ms horvat. in these circumstances, it was appropriate for the court to revisit the earlier interim orders pursuant to which mr russell was spending time with x and y, as from both parties’ perspectives, but for different reasons, those orders were not working.
226 ms brookes was able to see the videotaped footage of the father interacting with the children in his home, which demonstrated some skill in managing the children’s behaviour in a gentle fashion. she told me that she had been impressed with this and it had caused a change her to reassess her position in the case.
227 in particular, given that i had been told that ms brookes vehemently rejected the proposition that she was actively influencing the children against their father and it has her position that she wanted the children to spend extended periods of time with their father, including overnight time, i was hopeful that there could be a reset or normalisation of handover arrangements in the context of a regime of overnight weekend time.
228 in this context, on 30 april 2021 orders were made changing handover arrangement in an attempt to see if this would alleviate the endemic problems. in particular, it was ordered that mr russell collect the children at their school in the absence of ms brookes. i requested the principal to assist as much as possible in this process. it was also agreed that the children would be returned to their mother at a hotel carpark in suburb g, approximately mid-way between their respective homes.
229 the first visit was scheduled to occur on 7 may 2021. it was cancelled at the instigation of the principal on the basis that x had provided a note to her teacher which indicated, in effect, that mr russell had been hurting her. as a consequence the principal made a report to police. in due course, the police investigated the matter but found no substance to the allegation. i have not been provided with a copy of the note in question but apparently it stated that x reported her father had bitten her ear, hit her in the stomach and thrown her across a room.
230 the next visit was scheduled for 14 may 2021. the principal determined that the handover would occur in her office. ms m came along to assist. the children resisted going with their father and the principal was uncomfortable with him physically carrying the children to his car. in an attempt to break the impasse, the principal telephoned the mother and put her on speaker, who declined to talk to the children directly. the father deposes as follows as to how the handover concluded:
after some time (over an hour), another teacher took over from the principal and he said to the children they could either walk to the car or be picked up. i picked up x and attempted to place her into the car but was physically not able to get her into my car even with the paternal grandmother’s assistance and at this point i asked the school to contact the mother to come and collect the children as it was only traumatising them. at 4.56pm the mother arrived and took the children home.[26]
231 a more successful handover took place at the neutral park the next day, as the mother herself placed the children in the father’s car. thereafter the father and ms n took the children to the cc park for lunch, where they ate sushi and frozen yoghurt. the market is convenient to a movement class the children attend. the father elected to return the children early so that the session could end on a positive note. however, it is his evidence that the children still resisted getting in his car, indicated that they wanted to go home, behaved poorly, and referred to him as mr russell or other names.
232 as matters have progressed, this pattern of a short period of day time contact, with collection and return at the carpark, with lunch at the market in conjunction with the movement class has proven to be the least traumatic, for all concerned, including mr russell, ms n and the children, for the children to spend some time with their father.
233 a period of overnight time at mr russell’s home, which occurred on 21 may 2021 was particularly trying. the children refused to eat dinner, including takeaway. they refused to get into their pyjamas or brush their teeth. this culminating with the children sleeping on the floor, under their beds, still in their school uniforms. the next day they refused to eat breakfast. the only respite provided from this oppositional behaviour is when the children attend a dance class, where they participate freely and take instruction.
234 given this experience and to avoid further trauma to the children, mr russell elected to forego his additional time with the children and it was agreed he would spend time with them from 12.30pm until 2.30pm with handover to take place at either their dance class or the carpark. this was confirmed in an order of 25 june 2021.
235 given this serious deterioration in the children’s behaviour, mr russell provided further oral evidence regarding his experience with the children. he reported that they pinched, bit and kicked him and ms n causing them each significant bruises and bite marks. in these circumstances, the school authorities had made it abundantly clear that they would not agree to handover occurring on school premises.
236 the major problem remained the extreme physical resistance the children displayed to getting into his car and their dangerous and dysregulated behaviour when in the vehicle, combined with a fear of coming to his house and eating anything provided to them.
237 notwithstanding these extreme difficulties, mr russell maintains his position that the children should be placed in his immediate care. in this context, he deposed that his employer had indicated a willingness to allow him to reduce his hours to 9.30 am until 2.30 pm, which would permit him to work only during school hours. he also produced evidence that he had a significant amount of accrued leave.[27]
238 in the context of this escalation in the children’s oppositional behaviour, ms r was questioned about whether she still maintained her view that a shared care regime might conceivably be an option in the case. she was also cross-examined about other conceivable outcomes in the case and their various pros and cons. these options can be summarised as follows: maintenance of the current slender thread between the father and the children through a regime of brief weekly time, in the hope that the children, through the effluxion of time, would grow gradually to have a more normal relationship with their father. the chief benefit of this option being that it would not cause the children any continuance of the stress arising from being a state of hyper-arousal, when in the father’s care. the chief deficit being that it might lead to the extinction of the father/child relationship because of insufficient temporal nurture, the children spend conventional periods of time, with their father, whilst continuing to live predominantly with their mother. the chief deficit of this being that it might continue the children’s distress and exposure to the mother’s negative narrative of their father. in this context, intensive family therapy be invoked to support the children spending time with their father and to modify their oppositional behaviour to him, an immediate change of primary care to the father again in the context of intensive reunification counselling. the chief deficit of this being that it necessarily was an extreme intervention, which might have dangerous and unforeseen implications, not the least of which was what would happen when the mother was re-introduced to the children.
in the context of options two and three, significant issues arise as to the costs of the therapeutic interventions and who of the parties should pay for them.
239 in his continued cross-examination, mr anderson explored with ms r the worsening behaviour of the children, which was occurring whilst the case was on-going and whilst ms brookes was ostensibly under the scrutiny of the court. in this context, ms r accepted that, if ms brookes was clandestinely working to encourage the children to oppose their father, she was hardly likely to desist once the scrutiny of the court was removed, which militated against options one and two.
240 ms r was also asked to opine why the children had behaved in what she acknowledged was a quite extraordinary manner. she indicated her view that it was likely a function of the highly conflicted relationship between their parents, which caused them to have a level of psychological distress at the prospect of having a relationship with the secondary parent if they had been exposed to or experienced a negative narrative from the other parent.
241 at a later stage, whilst being cross-examined by ms horvat, ms r indicated her view that the children were acutely aware of the mother’s negative view of the father, even if ms brookes remained silent. in her opinion, the absence of positive behaviour or conversations about the other parent were just as telling for the child as providing negative comments. what is clear to me is that there is no realistic prospect of there being any improvement in the parties’ relationship with one another.
242 ms r accepted that the children’s behaviour was likely attributable to one or three scenarios, which can be summarised as follows: they had been exposed to some species of physical neglect or harm in their father’s household. one possibility of which was the imposition of the bear hug by mr russell and ms n. in these circumstances, the children had a rational reasons not to want to spend time with their father, not attributable to ms brookes, x’s asd was the primary reason that she behaved in the dysregulated way in which she did and she was able to influence how y behaved. accordingly, ms brookes had no significant influence in the children’s behaviour and their behaviour was innate to them, there was some major deficit or influence in the mother’s household which caused them to resist their father, which could summarised as oppositional/defiant syndrome by proxy.
243 ms r conceded that there might be some over-lap between scenarios two and three but the most likely explanation was that the children were aligned with the mother’s negative narrative of their father. ms r opined that, if this was the case, it had the potential to be harmful for them as such a constant state of hyper-arousal would by psychologically damaging for them in a variety of ways.
244 in particular, the children would be damaged by being provided with a false narrative of their father, as a person who hurt them, whilst he should be protecting them, leading to them conceivably having a distorted sense of identity and perhaps a difficulty in making secure relationships in maturity and having a sufficient quotient of emotional resilience. essentially, the children would be left with a distorted and incomplete picture of their paternal family and might perceive their father had abandoned them.
245 if the mother was actively influencing the children to act out against their father through some process of external manipulation or provision of a false narrative about him, ms r’s view remained that this amounted to serious emotional abuse of the children and should be ceased by drastic court action.
246 given what had occurred recently, ms r was less sanguine about the parties, with assistance working towards a shared care regime. she accepted that the mother was unlikely, at present, to be a willing participant in such a scheme and it was unlikely to lead to a cessation of litigation in future. clearly long-term exposure to the endemic conflict between the parties was not conducive to an advancement of the children’s best interests.
247 she was also concerned about the current weak bond between the father and the children and feared that it might not be resilient enough to sustain an on-going relationship between x, y and their father. given what she regarded as mr russell’s love of the children, she did not consider a severance of relationship would be in the children’s best interests.
248 ms r was also concerned that a regime which saw the children spending one or two days per fortnight with their father in the context of the children remaining oppositional with all the emotional arousal this entailed was
249 in these circumstances, ms r was of the view that, given the status of the evidence, as it had been disclosed to her, the least bad option was that the children should transition into the exclusive care of their father immediately and after about eight weeks or so, arrangements made for the children to begin to interact with their mother. this was characterised as the moratorium with involvement with mother being phased back in.
250 however, such an outcome would only be viable in conjunction with intensive therapy, to be provided two to three times per week, ideally in the children’s home in its initial phases. in this context, ms r posited ms b as being a practitioner who could provide such therapy.
251 in addition, ms r opined that such an outcome could only be recommended if the children had an extensive level of relationship with their mother given her previous role as their primary carer. this would require the children spending three to four nights per fortnight in their mother’s care.
252 for obvious reasons, ms horvat, in her cross-examination of ms r focused on the problems likely to arise from the third and most immediately drastic intervention. ms r has had a lengthy involvement with the family. in this context, she accepted the proposition that the evidence indicated the children appeared to be successful in most aspects of their lives – school, play, friendship circles, medical and therapeutic interventions – the one exception being their relationship with their father. she also accepted that these successes could only be attributable to ms brookes’ parenting of the children.
253 ms r also conceded that she would not support the change of residence outcome if the court found that the children were genuinely fearful of their father or their behaviour could be largely attributable to x’s asd. in this context, it was suggested that the use of the bear hug was not recommended by ms v and ms r herself had limited experience and expertise within the field of asd. ms r conceded both these points. however, she stood by her recommendation of the bear hug method if it prevented a child coming to harm.
254 the problem, i have, in this regarded, as previously noted, is that i have no direct evidence from ms v herself, particularly how she would recommend dealing with a child in a state of extreme opposition as described by mr russell, particularly if there was the potential for the child to come to harm if not restrained. at the same time, it does not appear farfetched to assert that a child, such as x, would not exactly warm to being subject to the technique.
255 however, ms r considered the evidence that the children had been actually physically hurt by their father to be scant for a number of reasons. firstly, she had observed signs of mutual comfort and support between mr russell and the children at very stages of her involvement with the family.
256 secondly, the very nature of the defiance, which the children exhibited towards mr russell and ms n indicated that they were not frightened of him. essentially, an abusive parent will abuse a misbehaving child and there was no evidence that this had occurred. i agree with this assessment.
257 however, ms r conceded to ms horvat that the bond between the father and x and y lacked strength and it would take a great deal of work to build a bond between father and children. her view, in this regard, was strengthened by the descriptions of the extreme behaviour displayed by the children since april.
258 in addition, she consider it probable that all these difficulties were likely exacerbated by the children being quite possibly aware that the legal proceedings between their parents had become more contested and the idea of them leaving their mother’s care had been mooted as a possible outcome. for obvious reasons, if the children had been either actually advised of this scenario or, in some way, had reached it by an independent process of intuition, it is likely to explain the escalation in their misconduct.
259 in these circumstances, ms r agreed with my categorisation of the case as a no win situation for the children, with all of the possible outcome being disastrous for the children. in particular, ms r considered it unlikely the mother would cooperate in any process directed towards the children living predominantly with the father. in addition, the reaction of the children to such a process was also highly uncertain, given that it involved them being removed from the person who had hitherto been their primary, if not sole, source of emotional support.
260 in the concluding portion of her cross-examination, ms r summarised the difficulty in the children being removed from their mother and being placed in their father’s care as follows: the mother would be extremely resistant to such an outcome and would do all that she could to undermine it, it would not be in the children’s long term best interests to be excised from their mother, if the mother had been tacitly encouraging the children to act out when moving to their father, she was hardly likely to stop, if the children moved into his car, how the children reacted to this volatile scenario was difficult to predict, this outcome, in her view, was the only viable way in which the children could have a relationship with both of their parents, this was because mr russell, in her assessment, was capable of being supportive of the children having a full relationship with their mother as he was able to identify positive attributes referrable to her. the same could not be said of ms brookes vis-à-vis mr russell and his relationship with the children, the financial implications of the therapy required, which was indispensable, were highly problematic along with the logistics of it being provided with the regularity and intensity required, nonetheless she recommended the outcome with a heavy heart.
261 in all these circumstances, i invited the parties to consider how they wanted to proceed in the matter and whether ms b or some other expert should be engaged and, if so, whether he or she should be called to give evidence.
ms b’s evidence
262 ms b is registered as a psychologist and a member of the college of forensic psychologist. she holds a masters of forensic psychology and has been in private practice since 2015. prior to that time, she has been employed by various south australian government departments, including the department of correctional services, child & adolescent mental health services and the adelaide youth training centre. she has worked with young people over a period of twenty years, particularly in a juvenile justice setting.
263 ms b has not met the children or the parties in the proceedings. rather, she has been provided with the various reports of ms r. it is her evidence, which has not been challenged, that she has expertise in assisting families involving reunification between a parent and child including in the context of reversal of primary care.
264 ms b charges her services at the rate of $200.00 per hour and $267.00 for reading time. in order to assess what she could offer the family in the particular matter, she advises that she would need to meet with the parties individually, in the absence of the children, for one to two sessions. then meet with x and y for a further two to four sessions.
265 accordingly it would cost between $600.00 and $1,000.00 for ms b to assess what she could offer the parents. she would then need to construct a plan on which both parents agreed. she described this as a dynamic process requiring continual modification. in her affidavit filed on 5 july 2021, she indicated that if she was able to achieve success in her reunification of the children with their father, it would be unnecessary to consider changing the children’s residence. however, if the process was unsuccessful, she considered it would be necessary for the court to consider what to do next, as she was not in a position to make any concrete recommendation in this regard.
266 the overall effect of ms b’s oral evidence to the court, provided on 12 october 2021, was of a professional person who was extremely guarded about making any concrete recommendations and who saw extraordinary levels of difficulties in the case, particularly in the context of changing the children’s principle place of residence. these difficulties included the following: x’s asd which rendered more likely to struggle with such a change, the children’s primary attachment to their mother and the strength and positive attributes of this relationship, x’s likely grief reaction if separated from her mother, which would be traumatic for the child and likely to cause her to internalise responsibility for causing her mother distress. this had the potential to have long term implications for her mental health, including as an adult.
267 ms b was vehemently opposed to the court moving the children into the care of their father and then co-opting an expert, such as herself, to explain to them what had happened afterwards and why. she frankly deposed that this would be an act of madness. if it was to occur, ms b opined that she would need to work with the parents first to flesh out the dynamics of the change. in this context, although she indicated she had no personal knowledge of ms brookes’ personality, she conceded that it was unlikely that she would cooperate with such a process.
268 however, regardless of how any such transition occurred, ms b considered that it would very tough on all concerned. the children would need a lot of emotional support, as would mr russell in dealing with the children. the children would need to be isolated from their mother for between eight and twelve weeks. how they would react to this period was unknowable, certainly not by ms b, given she had not met the children concerned.
269 ms b deposed that she did not think funding for her services would be available to either party through the ndis or a general medical practitioner mental health referral. finally, ms b indicated that before the court gave any thought to her involvement in the case, particularly in the context of a change of care, she would want to have conducted her preliminary assessment of the family and to have reported back.
270 in this context, she deposed that her primary focus is on the children, and that making sure that this decision does no more harm to their lives. it being entirely possible, from what she had been advised of the family that the children would be too traumatised by a change of residence to make it a viable outcome in the case.
the parties’ final proposals
271 for all sorts of reasons, the case took longer to reach the stage at which it must come to me for decisions. the delays have arisen because of the pandemic emergency, mr russell aspiration that the parties would reach a consensual outcome, and the more recent polarisation of the parties’ respective positions following the escalation in the resistant behaviours of the children.
272 in this context, i invited each party to provide a detailed minute of the final orders sought by him or her. the father’s position is that, pending delivery of judgment, the existing arrangement for him to spend 4½ hours each saturday continue. this is not controversial.
273 his primary position thereafter is as follows: he have sole parental responsibility for the children, the parties engage ms b forthwith to facilitate a change of residence of the children, the mother bear the costs of her attendance on ms b. the father bear his costs of such attendance, not before 31 january 2022, the mother deliver the children to a nominated court child expert and with the assistance of ms r, the children be placed in the father’s care, if the mother fails to comply with such an order, a recovery order be made, the children not spend time with their mother for a period of twelve weeks and the mother be restrained from approaching the children, after twelve weeks the children begin to spend gradually increasing time with their mother commencing with three hours at a play café then moving to: seven hours on each sunday for eight weeks, alternate weekends 10.00am saturday until 5.00pm sunday for a further period of eight weeks a longer alternate weekend for after school on friday until the commencement of school the following monday, after 24 weeks, school holiday time and special occasions time start, in a conventional manner, if the mother fails to return the children in compliance with these orders a self-executing order be made suspending the mother’s time with the children.
274 as an alternative to this proposal, in the event the court is not prepared to countenance a compulsory change in the children’s living arrangements, mr russell proposes the following: equal shared parental responsibility be conferred on the parties for x and y, the children live with their mother, the children spend time with their father from the conclusion of their dance class on saturday (or 9.00am if the class is not in session) until 5.00pm the following sunday and at any other times as agreed between the parties in writing, from 1 january 2024, if the father so elects, the children spend time with him on extended alternate weekends during school terms and for half of all school holiday periods, handover occur at either dance class or the e hotel carpark in suburb g, there be a formal mechanism for both parents to receive educational and health information concerning the children, mutual non-denigration orders.
275 the mother has only one position, in respect of final orders, which can be summarised as follows: the parties take all necessary steps to engage ms b to provide them and the children with re-unification counselling directed towards assisting the children to transition between the parents, of as long as ms b is prepared to provide such therapy and for it to be at mr russell’s sole expense, the parties be conferred with equal shared parental responsibility, the children live with her, pending the provision of re-unification counselling, the children spend time with their father pursuant to the existing saturday regime, at the completing of the reunification counselling, the children spend time with their father on alternate weekends, during school terms from after school on friday until 5.00 pm the following sunday, for three overnight periods during each short school holiday, for four overnight periods in alternate weeks during the end of year long school holiday period, on designated special occasions. handovers occur at the children’s school or the e hotel carpark, she would consent to the mechanisms by which the father is to be provided with information concerning the children’s education and health needs, an injunction be made restraining the parties from using physical discipline on the children or denigrating the other. in this context, she would not seek to restrain the father from driving the children in his car, which was her previous position.
276 when i saw the parties’ respective written proposals, i confess i was somewhat perplexed because at first blush, the mother’s position was not vastly removed from the father’s alternative if subsidiary position, other than in respect of the engagement of ms b. in these circumstances, i invited the parties to confer to see if there was a midway course which could be agreed upon.
277 i was told that no such accommodation could be reached. as i understand it, it is the father’s position that he doubts the mother’s bona fides regarding the orders she proposes given the difficulties which have ensued over the last year. he fears that if he agrees to the proposal, it will be doomed to failure because it lacks the mother’s genuine commitment to it. in addition, he cannot afford to engage ms b, as the mother proposes.
278 in these circumstances, his position is that the litigation needs to be finalised one way or the other. his counsel, mr anderson describes his client as totally exhausted, in both an emotional and financial sense by the litigation which has consumed the last four years of his life. i can well understand his position, particularly given he has funded the proceedings, whilst the mother has not.
279 apart from the engagement of ms b, the mother has not proposed any mechanism to achieve the outcome which she proposes. in addition, in my assessment, the success of ms b in easing the problems of the children transitioning between their parents cannot be gainsaid. in my view, whether the children’s school can be persuaded to be the location for handover is an issue which has not been recently examined before me.
280 in respect of the father’s alternate position – that he be able, at his election, to move to a conventional time spending regime when x is aged 12 years and 10 months and y is aged 11 years and four months – no evidence has been canvassed. i presume that mr russell hopes that after an extended period of restricted time, his relationship with the children will be normalised and their behaviour more stable as a consequence of greater familiarity with him.
281 no doubt this is proposed as a non-confrontational and child focussed response to the difficulties in the case and one which will spare the children from further trauma. clearly, it is not mr russell’s preference but again, i can understand why he would see it as a possible mechanism to bring about an organic finalisation of the case.
legal principle applicable
282 part vii of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”) deals with orders relating to children. before making any particular parenting order, the court must regard the best interests of any child concerned as the paramount consideration.[28]
283 part vii is subject to a number of principles and objects set out in section 60b. these, if you like, provide the philosophical underpinning of the act as it relates to decision-making so far as children are concerned. the court is obliged to ensure that a child’s best interests are served by ensuring it considers various fundamental principles. i will provide each of them verbatim:  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles, which underpin these objects, are set out in section 60b(2) and are as follows: (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles, which underpin these objects, are set out in section 60b(2) and are as follows: (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles, which underpin these objects, are set out in section 60b(2) and are as follows: (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles, which underpin these objects, are set out in section 60b(2) and are as follows: (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
the principles, which underpin these objects, are set out in section 60b(2) and are as follows: (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
284 what is interesting to note about these various principles and objects is the fact that it is children who have rights under the legislation and parents who have obligations and duties. in particular, the benefits likely to accrue to a child of having a meaningful involvement with a parent must be viewed within the context of the child’s overall best interests, which consist of a number of considerations and factors.
285 the act, picking up on section 60b, provides a specific list of matters, which the court must take into account in determining how a child’s best interests are to be served in the making of any parenting order. they are contained in section 60cc.
286 section 60cc creates two classes of considerations, which apply to the court’s determination of how a child’s interests will be best served in proceedings before it. they are designated as primary considerations of which there are two and additional considerations, of which there are some fourteen in number.
287 in general terms, given their close connection to the objects and principles contained in section 60b the primary considerations are to be given more weight in the court’s deliberations. however, given the idiosyncratic issues arising in any particular case, one or more of the additional considerations may come to the fore.
288 the two primary considerations, set out in section 60cc(2)(a) and (b), are as follows:   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.
289 in the past, these considerations were not formally ranked in regards to one another. they are now. as a result of the insertion of section 60cc(2a) into the act, the court is now directed, in applying the primary considerations, to give greater weight to section 60cc(2)(b), which is the primary consideration relating to the need to protect children from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to or exposed to neglect, abuse or family violence.
290 in the words of the relevant explanatory memorandum “where child safety is a concern, this new provision will provide the court with clear legislative guidance that protecting the child from harm is the priority consideration.” future protective issues for a child are the court’s priority.
291 accordingly, the legislature has directed the court, in respect of how a child’s best interests are to be secured, to give pre-eminence to protective concerns raised in respect of the child’s exposure to abuse, neglect and family violence.
292 although the court cannot overlook the benefits likely to accrue to a child from meaningfully interacting with a parent, it must give greater weight to protecting children. necessarily, how this balance is to be achieved, to secure an outcome consistent, to the maximum extent, with the best interests of the child, must depend on the idiosyncratic circumstances of each case.
293 the central themes of mr russell’s case turn on both protective concerns and the benefits likely to accrue to x and y from having a meaningful level of relationship with him. firstly, it is his position that the mother by restricting his relationship with x and y and manipulating their behaviour so that they act out in the extraordinarily disruptive way described by him, ms n, ms m and ms r, is abusive of the children.
294 secondly, as he is the children’s father and loves them deeply, he has a central role in their lives, which must be considered fundamental to their best interests. axiomatically, it cannot be in their best interest if he has only a truncated relationship with them or one which is dysfunctional in nature.
295 it is position that what has occurred over the past four years or so, between him, x and y, cannot be properly described as a meaningful level of relationship, given the legislative criteria applicable. he also contends that, given the children’s burgeoning sense of identity and growing maturity, they need to have a proper level of relationship with the various aspects of their paternal family, which include not only him but also their paternal grandmother and half-sibling.
296 the aspects of a child’s life, in which a parent can be meaningfully involved, are, for obvious reasons, potentially multifarious. they include “fun” activities on holidays and weekends – essentially interacting with their parents in a relaxed setting – as well as the day to day reality of the child’s life, such as supervising homework and bedtimes, imposing day to day discipline, and collection and delivery to school and sports training – essentially spending time with parents in a more mundane set of situations.
297 in this context, mr russell contends that the various regime, which have been put in place since 2017 have been both highly artificial and emotionally detrimental to the children. essentially, there has been nothing meaningful, in the sense of beneficial, in many of his interactions with the children.[29]
298 rather, when he has interacted with x and y, frequently those interactions have been traumatic, not only for him but the children. it is his case that the evidence available to the court indicates that it is the mother who is causing this lamentable state of affairs and therefore a radical change is required to protect the children in order to satisfy the two primary considerations stipulated by the act.
299 the expression abuse in respect of a child is defined in section 4(1) of the act. it means:  an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child, or (b) a person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child.
300 on the basis of the evidence of ms r, it is the father’s case that though her influence, the mother has actively precipitated the children to behave in the extremely dysregulated fashion described by him, ms n and others, and in so doing is causing x and y to suffer serious psychological harm in the sense envisaged by the act.
301 ms brookes’ case also centres on issues relating to the potential exposure of the children to abuse. it is her position that any process which results in the transition of the children into mr russell’s care would cause them to suffer a serious level of not only psychological harm but also put them at risk of suffering some form of physical harm.
302 necessarily, if they go to live with their father, x and y will be confused and possibly angry. they may internalise these feeling and grieve for their mother. they will also, quite possibly, act out these powerful emotions in all sorts of unpredictable ways. they may physically attempt to resist their father or attempt to abscond from his home. they will be sad and, as has happened before, may refuse nourishment.
303 all these things, individually or in combination, possibly with other behaviours which has not as yet been considered, must constitute abuse of the children and therefore be contrary to their fundamental best interests, regardless of issues relating to the status of their relationship with their father. in this context, no doubt, she relies on the provisions contained in section 60cc(2a) which prioritises protective concerns over the qualitative aspects of parental relationships.
304 accordingly, each party asserts that the other parent or their respective proposals for the care of x and y represents some sort of risk to the children. as such, the court must attempt to assess the degree of risk arising from the probative evidence mustered by each of the parties, whilst at the same time, examining the qualitative aspects of the children’s relationship with each of them.
305 in deiter & deiter,[30] the full court has directed that, in assessing the degree of risk incumbent in any particular parenting scenario, the court must look to the degree of probability that a harmful event will occur in future and what will be its severity, to any individual, particularly any child, who will be potentially affected by it.
306 essentially, the court is required to assess risk and put in place a proportionate response to the degree of risk involved. risk arises in every aspect of human endeavour. no individual’s life, including the life of a child, can be rendered entirely free of all risk. in this court, as with life, it is a question of balancing and assessing the degree of risk arising, on an objective basis.
307 the court is frequently called upon to assess all manner of potential risks to the children concerned in proceedings coming before it. the court cannot defer its assessment of risk because it is unable to make definitive findings that a harmful event did or did not happen. in addition, it cannot abrogate its responsibility to assess risk because of deficiencies in the evidence provided to it. [31]
308 the full court in slater & light expressed the task of assessing risk in the following terms:
the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term ‘unacceptable risk’. it is an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable.[32]
309 in the present case, the court must attempt to assess what is the level of risk likely to arise for x and y if they move into their father’s care, with and without the safeguards implicit in the support possibly available from ms b and in the context of the children’s previously reported behaviour, its assessment of the father’s and ms n’s capacity to support them in such a transition and given ms brookes’ likely opposition to such an intervention.
310 it must determine whether the risks arising are so extreme and prescient that for the court to take them would be objectively unacceptable, regardless of any implication arising relating to other aspects of their best interests, particularly the quality of their relationship with their father and other members of their paternal family.
311 other criteria, relating to how the court is directed to consider how the best interests of any child concerned may be served by any order which the court makes, are set out in s 60cc(3). these criteria are categorised as additional considerations.
312 there are fourteen criteria, including, pursuant to section 60cc(3)(m), the court is empowered to have regard to any other fact or circumstance which it considers relevant. this is to ensure that the infinite variety of individual children’s circumstances may be addressed in any order which the court makes.
313 although the court is directed to consider many factors, in discharging its duties under part vii of the act, the best interests of the children concerned remain paramount. the court’s duty is to deliver individual justice for the child affected in every case.[33]
314 in this sense, the court’s inquiry is a positive one tailored to the best interests of the particular children and not children in general.[34] as such the various factors in s 60cc are inclusive but not exclusive of one another.[35]
315 the additional considerations include such matters as any views of any child concerned, subject to maturity, the parental insight of the parties concerned, the effect of any change in the circumstances of the child concerned, the practical implications of proposed contact arrangements, the capacity of the parents to supply the educational and emotional needs of any relevant child, and the desirability of being litigation, relating to children to a close. all these considerations are germane in the present matter and will receive further evaluation in due course.
316 the primary considerations are generally to be given more emphasis, arising as they do directly from the aims and principles of the family law legislation. however, in determining the outcome of a particular case, one or more of the individual considerations may come to the fore.
317 the fundamental task for the court is to determine, bearing in mind all the considerations contained in s 60cc, and bearing in mind the overarching goals and principles contained in s 60b, what is the best outcome for any child concerned, both now and in the future.
318 because of the importance the legislation places on both parents being closely involved in their child’s life, the starting point for any parenting order is to consider whether the parents concerned should have equal shared parental responsibility for their child.[36] the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the allocation of time which a child spends with each of his or her parents.
319 the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is rebutted if it is found, on reasonable grounds, that one of the child’s parents has abused the child concerned or exposed him or her to family violence.[37]
320 the presumption is also rebutted if evidence is provided which satisfies the court that it would not be in the child’s interests for his or her parents to have such equal shared parental responsibility for the child concerned.[38]
321 the family law legislation emphasises the importance of parents being actively involved in their children’s lives – in their schooling, sporting activities and recreation, and their daily routine, as well as special occasions – so long as this involvement is commensurate with protecting children from harm.
322 the mother is open to the conferral of equal shared parental responsibility. this proposal leaves the father somewhat aghast, as the major threads of his case are that he has effectively been excised as a parental presence in the lives of x and y and has not been consulted about issues relating to their health, education and long term development.
323 his primary position is that he should be conferred with sole parental responsibility for the children on the proviso they live primarily with him. otherwise, he is open to the conferral of equal shared parental responsibility and all the obligations which go along with that.
324 section 61da deals with the allocation of parental responsibility in respect of a child. it does not deal directly with more practical aspects of a child’s life, particularly the amount and type of time a child spends with his or her parents or where a child is to live. such matters are dealt with by s 65daa.
325 by application of s 65daa, if the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility applies in respect of a child, the court is required to consider firstly whether the child concerned should spend equal periods of time with both his or her parents, provided such an outcome is both likely to be in the child’s best interests and reasonably practicable.
326 if the court rejects equal time, it is then required to consider the child spending ‘substantial and significant’ periods of time with each of his or her parents. again, this outcome is subject to consideration of the child’s best interests and reasonable practicality.
327 the expression substantial and significant time is defined in the family law act 1975 (cth) at s 65daa(3). it means time that allows a child to spend time with a parent on both weekends and holidays and days during the working or school week.
328 more significantly, it is time that enables a parent to be involved in a child’s daily routine and in occasions and events, which have particular significance to the child. again, the aim of the legislation is to enhance the parent/child relationship through mechanisms that enable the child to spend time with a parent in a variety of settings.
329 issues of practicality are dealt with by s 65daa(5). the court is required to consider how far apart the parties’ homes are, the parties’ current and future capacity to implement shared care arrangements, the parties’ ability to communicate with one another and solve parenting problems consensually, and most importantly, the likely impact of such an arrangement on the child concerned.
330 the high court has recently considered the interplay between the question of whether it is in a child’s best interests to spend equal time with each parent (and substantial and significant time) and the question of whether such outcomes are reasonably practicable, which arises from ss 65daa(1) and (2) of the family law act. it has determined that both questions must be answered in the affirmative before an equal time order may be made (and with equal effect a substantial and significant time order).
331 the high court has held that it is a statutory pre-condition of the making of an equal time order that it is reasonably practicable for such an order to be made. this is because sections 65daa(1) and (2) are expressed in imperative terms and oblige the court to consider both questions. the affirmative answer to both being an essential jurisdictional fact before an equal time or substantial and significant time order is made.
332 accordingly, courts such as this one are directed to consider the reality of the situation which confronts parents and children not merely whether it is desirable, in the sense of facilitative of the child’s best interests alone, that an order for equal time to be spent by the child with each parent. essentially, a consideration of what is feasible for a child is of equal importance to what is desirable for that child.[39]
333 accordingly, a proper consideration of what is feasible requires the court to consider the circumstances of both parties. this is particularly so if an equal time (or a significant and substantial time) order can only come about by requiring both parents concerned to remain in (or move to) the same locale.
334 the legislative pathway, which was delineated by the full court in goode & goode [40] can be summarised as follows: the court is to consider the s 60cc matters relevant, then decide whether the presumption in s 61da should be applied or, if it is rebutted because: there are reasonable grounds to believe abuse or family violence has occurred, or in an interim matter only, it is not considered ‘appropriate’ for it to be applied, if the presumption is rebutted or found not to apply, then make the orders considered to be in the best interests of the child, again as a result of applying the relevant s 60cc factors, if the presumption does apply, decide whether it should be rebutted because it would not be in the child's best interests, if the presumption applies, consider first making an order that the children spend equal time with each parent, then second, an order that the child spend substantial and significant time with each parent unless it is contrary to the children's best interests as a result of the consideration of any relevant s 60cc matter, or is impracticable in the terms specified by s 65daa(5), if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time are considered to be in the best interests of the child, then make the orders which are considered to be in the best interests of the child when considering applicable matters in s 60cc, and even in this latter situation, it is open to the court to make an order for equal time or substantial and significant time, if the court considers it to be in the best interests of the child concerned.
335 accordingly, the dynamic of the parties’ relationship, including how well they communicate and solve problems is central to the conferral of parental responsibility in a shared or communal sense. clearly, in the present case, the parties communicate poorly, if at all and their capacity to solve the significant behavioural problems of x and y, in the context of having a viable relationship with their father, must be close to non-existent.
336 at the same time, it appears to be the case that both mr russell and ms brookes are deeply interested in all aspects of their children’s care, particularly in terms of their progress at school and how their medical and behavioural issues are approached. if only to a limited extent available to him, mr russell has also demonstrated an interest in being involved in the children’s extracurricular activities.
337 in this context, the final orders proposed by each of the parties envisage mechanisms being engaged to able the ready exchange of information about the children’s schooling and medical treatment passing between them and each of them be authorised to discuss such issues with the children’s teachers and doctors.
338 how responsibility for the parenting of a child is formally conferred upon a person, in proceedings conducted under the act, is through the making of a parenting order. parental responsibility, ‘in relation to a child, means all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in relation to children’.[41]
339 the court has authority conferred upon it, through the provisions of part vii of the act, to alter the conferral of parental responsibility on any parent or parents, which arises by reason of their status as parents of any child concerned. this is done through the mechanism of a parenting order.
340 a parenting order is an order which deals with such issues as the persons with whom a child should live, spend time and communicate with, and the persons who should have responsibility for making decisions, both significant and otherwise, about a child and the degree of consultation necessary to implement such decisions.[42]
341 pursuant to section 65c of the act, a child’s parents, the child, a child’s grandparents, or any other person concerned with the child’s care, welfare or development, may apply for a parenting order. accordingly, the applicants have legislative authority to seek the orders, which they do.
342 in addition, as a consequence of the provisions of section 65d, the court is empowered to make whatever parenting order it considers “proper”. pursuant to section 64b parental responsibility can be allocated to two or more persons.
343 clearly this provision, when considered in the light of the objects and principles underlying part vii, contained in 60b, is supportive of the concept of parents sharing parental responsibility and meeting their responsibilities concerning their children’s care, welfare and development.
344 an order which provides for shared parental responsibility requires that the parties to it consult with one another and make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about major long-term issues to do with the child or children concerned.[43]
345 major long-term issues is defined in section 4 of the act and includes issues to do with a child’s education, religious and cultural upbringing, the child’s health, the child’s name, and changes to the child’s living arrangements that would make it significantly more difficult for the child concerned to spend time with a parent.
346 pursuant to section 65dae, parents (or other relevant persons) do not have to consult on matters, which are not concerned with long term issues, when the child is spending time with one or the other of them.
347 this is to ensure that the myriad of decisions, which have no long term significance concerning a child and which need to be made on a day to day basis, by both of the child’s parents, can be made.
348 as is evident in the current matter, although each of the parties is quite clearly and fervently interested in all issues to do with the long term parenting of x and y, their capacity to communicate effectively is extremely limited. as such, each of them can only be described as interested in the care, welfare and development of their children.
349 clearly, the viability of the parties’ on-going parenting relationship must be a relevant consideration as to how parental responsibility is conferred between them. in bartel & schmucker (no 3), cronin j said as follows regarding the nature of parental responsibility:
whilst parental responsibility is vaguely defined, some insight into what is needed from a parent can be seen in s 65dac(3) which provides that if both parents have that responsibility, they are taken to be required to consult about parenting issues and make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision. it will again be remembered that the focus of the objects and principles in this act is on joint parenting.[44]
350 cronin j further said of the concept of parental responsibility that it:  s a broad concept as described in s 61b and that task covers many things. parents are expected jointly to endeavour to promote their children’s development by ensuring they have the greatest potential in adulthood whilst at the same time enjoying the security of childhood they deserve.[45]
determining the best interests of the children – section 60cc
a) the primary considerations
351 the applicable legislation requires me to consider two criteria primarily – protective concerns relating to the exposure of a child to abuse, neglect and family violence – and the benefits of a child having a meaningful relationship with both of his or her parents. as previously indicated, the former criterion is to be given greater weight, in appropriate cases.
352 i have no difficulty in reaching the conclusion that x and y will derive significant benefits from having a meaningful level of relationship with their father not least because of his love and devotion to them, which he has demonstrated in his struggle to maintain contact with them in the face of ms brookes’ extraordinary opposition. although a person of modest means, he has expended thousands of dollars in his efforts to this end.
353 other benefits which will flow from the children maintaining relations with their father, include the children having a proper sense of personal identity from interacting with the paternal aspect of their family and having access to a male role model, which they currently lack. in addition, regrettable though it is to express in writing, the children will have access to a corrective from the mother’s negative attitudes to some aspects of life in general and mr russell in particular.
354 i also accept that both children are likely to derive a significant level of benefit from having a meaningful level of relationship, with their father, in the sense envisaged by the relevant authorities. these benefits include the love which can only be provided by a parent and the creation of happy shared memories, which form the bedrock of an individual’s sense of who they are in later years.
355 pre-adolescent and adolescent girls are also likely to benefit from having an engaged father in their lives as a source of advice, and as a person available to them just to do things together and receive positive approbation for their activities. at the end of the day, it is likely to be beneficial just to receive an alternative form of parenting to that provided by ms brookes alone, no matter how accomplished she may be in this regard.
356 the difficulty arising in the case is that for the children to be able to access these benefits it will be necessary for them to pay a heavy emotional price, when they are at a tender age and lack developed intellectual facilities to assimilate what is happened to them and why. this must have the very serious potential to expose them to suffering a level of psychological harm, which must be regarded as serious in nature and so one falling within the definition of abuse provided by the act.
357 i have found that the mother’s conduct is emotionally abusive of the children. i concede this conduct is as a result of a combination of active and innate attitudes on her part and which may also involve factors relating to x’s asd and her influence on y. however, to a large degree, the mother’s conduct has resulted in the children being defiant, destructive and oppositional to their father and ms n, almost as if they were their mother’s proxies,
358 the evidence available to me leads me to the conclusion that ms brookes has used every avenue open to her to make it as difficult as possible for the children to maintain a relationship with their father. this has caused these emotionally vulnerable children, particularly x, to align with her, against their father.
359 in my view, there can be no other logical explanation for the children’s perennial and extraordinary behaviour in their interactions with their father – manifested by such things as their refusal to enter his car, their biting and hitting of him, their running away and their refusal to acknowledge him as their father – other than the mother’s implacable opposition to him having a normal level of relationship with him.
360 in my view, given that the children attend school successfully, participate in all manner of extracurricular activities, without apparent difficulty or comment and are able to attend social occasions of which the mother approves without conflict, there can be no other rational explanation for the children’s disruptive behaviour as displayed towards mr russell, ms n and ms m other than ms brookes cannot countenance their involvement with x and y for some reason or motivation.
361 what are the reason or reasons for ms brookes’ attitude is difficult, if not impossible, to ascertain but may relate to her bitterness at the end of the parties’ relationship or to some resentment relating to financial affairs. in any event, it is not useful to conjecture about such things other than to point out, as a matter of law, it is not the mother’s entitlement to determine the issue as it is x and y’s right to enjoy the benefit of having a relationship with their father.
362 in my view, the children have been provided with a maligned and negative construct of their father, which is not analogous to how he is in reality. i assess him to be a patient and child focussed parent. the mother’s decision that the children will not have a meaningful level of relationship with their father is fundamentally emotionally abusive of the children, not only in respect of its longer term implications but also in the shorter term.
363 it is the mother’s case that the children’s opposition to their father is explicable to the fact that he physically abuses them in some way or is emotionally neglectful of them. in my assessment there is no cogent evidence to support such an assertion. rather, the evidence provided by ms r indicates that the children are capable of relaxing and having brief windows of relatively uneventful time in their father’s care. this is not consistent with the children having being abused by him.
364 in this context, to my mind, ms r’s view that the children would not be so dismissive of their father and so lacking in timidity in expressing their apparent disdain for him, if they were truly fearful of him because of having been subject to some form of physical abuse. in addition, the children can have had no personal experience of mr russell’s narcolepsy other than what they have been told about it by adults. they have no subjective reason for wanting to escape mr russell’s car. the major influence in the children’s conduct must therefore be ms brookes.
365 as a consequence the children have been deprived of the sense that their father loves and cares for them. their oppositional behaviour towards him and ms n is not a useful template on which to model their future behaviour in life. x, in particular, is likely to face many challenges as she grows to maturity.
366 the central issue in the case is what corrective or antidote should be applied to this lamentable situation and what are the risks likely to arise from its application with the blunt question arising of whether any such potential cure is more corrosive, in its effects, than the situation it is directed towards ameliorating.
367 at this juncture, largely as a result of being at the end of both his financial and emotional resources, mr russell seeks that a mechanism be put in place to secure that the children come into his immediate care in conjunction with an extended period of moratorium from their mother. the essential task, for the court, is to assess the risks likely to arise from such an intervention and weigh them objectively against the possible detrimental consequences.
368 at the outset of these reasons for judgment i commented about my regret in respect of how long the proceedings had been on foot and the failure to appoint an independent children’s lawyer at an earlier stage, who might have able to act as an honest broker between the parties. one of the reasons for the delay has been the hope that, with time and patience, ms brookes would moderate her attitude towards mr russell and the children would become more attuned with their father, leading to an easing of their opposition.
369 in this context, mr russell hoped that he would be able to defuse the mother’s concerns about his narcolepsy with objective medical evidence and that the involvement of first ms aa and then ms r would lead to better outcomes at handovers. these have proven to be vain expectations. in addition, he hoped that the possibility of there being a change in the children’s residence might also lead to ms brookes trying harder to support the children’s relationship with him.
370 i have had the opportunity to observe ms brookes through the proceedings to date. in particular, there was an opportunity to reset at the end of the first hearing phase when the children’s school was utilised as the venue for handover. this proved to be a retrograde step. in these circumstances, in my assessment, ms brookes is unlikely to meekly accept a change of residence for the children and work cooperatively towards a shared care regime or any other arrangement in which the children spend substantial and significant time with both of their parents.
371 rather, i fear that there is a potent risk, if the children come and live with their father, both before and after any process of reunification with their mother, of them suffering serious harm in both an emotional and physical form. firstly, the process of them coming into their father’s care, at a venue such as the court, must be a challenging one, which ms brookes is hardly likely to support. secondly, regardless of what explanations are provided to them, there must be a significant risk that x in particular will attempt to decamp from mr russell’s home by whatever means are open to her. the children’s resistance to such a change of regime is likely to be both extreme and protracted.
372 as mr russell deposes, x and y are children who refuse to eat or even sleep in beds provided for them. their level of opposition to things which ostensibly displease them and their length to which they will go to align with their perception of what their mother wishes, can only described as extraordinary.
373 as a consequence the challenges mr russell will face in his household, from their probable behaviour, must in my view be characterised as extreme. these challenges will also coincide with him and ms n having to accommodate the demands of a new baby. the possibility of some unforeseen crisis occurring cannot be underrated.
374 the level of the children’s emotional dependency on their mother is high. they will know of her distress at any separation and will respond to it in ways which are likely to be both volatile and unpredictable. ms brookes is unlikely to be cooperative in any process of de-escalating their behaviour. the children are also likely to internalise a sense of responsibility for letting their mother down, which is emotionally detrimental to them. they will simultaneously grieve at the apparent loss of their mother and feel guilty for it.
375 i acknowledge that such difficult transitions of children, between parents, do occur and cannot be regarded as unknown to the literature of child psychology, particularly in the field of child protection as ms r indicated. however, any such transition requires extensive professional support to be successfully achieved.
376 in this context, the evidence of ms b is central. from what she knew of the case, she was not sanguine about its prospects of success. in addition, i harbour significant doubts that the intensive therapeutic support required is beyond the means of the parties concerned and, for obvious reasons, ms brookes will not provide it.
377 accordingly, i am of the view that, important as the benefits of the children having meaningful level of relationship with their father are, the potential risks of compulsorily putting into place a mechanism, which may or may not be successful, to secure such an outcome, is too great a risk for the court to contemplate, at this stage of the children’s development.
378 as is apparent, i have many criticisms of ms brookes, whom i have assessed as being incapable of supporting the children in having an appropriate level of relationship with their father. however, in all cases concerning children, it is their best interests which are paramount not those of their parents. a child is not to be stripped from one parent’s care as a consequence of such criticisms and awarded to the other parent because he or she is assessed to be the more deserving. any cases involving endemic parental conflict, such as the present one, are rarely conducive to a happy ending.
379 rather such cases, in my assessment, behove a cautious approach and the adoption of the outcome least likely to be detrimental to the children concerned. i accept that it is incontrovertibly the case that it will be detrimental for the children if they only have a cursory level of relationship with their father and such an outcome, in itself, entails the very real danger of their paternal relationship being entirely extinguished, which would be a calamitous outcome in terms of their long term development.
380 however, it is my assessment that the risk involved in the children being removed from their mother and this intervention miscarrying, resulting in the children losing their relationship with their father anyway, is a greater risk and one too great to contemplate at this stage. this case does not provide a happy ending.
the additional considerations
a) the children’s views
381 the applicable legislation requires me to consider any views expressed by the children concerned and any factors which may affect the weight to be given to those views, such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding. the legislation speaks of views rather than wishes. the latter is a more concrete concept, the former is more addressed to perceptions and feelings.[46]
382 accordingly, a child is not required to make a decision about what the appropriate outcome is in any particular case. nor are they required to express an explicit wish as to which parent or other significant person they want to live with or spend time with.
383 however, it seems that the court is required to explore a child’s perception of what he or she feels is likely to be best for him or her. very often these perceptions will be ambivalent and difficult to express or quantify. this is particularly so with younger children. this does not mean that a child’s view should be disregarded.
384 to the contrary, over time, there has been an increase in the judicial regard given to the rights of children in proceedings such as these. it is often said that children have a right to be heard. certainly children’s views are important and requiring of being given “proper and realistic weight” rather than token regard.[47]
385 it is also impossible to catalogue all the factors which may be at play in shaping a child’s view in any given case. matters of individual preference are idiosyncratic but no less important for that. it has been said that the process of weighing up a child’s professed view is “a process of intuitive synthesis”.[48] what is done with those views is a matter of common sense in the overall assessment of what is likely to be in a child’s best interests.
386 x and y, on numerous occasions, have made it emphatically clear that they do not wish to engage with their father to any marked degree. they said as such to ms r. they have often cut short their visits with their father and currently spend only the briefest of time with him.
387 given their respective ages and the undoubted influence of their mother in shaping these views, in my assessment, they cannot be determinative of the case to any significant degree. however, the children’s currently entrenched views cannot be ignored. the reality is, if the children do perceive that there has been an outcome imposed upon them, of which they disapprove, they will, in the common jargon of family lawyers vote with their feet with the dangerous and unpredictable consequences to which i have already alluded.
388 from mr russell’s perspective, the children’s entrenched views may very well stem from their mother’s false indoctrination and negative portrayal of him. however, i have grave reservations that moving the children from their mother’s care alone will have any great effect in shifting their attitude towards him. in my view, it is equally possible that such a shift will result in the hardening of their attitude.
389 in this context, the court must consider what tools will be available to mr russell to effect such as shift in attitude. he has his decency and patience and obvious love for the children. he may also have the assistance of ms b, although she is currently reluctant to commit to providing her services until she has more information on the ground. i am concerned that mr russell may not have sufficient resources to effect a long term change in the children’s attitudes towards him and ms n.
b) the nature of the children’s relationship with each of her parents and significant others
390 the children’s most significant relationship is with their mother. she has been their principle provider of care since they were each born. it is noteworthy that, regardless of his many criticisms of her, mr russell shies away from negative attributions of her skills as a parent and her love and devotion to x and y.
391 it is also readily apparent that both children in turn love their mother and have a deep sense of loyalty for her. clearly, these are significant factors which militate against the children being removed from their mother’s care on either a temporary or longer term basis. there can be no doubt that ms brookes is and has always been x and y’s primary carer and she is highly adept in this regard other than in her capacity to support them spending time with their father.
392 mr russell’s relationship with the children currently hangs by a thread. as a consequence of his efforts over the last four years or so, the children know him. they have seen him consistently, in extremely difficult circumstances, on a regular, if gradually diminishing basis. most recently the time has occurred only in conjunction with their weekly dance class. mr russell’s recent evidence being that he is unwilling to subject the children to the possibly greater trauma of spending longer periods with him.
393 whether there has been some advance since the case was last in court in october is unknown to me. however, when mr russell last gave evidence (on 25 june 2021), he deposed as to his great difficulties in getting the children to spend extended periods of time with him, particularly in respect of getting into his car, eating any food prepared in his household or sleeping in the beds allocated to them.
394 this may be a reaction to the escalating tension between the parties, given mr russell’s application for an immediate change of the children’s living arrangements, a matter about which the children be aware. certainly, i have not been advised of any easing in arrangements or any significant breakthroughs in respect of the children’s opposition to spending extended periods of time with their father.
395 the evidence of ms r which, given her independence and expertise, must be given significant weight, is that when the children are calm and receptive, they are capable of having warm and positive interactions with their father. accordingly, in my view, all is not lost in this regard. it is question of how to remove the children from the consequence of becoming aligned in the endemic conflict between their parents.
396 the evidence also indicates that there have been some successful periods of overnight time interspersed with unsuccessful periods, marked by a refusal to eat or adopt normal sleeping patterns. the issue for the court being, if the court does not adopt mr russell’s preferred outcome, how it normalises the manner in which the children spend time with their father. it being the case that there have been brief glimpses, provided from time to time, that this is possible.
397 one possible scenario for achieving this outcome is a cessation of the court proceedings. certainly, the proceedings do not seem to have assisted any resolution of the issues arising in the case, notwithstanding mr russell’s patient forbearance. accordingly, it may be the case that a cessation of the court’s focus on her may result in ms brookes becoming more rather than less resistant to adherence to court orders.
398 in this context, it is noteworthy that ms brookes’ final position is that there should be made what many would categorise as standard contact orders for alternate weekend time and regularly during school holidays, albeit that this should occur only after the completion of therapy to be offered by ms b.
399 i have also seen, in the form of the video-taped interactions recorded by the children on mr russell’s mobile phone, some direct evidence of the nature of the children’s relationship with their father, which is clearly, in my view, one characterised by love and patience on his part and a sense of some closeness and familiarly as demonstrated by x and y. as such, i do consider that the children do have a paternal relationship, with mr russell, which will be beneficial for them, if is maintained.
400 on its face, this would appear to be a tacit recognition by ms brookes that x and y do have a salvageable relationship with their father. although it also echoes her earlier positions, which have been more honoured in the breach than the observance. in this context, it is noteworthy that ms brookes advocated the use of school as a handover location, following the first section of the proceedings, because she professed herself to have been impressed by what she had seen on the video-tape footage. as previously indicated, this did not provide any panacea to the difficulties in the case.
401 similarly, ms m has the type of love and interest in her grandchildren one would expect of her. x and y are familiar with both her and her home. grandparents are important to children. not only are they a source of love but they are also able to provide family history to their grandchildren and give them a sense of self. the same can be said of cousins, uncles and aunts.[49]
402 what is the nature of the children’s relationship with ms n is more difficult to assess. she has come onto the scene relatively recently in what can only be characterised as difficult circumstances. the children have been extremely oppositional to her, although, it is my view that she has behaved in a conciliatory and sensitive manner towards them and wants to support her fiancé in his efforts to extend his relationship with his children.
403 again what will be the implications of introducing another child into this dynamic is also very unclear. in general terms, i would expect any child to be excited at the prospect of having a new born half-sibling to meet. however, to a large extent, how x and y respond to the issue of this will depend on what they have been told about it and how they each perceive they are expected to behave by what they are told or intuit from each of their parents’ behaviour.
c) the extent to which each of the parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity to be involved in decision making and to spend time or communicate with the children
404 ms brookes is critical that mr russell withdrew from the children’s lives following the parties’ separation. i do not think that criticism is warranted. mr russell rightly anticipated that he would not be able to participate easily in the children’s lives given the circumstances surrounding their separation.
405 in addition ms brookes is critical that he has not been interested in issues to do with x’s asd. it is true that, in theoretical terms, mr russell could have been more involved in making decisions regarding the children. however that would blithely ignore the reality of the situation which is that ms brookes has made it as difficult as possible for him to be involved in all aspects of the children’s lives.
ca) provision of financial support for the children
406 ms brookes has also been critical of mr russell’s decision to withdraw the children from attending at t school. i accept that this was because he could not afford the fees. there is no other evidence to suggest that he has avoided child support.
d) the likely effect on the children of any changes in their circumstances
407 the effects of a major, if possibly confined, change of circumstances in how x and y are to be parented is one of the major issues in the case. in this context, i have no doubt that the short to medium effects of the children being moved into their father’s sole care would be severe indeed.
408 x and y are likely to resist the change in possibly dangerous and unpredictable ways. they are likely to be violent, obstructionist and oppositional in their behaviour. they may refuse nourishment. they may abscond. certainly they will not be happy and will feel they have both abandoned and been abandoned by their mother. the situation would be extremely volatile if the children’s previous conduct is anything to go by.
409 the children’s relationship with their mother cannot be permanently severed. the process of the children being re-introduced to their mother is likely to be equally traumatic for all concerned. it seems improbable in the extreme that ms brookes will do anything constructive to support the process currently advocated by mr russell.
410 such a process will require a great deal of external professional support, which ms b has expressed significant reservations, at this stage, she will be able to provide. mr russell doubts he can afford to pay for such therapy and ms brookes is manifestly unable to provide the required level of financial support, even if she was inclined to do so.
411 in the past, when he has found the children’s behaviour challenging and when he has been asked by them for an early return, mr russell has returned the children earlier than obliged to. i accept that he has done so because he wishes to avoid the children being exposed to further emotional trauma. however, it must be the case that what he proposes will be far more challenging than what he has faced in the past and will occur in the context of him and ms n having a new born child.
412 i must make some sort of assessment of the possibility that if the change of residence is accommodated cleanly and with professional assistance, x and y will quickly settle down emotionally away from the influence of their mother and their relationship with their father will thus be able to be normalised. although possible, i seriously doubt that this to be a probable outcome. more likely is that it will be emotionally bruising for all concerned, particularly x and y.
413 on balance, i consider that there are too many potential pitfalls and too many potential risks to justify it as an outcome in x and y’s best interests. i have no doubt that both mr russell and ms n are well motivated but i am concerned that they may have under-estimated the degree of difficulty likely to arise, particularly in the context of their other commitments.
414 in this context, i am of the view that to adopt the course primarily advocated by mr russell would represent an unacceptable risk to the emotional and physical safety of the children, which cannot be currently justified.
e) the practical difficulties and expense of the children spending time and communicating with each of their parents
415 the parties live relatively close together in suburban adelaide. both have transport. however, the practical difficulties which have arisen so far have led to the children currently having an extremely circumscribed relationship with their father. the major difficulty with the father spending time with the children stems from their refusal to get into his car.
416 in objective terms, there can be significant level of risk associated with the children travelling in mr russell’s car referrable to his narcolepsy. the evidence indicates that in a suburban setting, during daylight, the stimulation available to mr russell will prevent him falling asleep with or without the prescription of dexamphetamine. i reject any submission that mr russell has down-played the risks of his condition or is cavalier in his disregard of it. in my view, the contrary is the position.
417 the issue in this case is that ms brookes has not provided any concrete solutions to these problems or those relating to the children’s behaviour when they are in the father’s care. in my view, her stance has been one of passive obstruction throughout. however, notwithstanding the serious criticism i have of ms brookes, i remain of the view that the peremptory removal of the children from her care will not create a solution to these problems.
418 rather, in my view, a continued and gradual approach is more likely to furnish progress, in repairing the children’s relationship with their father, particularly if it occurs away from the polarising effects of litigation. in this context, the mother’s final position and the alternative position adopted by the father are not too far apart.
f) the capacity of each of the children’s parents and other persons to provide for the emotional and intellectual needs of the childreni) the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the parties
419 the above two considerations are closely related and, as such, it is convenient to consider them together. i accept that ms brookes has many positive attributes as a parent. it is to her great credit that both x and y currently attend a mainstream school and both are reported to be doing well. in addition, it is undoubtedly the case that she has arranged for the children to provide for all manner of extracurricular activities directed towards them being well developed children.
420 mr russell does not dispute that ms brookes has demonstrated a high degree of commitment to ensure that both children but x in particular receive the intellectual and physiological stimulation required to assist each of them to reach their full potential. mr russell has said on many occasions that he regards ms brookes to be a good parent. i accept that this is the case.
421 however, there is much to be concerned about given some aspects of the children’s current emotional presentation. ms brookes has deposed that x and y are well behaved in her home, a state of affairs which ms r doubts but is not in a position to categorically determine. they are not so well behaved in a large number of their interactions with their father and other professionals engaged by him, including ms r herself, ms aa and ms s.
422 clearly, if the children behave in the oppositional manner in which they have been described as interacting with their father, in other contexts of their lives, this will not be helpful to them in emotional terms. it is also concerning if ms brookes has given the children her tacit approval to behave, as they have, towards their father.
423 this is one of the central issues of the case. on the one hand, the evidence indicates that x and y can regulate their behaviour appropriately in a wide variety of settings, particularly at school or in an extramural setting. it is only when they are engaged with their father that their behaviour becomes dysregulated. mr russell has been able to manage this conduct on some occasions but not on others. i remain concerned that ms brookes has been prepared to condone the children’s behaviour to some degree. i do not think such an attitude is conducive to the appropriate emotional or intellectual development of the children.
424 one of the more useful attributes for a parent, in a post separation context, is the capacity to support a relationship between the children concerned and the other parent. clearly, such an attribute is likely to lead to a minimisation of the potential for parental conflict and so be helpful for the children involved. in my view, it is one of the central responsibilities entailed in being a parent.
425 having said this, i appreciate that separation is invariably emotionally debilitating and it is rarely the case that it can be achieved without some level of discord. it is apparent to me that ms brookes did not adjust easily to the parties’ separation and has struggled to separate her own emotional needs from those of the children, particularly in respect of their entitlement to have a proper level of relationship with their father.
g) the children’s maturity, sex, lifestyle and background
426 there is no need for the court to address these matters on any individual basis. in my view, i have considered the salient features of the children’s background in these reasons as a whole.
h) aboriginal heritage
427 this is not a relevant consideration in the case.
j) family violencek) any family violence order
428 although each party has alleged that the other behaved in a coercive and controlling fashion towards the other during their relationship and afterwards, these were not issues which received a large degree of scrutiny during the hearing. the only relevant family violence order was made against ms brookes and, in my view, the incident leading up to the granting of the order and the police charge relating to it is the only established incident of family violence. i accept that the incident occurred at a difficult and volatile point in the parties’ separation and as such it is not typical of the parties’ relationship with one another.
429 however, the parties’ relationship is atrocious and likely to remain so for the indefinite future. as ms r has opined, this state of affairs is likely to lead to the children become enmeshed in the conflict between the parents and this is not conducive to their emotional well-being. regrettably, whatever is the outcome of the case, i doubt that the various factors likely to be conducive to the children becoming aligned with one of their parents against the other are likely to diminish any time soon.
l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings
430 finality is generally preferable in children’s cases. litigation is expensive in both financial and emotional terms and does little to encourage an easy parenting relationship between the parties concerned. in addition, so far as children are concerned, it is usually desirable that arrangements for their care are stable and constant and not subject to the threat of further litigation.
431 however, the issues in this case are both long-standing and powerful. as such the case presents the court with invidious options. as such, it would be naïve to think anything other than the prospect of further litigation remain high, given the polarising issues which it raises. the case is unlikely to have anything approaching a satisfactory outcome.
432 on balance, in my view, the father’s primary proposal is the one most likely to have within it the seeds of further protracted and acerbic litigation. ms brookes is not likely to accept it and its problematic nature are calculated to bring the parties back to court in a short timeframe. as such, the outcome which might conceivably avoid further litigation is one which sees the children continuing to live mainly with their mother and spending time with their father regularly with the possibility of the time being extended once the emotional sequelae of the current proceedings has diminished and all concerned adjust to what has been ordered.
conclusions
433 this is the point in the judgment at which i must pull together the various conclusions i have reached in respect of both the primary and additional considerations and then put in to place, in concrete terms, the orders which i consider will best reflect the interests of x and y. it is not an easy task.
434 the central conclusion i have reached is that it would not be in x or y’s best interests for there to be a dramatic change in the arrangements for their care, given the centrality, for each of each of them, of their relationship with their mother. such a change would be both dramatic and traumatic. i just do not think it would work. it has the potential to do untold emotional harm to the children. at the end of the day, it too extreme an outcome to be justifiable as the one in the best interests of the children.
435 neither of the children would welcome such an outcome, and each is likely to resist it vehemently, as would ms brookes herself. in addition, the provision of expert therapeutic assistance to manage such a transition is problematic in the extreme. as a consequence of these considerations, i believe the risks inherent in such a change of care are too great for the court to countenance and therefore it cannot be justified.
436 at the same time, it is impossible not to feel an enormous amount of sympathy for mr russell and ms m, who have patiently done their best to overcome the difficulties placed in their way by ms brookes and achieve a normalised relationship with the children. given mr russell’s qualities and his undoubted love for x and y, i am satisfied that each child will derive incalculable benefits from having a meaningful level of relationship with their father.
437 necessarily, these reasons for judgment have taken some time to be prepared, after the court proceedings themselves have been much protracted, whilst solutions have been unsuccessfully sought to the seemingly intractable problems which the case throws up. during this period, the father’s relationship with the children has become even less secure and the difficulties more pronounced, notwithstanding ms brookes’ assertion that she had reassessed her position following the first component of the trial. this proved to be illusory.
438 however, ms brookes’ most recent proposal envisages the children spending overnight time and blocks of school holiday time, with the father, with handovers at the e hotel carpark or their school. i have not been advised as to what has occurred since late october, particularly whether there has been any progress in the children being persuaded to leave the market/dance studio and journey, in mr russell’s car, to his home.
439 in my view, an end to the proceedings may assist to bring relations between the parties to a more stable equilibrium and ease the pressures on the children. the children have spent time with their father, including overnight, at his home in the past. i do not consider that either he or ms n have exposed the children to any form of abuse, including when they have applied the bear hug technique referred to them by ms r as means to prevent them coming to harm.
440 one thing which has been achieved over the long four years of this case is that the children know they have a father. they have met him on numerous occasions. if ms r’s evidence and that of mr russell is to be accepted, which i have, the children have had some good times with him. although the children persist in referring to him as mr russell, rather than dad, it must be the case that each is aware of that mr russell is their father. accordingly, in extraordinarily difficult circumstances, by dint of his patience and determination, mr russell does have some form of nascent relationship with the children.
441 the question is what should happen next. for obvious reasons each of the parties have concentrated on the major issue in the case and, in my assessment, have not given close consideration to be what should happen as an alternative to the change of primary care.
442 in addition, the court cannot keep these proceedings on foot indefinitely. necessarily, it must withdraw and put in place the orders, which axiomatically cannot be perfect but with an expectation that something can be build upon the little which has been achieved thus far. this withdrawal being posited on the hope that the cessation of the litigation will allow some healing of the family to occur. in tandem with this, time may also play its part and once the children have achieved some greater maturity, the problems of their transition to their father will ease.
443 the mother’s proposal is that overnight weekend time should re-commence after ms b has completed re-unification therapy. she is not able to pay for such therapy and ms b is guarded as to whether it would assist, given she only knows of the family through reading documents and considering the opinion of ms r.
444 mr russell is at the end of his tether, both financially and emotionally and is unwilling to commit to such a process, at his expense. in this context, it is the case that, in the past, ms r, ms aa and ms s, each a skilled and child focussed intermediary, have experienced significant difficulty in supporting the children to interact with their father.
445 in these circumstances, i am concerned that ms brookes’ proposal may be viewed as cynical and disingenuous one. however, some orders must be made to reflect the fact that the proper service of the children’s best interests dictate that they have an on-going relationship with their father. in this regard, it is ms brookes’ legal obligation to facilitate these orders through a process of encouragement and then direction. the involvement or otherwise of any form of therapy does not absolve her of that obligation.
446 significantly, ms brookes has demonstrated that she can discharge her parental responsibilities in a wide variety of context, particularly in regards to ensuring that x and y attend school and all more of other activities and social interactions in a manner which does not entail their wholesale emotional dysregulation.
447 ms b was an impressive, albeit a cautious professional witness. whether mr russell wishes to involve her, in the family, at his expense, is a matter for him. i will make an order that he be entitled to engage the children in any re-unification therapy, with either ms b or any other therapist as he considers appropriate, at both his sole election and expense. however, such therapy is not to be an essential prerequisite to orders mandating his on-going engagement with the children.
448 in my view, the father’s alternative proposal is a sensible and well calibrated one. it envisages overnight time now, in conjunction with dance class and an automatic move to the more normalised time, which is essentially in line with what ms brookes’ proposes, in a little under two years’ time, when it is to be hoped that the children will be more mature and their relationship with their father and other members of their paternal family will be more firmly consolidated.
449 at this stage, i hope that there will have been a process of sufficient consolidation to allow the father to start spending time with the children in school holidays. the mother has indicated, in her proposed orders that she, ostensibly at least, accepts the reality that the children must start spending time with their father for longer blocks in school holidays.
450 i concede that this approach is not without its risks. i also concede that the prospects of the case returning to court are high and the risks of the children becoming more aligned and enmeshed in the proceedings remain significantly heightened. however, in my view, it remains the least bad outcome in a case which provides no easy options and in which the long term stakes for the children are high.
451 the parties’ relationship as parents is atrocious and likely to remains so. these reasons for judgment and its conclusions will have do nothing to bring about some form of accommodation between them. however, at the end of the process, i remain convinced that both parties have much to offer the children. in particular, mr russell cannot be described as a disinterested parent. to the contrary, he is fervently interested in all aspect of the children’s care, welfare and development.
452 he has been prepared to defer to the significant decisions the mother has made about schooling and health issues since the parties separated. it would be naïve to think that there will ever be any easy process of consultation between the parties about major long-term issues pertaining to x and y, let alone a consensual decision about such matters.
453 notwithstanding these obvious and significant issues, i do not think that it would be helpful to the children if one parent is conferred with sole parental responsibility in respect of issues pertaining to their long term care, welfare and development. such an outcome would only deepen the divide between their parents. accordingly, i consider that it would be in the best interest of the children if their parents are conferred with equal shared parental responsibility.
454 clearly, either an equal time or substantial time regime between the children and their father is one which cannot be considered to be reasonably practicable to implement given the reality of their deeply fissured family life. however, in my assessment, mr russell’s proposals for the parties being kept informed about educational and medical issues pertaining to the children are sensible ones as are the injunctive provisions proposed.
455 as i have said the prospects of the case returning to court must be considered high. this is a complex and multifaceted case that has no quick fix. obviously, whether it does return must depend on the attitudes of each of the parties.
456 firstly, whether ms brookes is genuine in her apparent wish that the children should have some form of relationship with their father and the actual steps she is prepared to take to facilitate it. secondly, how mr russell interprets these reasons for judgment and what occurs in the next two years or so.
457 it is not a good thing that litigation concerning children becomes endemic. however, in some cases it is inevitable and the court cannot turn away litigation in such problematic cases. as such, it is not beyond the bounds of possibility that these reasons for judgment will have to be revisited, if fresh circumstances arise.
458 for all these reasons, the orders of the court will be as set out at the commencement of these reasons for judgment.
associate: dated: 21 february 2022
dated: 21 february 2022
[1] see annexure 4 to the affidavit of ms brookes filed 1 april 2021.[2] see exhibit c.[3] see evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140.[4] see fox v percy [2003] hca 22; (2003) 214 clr 118, 129 [31] (gleeson cj, gummow and kirby jj). [5] see exhibit b.[6] see affidavit of mr russell filed 14 july 2017 at [47]-[49].[7] see annexure -1 to the affidavit of ms brookes filed 14 august 2017. [8] see exhibit e.[9] ibid on page 2. [10] see affidavit of mr russell filed 1 december 2017 at [10]-[18]. [11] see annexure mo1 to the affidavit of the father’s solicitor filed 23 april 2018. [12] see ms r’s report dated 23 november 2018 at page 10, filed as annexure mo1 to the affidavit of the father’s solicitor filed 26 november 2018.[13] ibid at page 12.[14] ibid at page 14.[15] see family report of ms r at page 24, filed as annexure mo1 to the affidavit of the father’s solicitor filed 14 june 2019. [16] ibid at page 27.[17] see affidavit of ms n filed 26 march 2021 at [14].[18] see family report dated 20 november 2020. [19] in the marriage of stevenson & hughes [1993] famca 14; (1993) 16 fam lr 443, 450 (fogarty j). [20] see annexure ma-2 to the affidavit of ms s filed 25 march 2021.[21] see the affidavit of ms n’s filed 26 march 2021 at [27]-[28].[22] see family report of ms r at page 14, filed as annexure a to the affidavit of the father’s solicitor filed 25 november 2020.[23] ibid on page 16.[24] ibid on page 18.[25] ibid on page 23-24.[26] see the affidavit of mr russell filed 17 june 2021 at [19].[27] see exhibit k.[28] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca.[29] see mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518, 526 [26], where brown j indicated that a meaningful parental relationship is one that is important, significant and valuable to the child” concerned.[30] see deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82 at [62] (finn, thackray and strickland jj). [31] see eaby & speelman [2015] famcafc 104 at [19] (ryan j). [32] see slater & light [2013] famcafc 4 at [37] (may, strickland and forrest jj), quoting johnson and page [2007] famca 1235; (2007) flc 93-344 at [68] (may, boland and stevenson jj). [33] see b v b: family law reform act 1995 (1997) 21 fam lr 676.[34] ibid 734 (nicholson cj, fogarty and lindenmayer jj). [35] see russell & russell & anor [2009] famca 28 at [141] (ryan j).[36] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da.[37] ibid s 61da(2).[38] ibid s 61da(4).[39] see mrr v gr (2010) 240 clr 461, 466-7 [13] and [15] (french cj, gummow, hayne, kiefel and bell jj). [40] goode & goode [2006] famca 1346 at [65] (bryant cj, finn and boland jj). [41] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61b. [42] ibid s 64b(2). [43] ibid s 65dac. [44] see bartel & schmucker (no 3) [2012] famca 1094 at [18] (cronin j).[45] ibid at [21]. [46] see explanatory memorandum to the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill 2006 (cth) at [56].[47] see h v w (1995) 126 fam lr 788, 797 (fogarty, baker and kay jj).[48] see r & r: children’s wishes [2000] famca 43; (2000) 25 fam lr 712, 724 [54] (nicholson cj, finn & guest jj).[49] see bright v bright [1994] famca 176; (1995) flc 92-570.