last updated: 12 may 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
agombar & ermans [2022] fedcfamc2f 168
orders
the court orders that:
1. that the mother and father have equal shared parental responsibility for x born in 2013 (child).
2. the child live with the respondent (mother).
3. the child spend time and communicate with the father as follows:   during school terms (with such time to be suspended during all school holiday periods and to resume upon the recommencement of school as if the pattern had continued throughout the holiday period): (i) in week 1: from the conclusion of school on friday, commencing on 25 february 2022, (or at 3:30pm if a non-school day) until monday at commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day), and (ii) in week 2: from wednesday at the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until friday at the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day), (b) for easter from 5pm on easter saturday to 5pm on easter monday, (c) for christmas as follows: (i) for christmas 2021, and each alternate year thereafter, from 5:00pm on christmas eve to 3:00pm on christmas day, (ii) for christmas 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, from 3:00pm christmas day to 5:00pm boxing day, (a) for one half of each of the school term holidays (with such holidays being deemed to commence on the last day of the school term) from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term to 5:00pm on the middle saturday of the term holiday, (b) during the long summer holidays (with such holidays being deemed to commence on the last day of term 4) on a week about basis commencing from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term to 5.00pm on the same day of the week seven (7) nights later and each alternate week thereafter, ensuring that the child is returned into the mother’s care by 3:00pm the day before school recommences for the new academic year, (d) on the child’s birthday, if not already in the father’s care: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm, (e) on the father’s birthday: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm, (f) on father’s day from 5:00pm the day prior to father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   in week 1: from the conclusion of school on friday, commencing on 25 february 2022, (or at 3:30pm if a non-school day) until monday at commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day), and (ii) in week 2: from wednesday at the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until friday at the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day),  ) in week 2: from wednesday at the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until friday at the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day),   for easter from 5pm on easter saturday to 5pm on easter monday, (c) for christmas as follows: (i) for christmas 2021, and each alternate year thereafter, from 5:00pm on christmas eve to 3:00pm on christmas day, (ii) for christmas 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, from 3:00pm christmas day to 5:00pm boxing day, (a) for one half of each of the school term holidays (with such holidays being deemed to commence on the last day of the school term) from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term to 5:00pm on the middle saturday of the term holiday, (b) during the long summer holidays (with such holidays being deemed to commence on the last day of term 4) on a week about basis commencing from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term to 5.00pm on the same day of the week seven (7) nights later and each alternate week thereafter, ensuring that the child is returned into the mother’s care by 3:00pm the day before school recommences for the new academic year, (d) on the child’s birthday, if not already in the father’s care: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm, (e) on the father’s birthday: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm, (f) on father’s day from 5:00pm the day prior to father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   for christmas as follows: (i) for christmas 2021, and each alternate year thereafter, from 5:00pm on christmas eve to 3:00pm on christmas day, (ii) for christmas 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, from 3:00pm christmas day to 5:00pm boxing day, (a) for one half of each of the school term holidays (with such holidays being deemed to commence on the last day of the school term) from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term to 5:00pm on the middle saturday of the term holiday, (b) during the long summer holidays (with such holidays being deemed to commence on the last day of term 4) on a week about basis commencing from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term to 5.00pm on the same day of the week seven (7) nights later and each alternate week thereafter, ensuring that the child is returned into the mother’s care by 3:00pm the day before school recommences for the new academic year, (d) on the child’s birthday, if not already in the father’s care: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm, (e) on the father’s birthday: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm, (f) on father’s day from 5:00pm the day prior to father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   for christmas 2021, and each alternate year thereafter, from 5:00pm on christmas eve to 3:00pm on christmas day, (ii) for christmas 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, from 3:00pm christmas day to 5:00pm boxing day,  ) for christmas 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, from 3:00pm christmas day to 5:00pm boxing day,   for one half of each of the school term holidays (with such holidays being deemed to commence on the last day of the school term) from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term to 5:00pm on the middle saturday of the term holiday, (b) during the long summer holidays (with such holidays being deemed to commence on the last day of term 4) on a week about basis commencing from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term to 5.00pm on the same day of the week seven (7) nights later and each alternate week thereafter, ensuring that the child is returned into the mother’s care by 3:00pm the day before school recommences for the new academic year, (d) on the child’s birthday, if not already in the father’s care: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm, (e) on the father’s birthday: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm, (f) on father’s day from 5:00pm the day prior to father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   during the long summer holidays (with such holidays being deemed to commence on the last day of term 4) on a week about basis commencing from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term to 5.00pm on the same day of the week seven (7) nights later and each alternate week thereafter, ensuring that the child is returned into the mother’s care by 3:00pm the day before school recommences for the new academic year, (d) on the child’s birthday, if not already in the father’s care: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm, (e) on the father’s birthday: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm, (f) on father’s day from 5:00pm the day prior to father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   on the child’s birthday, if not already in the father’s care: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm, (e) on the father’s birthday: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm, (f) on father’s day from 5:00pm the day prior to father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm,  ) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm,   on the father’s birthday: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm, (f) on father’s day from 5:00pm the day prior to father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm,  ) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm,   on father’s day from 5:00pm the day prior to father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.
4. that the father's time as specified in order 3 above, be suspended on the following occasions:  on the child's birthday, if not already in the mother's care: (i) if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm, (b) for christmas as follows: (i) for christmas 2021, and each alternate year thereafter, from 3:00pm christmas day to 5:00pm boxing day, (ii) for christmas 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, from 5:00pm on christmas eve to 3:00pm on christmas day, (c) on the mother's birthday: (i) if a school day, from 3:30pm to 7:30pm, (i) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm, (d) on mother's day from 5:00pm the day prior to mother's day until 5:00pm on mother's day, (e) for easter from 9am on good friday until 5pm on easter saturday, (f) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   if a school day, from 3:30 pm to 7:30pm, (ii) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm,  ) if the birthday falls on a non-school day, from 1:00pm to 5:00pm,   for christmas as follows: (i) for christmas 2021, and each alternate year thereafter, from 3:00pm christmas day to 5:00pm boxing day, (ii) for christmas 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, from 5:00pm on christmas eve to 3:00pm on christmas day, (c) on the mother's birthday: (i) if a school day, from 3:30pm to 7:30pm, (i) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm, (d) on mother's day from 5:00pm the day prior to mother's day until 5:00pm on mother's day, (e) for easter from 9am on good friday until 5pm on easter saturday, (f) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   for christmas 2021, and each alternate year thereafter, from 3:00pm christmas day to 5:00pm boxing day, (ii) for christmas 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, from 5:00pm on christmas eve to 3:00pm on christmas day,  ) for christmas 2022, and each alternate year thereafter, from 5:00pm on christmas eve to 3:00pm on christmas day,   on the mother's birthday: (i) if a school day, from 3:30pm to 7:30pm, (i) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm, (d) on mother's day from 5:00pm the day prior to mother's day until 5:00pm on mother's day, (e) for easter from 9am on good friday until 5pm on easter saturday, (f) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   if a school day, from 3:30pm to 7:30pm, (i) if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm,   if the birthday falls on non-school day, from 9:00am to 5:00pm,   on mother's day from 5:00pm the day prior to mother's day until 5:00pm on mother's day, (e) for easter from 9am on good friday until 5pm on easter saturday, (f) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   for easter from 9am on good friday until 5pm on easter saturday, (f) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing via appclose.
5. where changeovers do not take place at the child's school, changeovers shall take place at the mcdonald's restaurant, c road north, or such other place as agreed between the parties in writing (including sms text message).
6. that the child communicate by way of telephone or facetime:   each tuesday between 7:00pm and 7:30pm to whichever parent the child is not in the care of, with such parent to initiate the phone call to the child and the parent who has the child in their care to ensure that their phone is charged and switched on, (b) at other times as reasonably requested by the child to be facilitated by the parent who has the child in their care.   at other times as reasonably requested by the child to be facilitated by the parent who has the child in their care.
7. the parties be at liberty to attend events, activities and functions at the child's school, that are routinely attended by parents.
8. that each party be restrained from enrolling or committing the child to any activity during the other party's time without first obtaining the other party's consent in writing to such activity.
9. each of the parties shall notify the other as soon as practicable in the event that the child suffers a significant illness or injury whilst in his or her care and authorise the other to speak with all medical practitioners and other treating professionals.
10. the mother and father follow all reasonable recommendations and directions of any agreed medical practitioner or allied health professional treating the child from time to time including the administration of prescribed medication and engaging with other support services.
11. the parties ensure that at all times they provide to the other party their current contact telephone number and address.
12. each of the mother and father be and is hereby restrained from:   denigrating the other parent or any member of the other parent's family in the presence of hearing of the child or allowing any other person to do so, (b) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the child or allowing any other person to do so, and (c) exposing the child to family violence.   discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the child or allowing any other person to do so, and (c) exposing the child to family violence.   exposing the child to family violence.
13. that save in an emergency the parties shall only communicate via the app 'appclose' (or other agreed app) and only in relation to matters strictly concerning the child's care and welfare.
14. the parties be permitted to travel with the child as follows:  interstate:
if either party wishes to take the child interstate during their time with the child, they shall, no less than 14 days prior to the date of intended departure provide to the other written notice of the following:   itinerary for travel including flight numbers if applicable, (ii) contact name, number and address for all accommodation whilst away. (iii) the proposed travel not interfering with the other party's time with the child unless agreed and in writing, and (iv) if the proposed travel interferes with the other party's time with the child, but the other party has agreed to the travel in accordance with paragraph 14(a)(iii) of these orders, then make up time as close to equivalent as possible is to be offered by the travelling parent. (b) overseas:  ) contact name, number and address for all accommodation whilst away. (iii) the proposed travel not interfering with the other party's time with the child unless agreed and in writing, and (iv) if the proposed travel interferes with the other party's time with the child, but the other party has agreed to the travel in accordance with paragraph 14(a)(iii) of these orders, then make up time as close to equivalent as possible is to be offered by the travelling parent. (b) overseas:  i) the proposed travel not interfering with the other party's time with the child unless agreed and in writing, and (iv) if the proposed travel interferes with the other party's time with the child, but the other party has agreed to the travel in accordance with paragraph 14(a)(iii) of these orders, then make up time as close to equivalent as possible is to be offered by the travelling parent. (b) overseas:  ) if the proposed travel interferes with the other party's time with the child, but the other party has agreed to the travel in accordance with paragraph 14(a)(iii) of these orders, then make up time as close to equivalent as possible is to be offered by the travelling parent. (b) overseas:   overseas:
that the child be permitted to travel outside of the commonwealth of australia subject to the following:   that the parties shall do all acts and things as may be required to ensure that the child has a valid passport that has in excess of six months validity remaining on the passport at all times. (ii) that the parties shall to all acts and things as may be required to ensure that the child is up to date with all vaccinations as reasonably recommended by the child's usual treating doctor prior to travel. (iii) that the child's passport be held by the mother, and once the travel for which the passport was released from the mother to the father is over, the passport is to be returned to the mother within seven days of return to melbourne. (iv) that in the event that either party wishes to travel overseas with the child, then that party shall provide to the other party no less than 45 days written notice of their wish to travel with the child and subject to: the travelling party providing a written itinerary and contact details for the child whilst overseas, evidence of travel insurance for the child, no later than 28 days prior to the departure date, and the proposed travel being confined to countries that have signed the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction, and the proposed travel not to a location where there is a travel warning issued by the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade, and the proposed travel not interfering with the other party's time with the child unless agreed and in writing, and if the proposed travel interferes with the other party's time with the child, but the other party has agreed to the travel in accordance with paragraph 14(b)(iv)(d) of these orders, then make up time as close to equivalent as possible is to be offered by the travelling parent, and pending provision of the above, the other party shall not unreasonably withhold their consent to such travel occurring. such consent must be given in writing within 7 days of receive the documents listed above and within 14 days thereafter, the travelling parent will provide copies of the child's return air tickets (electronic or otherwise to the non-travelling party).  ) that the parties shall to all acts and things as may be required to ensure that the child is up to date with all vaccinations as reasonably recommended by the child's usual treating doctor prior to travel. (iii) that the child's passport be held by the mother, and once the travel for which the passport was released from the mother to the father is over, the passport is to be returned to the mother within seven days of return to melbourne. (iv) that in the event that either party wishes to travel overseas with the child, then that party shall provide to the other party no less than 45 days written notice of their wish to travel with the child and subject to: the travelling party providing a written itinerary and contact details for the child whilst overseas, evidence of travel insurance for the child, no later than 28 days prior to the departure date, and the proposed travel being confined to countries that have signed the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction, and the proposed travel not to a location where there is a travel warning issued by the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade, and the proposed travel not interfering with the other party's time with the child unless agreed and in writing, and if the proposed travel interferes with the other party's time with the child, but the other party has agreed to the travel in accordance with paragraph 14(b)(iv)(d) of these orders, then make up time as close to equivalent as possible is to be offered by the travelling parent, and pending provision of the above, the other party shall not unreasonably withhold their consent to such travel occurring. such consent must be given in writing within 7 days of receive the documents listed above and within 14 days thereafter, the travelling parent will provide copies of the child's return air tickets (electronic or otherwise to the non-travelling party).  i) that the child's passport be held by the mother, and once the travel for which the passport was released from the mother to the father is over, the passport is to be returned to the mother within seven days of return to melbourne. (iv) that in the event that either party wishes to travel overseas with the child, then that party shall provide to the other party no less than 45 days written notice of their wish to travel with the child and subject to: the travelling party providing a written itinerary and contact details for the child whilst overseas, evidence of travel insurance for the child, no later than 28 days prior to the departure date, and the proposed travel being confined to countries that have signed the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction, and the proposed travel not to a location where there is a travel warning issued by the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade, and the proposed travel not interfering with the other party's time with the child unless agreed and in writing, and if the proposed travel interferes with the other party's time with the child, but the other party has agreed to the travel in accordance with paragraph 14(b)(iv)(d) of these orders, then make up time as close to equivalent as possible is to be offered by the travelling parent, and pending provision of the above, the other party shall not unreasonably withhold their consent to such travel occurring. such consent must be given in writing within 7 days of receive the documents listed above and within 14 days thereafter, the travelling parent will provide copies of the child's return air tickets (electronic or otherwise to the non-travelling party).  ) that in the event that either party wishes to travel overseas with the child, then that party shall provide to the other party no less than 45 days written notice of their wish to travel with the child and subject to: the travelling party providing a written itinerary and contact details for the child whilst overseas, evidence of travel insurance for the child, no later than 28 days prior to the departure date, and the proposed travel being confined to countries that have signed the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction, and the proposed travel not to a location where there is a travel warning issued by the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade, and the proposed travel not interfering with the other party's time with the child unless agreed and in writing, and if the proposed travel interferes with the other party's time with the child, but the other party has agreed to the travel in accordance with paragraph 14(b)(iv)(d) of these orders, then make up time as close to equivalent as possible is to be offered by the travelling parent, and pending provision of the above, the other party shall not unreasonably withhold their consent to such travel occurring. such consent must be given in writing within 7 days of receive the documents listed above and within 14 days thereafter, the travelling parent will provide copies of the child's return air tickets (electronic or otherwise to the non-travelling party).
15. pursuant to s.62b and s.65da(2) of the family law act 1975 (cth), the particulars of the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may follow if a person contravenes these orders and details of who can assist the parties adjust to and comply with an order, are set out in the document entitled "family law courts fact sheet" a copy of which is annexed to these orders.
reasons for judgment
judge davis
overview
1 this is the hearing of an application for final parenting orders for x (child) who is the eight year old daughter of the applicant father (father), and the respondent mother (mother).
2 the primary issue to be determined by me is whether and, if so, on what terms the mother and the father should have shared care of the child.
3 there are other issues in dispute. in particular, in broad terms, they are whether:   the child should return to the mother’s residence after school and before commencing school holiday time to be spent with the father, (b) the changeover location should be at the midpoint between the parties or at the suburb d community centre when changeover does not occur at the child’s school, (c) telephone calls between the child and parent who does not have the child in their care should be at 5:30 to 6:00 p.m. or 7:00 to 7:30 p.m., (d) facetime should be used to facilitate those calls, and (e) the mother or the father should hold the child’s passport when it is not being used.   the changeover location should be at the midpoint between the parties or at the suburb d community centre when changeover does not occur at the child’s school, (c) telephone calls between the child and parent who does not have the child in their care should be at 5:30 to 6:00 p.m. or 7:00 to 7:30 p.m., (d) facetime should be used to facilitate those calls, and (e) the mother or the father should hold the child’s passport when it is not being used.   telephone calls between the child and parent who does not have the child in their care should be at 5:30 to 6:00 p.m. or 7:00 to 7:30 p.m., (d) facetime should be used to facilitate those calls, and (e) the mother or the father should hold the child’s passport when it is not being used.   facetime should be used to facilitate those calls, and (e) the mother or the father should hold the child’s passport when it is not being used.   the mother or the father should hold the child’s passport when it is not being used.
procedural history
4 i set out below some of the more significant procedural history of the proceeding.
5 the father filed an initiating application and material in support on 6 march 2020. amongst other things, the father’s initiating application effectively sought an equal shared care arrangement.
6 on 24 april 2020, the father filed an application in a case seeking an urgent hearing. the basis for that hearing was that the mother had unilaterally suspended the father’s time with the child.
7 the mother filed a response with supporting material on 6 may 2020. by that response, the mother sought sole parental responsibility for the child and to be excused from further particularising final orders pending the outcome of a family report.
8 the first return came before judge mcguire, as his honour then was, on 7 may 2020. his honour made interim orders by consent on 7 may 2020.
9 amongst other things, those orders provided for the child to spend time with the father each alternate weekend from 5 p.m. friday to 5 p.m. sunday, and for the father to communicate with the child by telephone each thursday evening between 5:30 p.m. and 6 p.m. judge mcguire’s orders also provided that the parties attend upon dr e as an independent expert for the purpose of obtaining a family report.
10 dr e completed interviews with parties on 10 june 2020 and prepared a family report dated 24 june 2020 (family report). the family report was filed with the court on 6 july 2020 as annexure -1 to an affidavit affirmed by dr e on 2 july 2020.
11 the matter then came before registrar kaur on 8 july 2020 who made further orders by consent. in broad terms, registrar kaur’s orders increased the time to be spent by the father with the child. amongst other things, in the alternate week, the parties agreed that an additional overnight stay was to be added – being, in effect, from the conclusion of school on thursday to school drop off on friday morning. registrar kaur’s orders also provided that the child would spend half of each holiday period with each parent. the other notable change was that although the telephone time on thursday evenings was maintained, it was altered to expressly exclude the use of facetime.
12 registrar kaur’s orders entailed a “3/11” arrangement, that is, an arrangement whereby the child was to spend three nights with the father and eleven nights with the mother. this remained in place when the proceeding came before me for final hearing.
13 on 18 november 2020, the matter came before judge o’shannessy who vacated the trial set down for november 2020 and adjourned it to june 2021. his honour ordered that section 102na(1)(c)(iv) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (family law act) applied to cross-examination by the father of the mother and requested that legal aid provide funding to assist him under the cross-examination scheme.
14 the final hearing came before me on 11 and 12 october 2021 via microsoft teams. mr byrne of counsel appeared for the father and mr carne of counsel appeared for the mother.
15 the father filed an amended application for final orders on 20 september 2021.
16 in support of that application, the father filed an affidavit sworn by him on 20 september 2021. on the same day, the father filed an affidavit sworn by his treating psychologist, mr f.
17 on 21 september 2021, the mother filed an amended response.
18 in support of her amended response, the mother filed an affidavit which she had affirmed on 20 september 2021.
orders sought by the parties at trial
19 i do not need here to set out the substance of the orders sought by the parties in their amended application and amended response respectively. that is because on the first day of the final hearing, after i had stood the matter down at the request of both counsel to permit discussions, counsel provided me with a minute of orders which identified:  orders which had been agreed, and (b) where orders had not been agreed, the competing orders respectively sought.   where orders had not been agreed, the competing orders respectively sought.
20 i attach that minute as schedule a to these reasons. accordingly, the orders ultimately sought on behalf of the parties and the field of dispute between them is reposed in that minute.
factual background
21 the mother and father commenced a relationship in 2008 and began cohabiting in 2012.
22 the child was born in 2013.
23 the parties separated in november 2013 when the child was about six months old. the family report states that the “parties provided similar narratives about what led to the separation in that they had different views and were unhappy in the relationship.”
24 from the time of the separation to the time of the trial, the mother continued to live in the family home. the child lived with the mother throughout that period.
25 the father moved in with his parents and continued to reside at that home with the paternal grandmother at the time of the trial. the paternal grandfather passed away in january 2021.
26 in the period commencing immediately after separation and up until x commenced school in 2019, the father’s time spent with the child was generally agreed between the parties.
27 as both parties worked full time in the period before x started school, the paternal grandparents often provided daytime care from monday to friday. during this time, there had been some disagreement about whether the child should attend crèche but ultimately she was cared for by the paternal grandparents. in this period the father’s time spent with the child was extended to include overnight stays each sunday to tuesday or wednesday, although the parties disagreed about whether or not this was a fixed arrangement and indeed which specific days were included.
28 once the child commenced primary school in 2019, the care arrangement altered such that the child spent each alternate weekend with the father. this time commenced at the conclusion of school on each alternate friday and concluded at 5 p.m. on the following sunday. the family report says that this change was at the request of the mother who sought greater structure for the child during the week and weekend time with the child for each parent.
29 in or about september 2019, the mother informed the father that she had re-partnered. dr e’s family report notes that this event “impacted significantly on the adult dynamic” between the parties.
30 on or about 16 october 2019, the mother obtained an interim intervention order against the father following a verbal dispute between the parties which occurred during changeover and largely in front of the child. the changeover in question was with a view to the father taking the child on a pre-arranged holiday to new south wales with the object of visiting the child’s paternal family. as a result of the verbal dispute, the holiday did not proceed and the child stayed with the mother. the ivo against the father listed both the mother and the child as protected persons. initially, the father contested the making of the final intervention order. on 21 june 2021, the father consented to a final intervention order for a period of 12 months without admitting to the allegations and the child was removed as a protected person from the final order.
31 as a result of the ivo, the mother ceased providing the child into the father’s care with the consequence that he did not spend his time agreed time with the child briefly. the father then engaged a solicitor who negotiated with the mother’s solicitor for the father’s time spent with the child to recommence on or about 22 november 2019.
32 there was another period of approximately six weeks, commencing in march 2020 and concluding april 2020, when the mother again ceased providing the child into the father’s care with the consequence that he did not spend his agreed time with the child. the mother alleges that this was because the father had inappropriate conversations with the child, including a conversation in language g, which were of an adult nature, directed towards the mother’s care arrangements and critical of her partner.
33 the father then filed:  the initiating application which commenced this proceeding on 6 march 2020, and (b) an application in a case on 24 april 2020, to seek to recommence time with the child.   an application in a case on 24 april 2020, to seek to recommence time with the child.
to seek to recommence time with the child.
34 the father’s time spent with the child resumed as a result of judge mcguire’s orders made on 7 may 2020.
35 in their respective notices of risk, each of the parties ticked the box reflecting allegations that the child had been subject to forms of abuse. however, dr e’s family report noted that neither party reported any involvement of the department of health and human services in relation to the child. moreover, the family report expressed no concern with respect child abuse.
36 the father applied to the suburb h magistrates’ court for interim intervention orders against the mother’s partner, mr j. on 2 august 2021, he obtained such orders. the father alleged that mr j threatened him on a number of occasions, which included an incident that occurred during a school pick up on or about 27 may 2021. in evidence, the mother and the father gave conflicting accounts of this latter incident. no account was advanced by mr j in the trial or otherwise.
evidence
37 the consideration of the evidence that follows focuses on matters of relevance to the orders which remained controversial between the parties.
38 again, prior to the evidence commencing on the first day of the trial, both counsel provided me with the minute of orders which constitutes schedule a to this judgment. again, that minute identified the orders which had been agreed by the parties as well as those that were still in dispute.
dr e’s evidence – the family report
39 it is convenient to deal first with the evidence of dr e. dr e’s was the author of the family report, dated 24 june 2020. she also gave oral evidence.
40 paragraph 79 of the family report states as follows:
this matter presents as one where the parties would benefit from clear, unambiguous structure through court orders. it was apparent on meeting with the parties that this matter resolves around the adult conflict and differences in each party’s respective views on parenting x. the high degree of conflict is problematic as it has not only resulted in court proceedings but has unnecessarily directly exposed x to heated arguments between the parties. this is not appropriate and needs to cease immediately. the literature is clear that children who are exposed to conflict, particularly over prolonged periods of time, are at increased risk of poorer outcomes across multiple domains including: psychologically, socially and academically.
41 dr e offers an example of the father making disparaging remarks to the child about the mother’s new partner to “demonstrate mr agombar’s lack of insight as to the inappropriateness of such actions and the impact on x of feeling pressured and caught in the middle of warring parties.”[1] dr e added that the child’s voice had been lost and that both the mother and the father tended to speak from their own perspective which they mistakenly perceived to be shared by the child.[2]
42 set against this backdrop, paragraph 90 of the family report expresses dr e’s evaluation of whether an equal shared care arrangement was practical or desirable at the time the report was written. paragraph 90 states:
with the above in mind, an equal shared care arrangement currently presents as impractical for a number of reasons. such as: the high degree of parental conflict, the distance between the residences and x’s school, mr agombar’s reliance on the paternal grandparents for assistances in caring for x, and mr agombar’s lack of insight about the impact on x of exposing her to adult conflict. it also fails to consider that x appears quite settled at present and has been coping well with the current arrangements. however, there is merit in considering increasing x’s time with mr agombar to include an opportunity for mr agombar to be more involved in x’s schooling. [emphasis added]
43 during the course of the trial it became apparent that the parties were deeply divided on whether mr agombar had developed insight into his role in the adult conflict, as well as its impact on x when she was exposed to it. the resolution of this issue was significant as it reflected the risk of whether and, if so, to what extent x might be exposed to such conflict in the future.
44 in spite of the above, it is important to highlight that the family report described x in glowing terms. the report stated that x “presented as a delightful, energetic and sociable child.”[3] it went on to say that ‘x was progressing well socially and academically, with no apparent concerns.’[4]
45 the family report also said the x spoke “positively and lovingly of her relationship with both parents”, and that she did not raise any concerns about her interactions with the mother’s partner, mr j.[5] x also presented her relationship with the paternal grandparents in positive light.[6] again, since the family report was written the paternal grandfather passed away in this year.
dr e’s oral evidence
46 the father's counsel, mr byrne, put some propositions to dr e relating to how mr agombar had followed recommendations set out in the family report, such as attending a parenting course and completing 15 sessions with a treating psychologist. mr byrne asked dr e about some positive feedback which mr agombar had received from his psychologist regarding his development of insight from the sessions with the psychologist.
47 in response, dr e gave the following evidence: he fact that the psychologist has suggested that he has developed some level of insight, demonstrates that there is a capacity and a positive capacity, moving forward. but, again,... i guess, the information that i feel i’m lacking to make that additional step is in relation to “has he been able to adopt those and adapt those [more positive] dynamics...
48 in relation to questions about whether additional weeknights might be added to the father’s time, dr e expressed the view that if the court were minded to follow that path, ordering a block of two nights rather than one night was preferable. dr e said that she considered that this is generally less disruptive for a child. she explained that it allows a child to adjust more fully to each respective parenting style.
49 dr e also said that, should the court determine that such a change was in the child’s best interests, any short term disruption in x’s routine would be outweighed by the longer term benefits.
50 dr e gave evidence to the effect that, generally, as a child gets older, longer travel times could be tolerated. however, dr e also said that this can be dependent upon the child. she expressed the view that the primary consideration had to be about the child’s needs and not the parent wanting to spend time with them. dr e said, “it’s about the quality of the time rather than the quantity”.
51 dr e went on to say that:
well, i think there’s a number of ways that parents can be involved in a child’s schooling, and it’s not necessarily that pick up and drop off. but yes, children do tend to enjoy those periods of having their parents do that, rather than having to go to after-school care programs – rather than relying on other third party care mechanisms. but it’s also about, you know, being able to engage in homework tasks and things like that, which are not necessarily always done, for example, on a friday afternoon. if that’s the only afternoon that her father has with her on the alternate weekends, it sort of limits the scope of being able to be engaged or involved in that. so it’s less of the day-to-day parenting and more of that quality time together over that weekend period, so there might be less focus on schooling, if that makes sense. but i would also – part of that is also around being able to attend events at school and all those sorts of things, being able to, you know, be invited to award ceremonies, and – and all of that is very important for children to see that, “just because my parents are separated doesn’t mean that they can’t still both be there for me.”
52 dr e also said that, typically speaking, changeovers should occur at the school because that is neutral location:
it’s also about the school provides a neutral ground for a child, so it’s also about ... if they get dropped off from one parent who had quite a varied parenting style to the other parent, they have actually got the whole day to settle and just be themselves, enjoy their friends, enjoy their learning and become neutral, to then be ready to go to the other parent’s home.
53 with respect to the importance for the child of the resolution of the adult conflict, dr e said:
... i think one of the big ones for me is in relation to really being able to set aside the adult issues, and recognising when an issue is around their own, i guess, their own needs, something that is concerning them versus something that is actually impacting on x.
54 mr carne then asked dr e questions relating to shared care. amongst other things, in response to such questions, dr e made the following observations:
for starters, it’s about the – i guess the risk that the child is going to continue to be drawn into and exposed to that conflict in terms of the stark contrasts across the households. so typically, whilst yes, parents can have a different arrangement in each household and slightly different parenting styles, unless they’re cooperative with parenting – and it’s a whole week, potentially, between each – seeing each parent – a lot of information is often missed and not communicated because they don’t have that open trust and communication that’s able to say, “okay, i’ve had this child in my care for a week. this is what’s happened, or this is their needs,” as opposed to, “we’re not speaking, so i’m not going to share that information with you. i’m going to give you minimal information.” so that’s one of the most significant concerns, and again, really exposing that child to the conflict is one of the biggest ones, because we know there are significant long-term impacts – the research is very clear on that – of children being exposed to such conflict
55 dr e gave evidence that trust between the parties was significant to their ability to parent the child in her best interests.
56 mr carne put to dr e that mr agombar had ongoing trust issues with mr hutchings’ partner, and asked for dr e’s opinion on whether this would be a barrier to increasing mr agombar’s time with x. dr e responded, amongst other things, that:
one thing i’d like to clarify ... for the court is that the father’s allowed to have an opinion. he is absolutely allowed to have that opinion about, you know, the mother’s partner. my concerns in relation to him having that opinion is who he shares that with and the way that he goes about expressing that, and my concern is about how that’s expressed to x, because this person is possibly considered someone who may be someone reasonably significant in her life, an additional person, not to take the place of her father at all or her mother. she has two parents and always will have. but that is my concern, is the way that it’s expressed and the way that x experiences that, because it also then creates doubt in her mind about the dynamic and her sense of safety and stability where she lives.
57 dr e expressed the view that even if the father had gained no further insight since the family report was written she would not reduce his time with x from its current level:
his honour: ...i suppose one of the matters exercising the court’s consideration at the moment is that ...let’s say the court were to find that the father had gained complete insight from the psychological sessions. then there’s no issue. let’s say the court decided that the father had gained no insight from the psychological sessions. then we would be where you were when you saw him last. and let’s say the position is somewhere in the middle. on any of those three hypotheses...as i understand your evidence, you’re saying that it’s still appropriate that the father spends, say, three nights a fortnight, minimum, with x? ---yes. i think that it is still important that they have a bond and a relationship. i’m not necessarily suggesting that it is a situation of no time or no contact in relation to that.
mr agombar – evidence in chief
58 mr agombar gave evidence in chief primarily by his affidavit of 20 september 2021.
59 he also gave some brief oral evidence relating to the more peripheral issues in dispute between the parties. that is, he gave oral evidence on questions other than the primary issue of whether there ought be equal shared care ordered. to the extent that it is necessary to deal with this evidence, for the sake of convenience i do so below, when discussing closing submissions.
60 he also relied upon the affidavit of his treating psychologist, mr f, of 20 september 2021.
61 the father deposed that, pursuant to registrar kaur’s orders dated 8 july 2020 he had:  attended upon a psychologist, mr f, for cogitative behavioural therapy, and (b) completed the parenting orders program.   completed the parenting orders program.
62 in very broad terms, the thrust of mr agombar’s affidavit evidence with respect to his application for equal shared care included the following:  during the relationship, he had a close relationship with the child, shared the role of primary carer and been very involved in her daily routine, (b) in the post-separation period, and before the mother re-partnered, his relationship with the mother had been amicable and shared cared had continued without problems, (c) the paternal grandparents, and particularly the paternal grandmother, had formed a close relationship with x, and (d) although mr agombar disagreed with some recommendations in the family report, he had taken them on board and made attempts to address issues such as communication with the mother, which he deposed as having improved a great deal.   in the post-separation period, and before the mother re-partnered, his relationship with the mother had been amicable and shared cared had continued without problems, (c) the paternal grandparents, and particularly the paternal grandmother, had formed a close relationship with x, and (d) although mr agombar disagreed with some recommendations in the family report, he had taken them on board and made attempts to address issues such as communication with the mother, which he deposed as having improved a great deal.   the paternal grandparents, and particularly the paternal grandmother, had formed a close relationship with x, and (d) although mr agombar disagreed with some recommendations in the family report, he had taken them on board and made attempts to address issues such as communication with the mother, which he deposed as having improved a great deal.   although mr agombar disagreed with some recommendations in the family report, he had taken them on board and made attempts to address issues such as communication with the mother, which he deposed as having improved a great deal.
mr agombar – cross-examination
63 in cross-examination, mr agombar agreed that the family report identified that adult conflict between ms ermans and him, as well as x’s exposure to that conflict, were significant issues in this proceeding.
64 the mother’s counsel took mr agombar to paragraph 90 of dr e’s family report asked him whether he agreed that there was a high degree of conflict. mr agombar replied:
well, there was, leading up to it, because she took out an ivo and we weren’t – she was reneging on arrangements made between solicitors and there couldn’t seem to be any sort of resolution or communication made between the parties. so that’s what was expressed at the time. so the – the communication wasn’t good at the time.
65 ultimately, mr agombar accepted that the fact that ms ermans had re-partnered was a cause of his conflict with her, and he gave evidence as follows:
... the conflict arose from – we had a – a – a flexible shared care arrangement with one another, albeit informal, and it worked for six and a half years. the dynamics changed when someone – when ms ermans or the respondent repartnered. there were concerns with regards to the safety and wellbeing of – and sleeping arrangements of my daughter when he was staying over...
66 as is apparent, mr agombar expressed distrust of the mother’s parenting in connection with the sleeping arrangements for x. such distrust arose from occasions on which x had slept in the same room as ms ermans and her new partner.
67 with respect to his contributions to the parental conflict, amongst other things, mr agombar said in cross-examination that:
when i was dealing with the respondent with regards to the sleeping arrangements, there was discussion made between the two of us and because we know each other well and maybe i know the – the buttons to push with her and so forth and when i was trying to work out – work a pathway plan, i think i – i probably contributed by saying that i didn’t trust her. so things like that which she took great umbrage to. ... i’ve tried at every time where i could to keep my daughter away from these adult issues and i’ve had many discussions with the psychologist to be able to address or reframe my thinking and not worry about which i tended to do – was focus on her behaviours and instead of focusing on mine and what i can control. and – and that’s, i think, the biggest thing that i can say that i was focused probably more on what ms ermans was doing or the respondent was doing and her behaviours, and without really taking on-board what i was contributing, you know, to the conflict.
68 as to whether any past mistrust by him continued, mr agombar said:
there’s no mistrust. just – but, you know, you asked me, your honour, it’s just – am i entitled to give an opinion, am i? ... it’s just that i read her affidavit and i thought, “oh my god”, ... she has resorted to throwing so much mud and telling lies, lacks honesty throughout the whole affidavit and then you’re asking me do i still trust her or can i trust her, you know. and it’s not about trust for me anymore. ... it’s just about moving forward with my daughter. ...so it’s not about trust anymore, you know. yes, i trust her as a mother doing the right thing by her daughter when she’s in her keeping but she’s – she hasn’t – i have that reservation there, your honour, with all honesty because, you know, she has stopped x from seeing me and her paternal grandparents for, you know, seven weeks at a time twice ... it hurt me and, yes, it made me angry but i’ve let go of all that. i’m a forgiving person. ...
69 mr agombar went on to say:
i believe she’s a good mother. she ... just loves her daughter and ... would be protective of her in areas, but i just feel as though we just have different value systems as to how we go about with navigating certain things that she wasn’t prepared to communicate with, but i tried to.
70 however, mr agombar accepted that he had questioned ms ermans’ decision-making and admitted to discussing this with x during a telephone call in language g in or about march 2020.
71 mr agombar gave evidence that he would endeavour to communicate more harmoniously with ms ermans in the future.
... i would reframe things in a way that would be less maybe offensive to ms ermans or for her to feel, in any way, offended or feel hurt by communications ... ... there was communication problems happening there and i’m trying to communicate with her and to be open and honest in our dealings with one another concerning our daughter.
72 in cross-examination, mr agombar’s also gave evidence which is relevant to the orders sought by the parties which are the subject of controversy but which do not relate to the question whether there ought to be an order for equal shared care. again, to the extent that it is necessary to deal with this evidence, for the sake of convenience, i do so when discussing closing submissions.
mr f – evidence in chief
73 in relation to whether there ought be an order for equal shared care of the child, mr agombar relied on the affidavit of mr f sworn 20 september 2021. mr f annexed his psychological report of mr agombar to that affidavit. that report included the following observations:
mr agombar has remained actively engaged throughout the therapeutic process and has been willing to take on the recommendations from the family report by dr e. ... throughout the therapy sessions, mr agombar has actively engaged in discussions, presenting as genuinely motivated to develop insight into his thinking patterns, as well as recognising the relationship between his thinking patterns and his behaviour. such discussions related to skills and strategies relating to cognitive reframing, helping mr agombar to understand the fact that improving his ability to recognise and reframe unhelpful thoughts will assist him to more effectively regulate his emotions, as well as positively respond to challenging scenarios in the future. ... ... based on my time spent with mr agombar, i therefore see no reason as to why he should not have shared custody. while it is my professional opinion that further session are not required as the listed concerns of the family court have been addressed, mr agombar has requested that he continue to attend the sessions, highlighting his desire to continue to achieve growth and develop further personal insight.
mr f – cross-examination
74 in cross-examination, mr f gave evidence about how far along the road he thought that mr agombar was in terms of developing insight into his contributions to the adult conflict with the mother after 15 sessions of therapy. mr f replied:
well, i think he has come a long way. ... [t]here’s always more that we can learn. but i think he has come a long way into developing that insight and being able to deal with conflict and manage that conflict as well.
75 when pressed on where mr agombar was on a scale of one to 100 in terms of achieving his potential in being able to deal with situation of conflict, mr f said:
i believe, your honour, that he is a fair way to his potential. i would say, you know, in between 50 and 100. we can always improve on that and, you know, i believe he’s very capable at dealing with the conflict. i also believe that ... there is a challenging period. ... [t]he goal is, and mr agombar has identified the goal of having an amicable relationship with his ex-partner and also her current partner, which obviously isn’t there 100 per cent, so that is something that i would definitely be prepared to support him in, but i do believe he is very capable of dealing with conflict from the insight that he has given me and the level of engagement.
ms ermans – evidence in chief
76 in evidence in chief, ms ermans adopted her affidavit of 20 september 2021. she also gave some oral evidence.
77 with respect to the question whether there ought be an order for equal shared care, in broad terms, by her affidavit ms ermans gave evidence including the following:  although no formal arrangement had been required up until x started school, there had been co-parenting difficulties. these included mr agombar attempting to override the mother’s decisions. this led to problems agreeing child care arrangements. (b) changes to the current arrangement would disrupt x’s routine and might create additional travel time. (c) ms ermans alleges that mr agombar’s communication and behaviour became increasingly aggressive over time. as a result, x’s exposure to incidences of family violence has intensified too. (d) mr agombar’s “controlling behaviour” escalated after ms ermans re-partnered. (e) in october 2019, ms ermans applied for an intervention order against mr agombar. since that time ms ermans alleges that mr agombar has breached the intervention order, and that x has been exposed to breaches, such as a breach that occurred at school changeover in relation to which mr agombar took out and intervention order against ms ermans new partner. (f) ms ermans deposes that ongoing communication issues demonstrate that mr agombar cares more about his own needs than those of x, that he lacks insight into his actions and that he exposes x adult conflict.   changes to the current arrangement would disrupt x’s routine and might create additional travel time. (c) ms ermans alleges that mr agombar’s communication and behaviour became increasingly aggressive over time. as a result, x’s exposure to incidences of family violence has intensified too. (d) mr agombar’s “controlling behaviour” escalated after ms ermans re-partnered. (e) in october 2019, ms ermans applied for an intervention order against mr agombar. since that time ms ermans alleges that mr agombar has breached the intervention order, and that x has been exposed to breaches, such as a breach that occurred at school changeover in relation to which mr agombar took out and intervention order against ms ermans new partner. (f) ms ermans deposes that ongoing communication issues demonstrate that mr agombar cares more about his own needs than those of x, that he lacks insight into his actions and that he exposes x adult conflict.   ms ermans alleges that mr agombar’s communication and behaviour became increasingly aggressive over time. as a result, x’s exposure to incidences of family violence has intensified too. (d) mr agombar’s “controlling behaviour” escalated after ms ermans re-partnered. (e) in october 2019, ms ermans applied for an intervention order against mr agombar. since that time ms ermans alleges that mr agombar has breached the intervention order, and that x has been exposed to breaches, such as a breach that occurred at school changeover in relation to which mr agombar took out and intervention order against ms ermans new partner. (f) ms ermans deposes that ongoing communication issues demonstrate that mr agombar cares more about his own needs than those of x, that he lacks insight into his actions and that he exposes x adult conflict.   mr agombar’s “controlling behaviour” escalated after ms ermans re-partnered. (e) in october 2019, ms ermans applied for an intervention order against mr agombar. since that time ms ermans alleges that mr agombar has breached the intervention order, and that x has been exposed to breaches, such as a breach that occurred at school changeover in relation to which mr agombar took out and intervention order against ms ermans new partner. (f) ms ermans deposes that ongoing communication issues demonstrate that mr agombar cares more about his own needs than those of x, that he lacks insight into his actions and that he exposes x adult conflict.   in october 2019, ms ermans applied for an intervention order against mr agombar. since that time ms ermans alleges that mr agombar has breached the intervention order, and that x has been exposed to breaches, such as a breach that occurred at school changeover in relation to which mr agombar took out and intervention order against ms ermans new partner. (f) ms ermans deposes that ongoing communication issues demonstrate that mr agombar cares more about his own needs than those of x, that he lacks insight into his actions and that he exposes x adult conflict.   ms ermans deposes that ongoing communication issues demonstrate that mr agombar cares more about his own needs than those of x, that he lacks insight into his actions and that he exposes x adult conflict.
78 ms ermans evidence is that it is in the best interests of x to establish firm boundaries, with regards to time spent and channels of communication, which allow x to have meaningful relationship with mr agombar but in a safe manner. ms ermans produced a completion certificate for the parenting after separation course in response to a call made on behalf of mr agombar.
79 before being cross-examined, ms ermans gave brief oral evidence in chief relating to matters which were controversial between the parties other than the equal shared care issue. again, to the extent necessary, i deal with such evidence when addressing closing submissions.
cross-examination of ms ermans
80 in effect, ms ermans agreed in cross-examination that, in essence, the foundations of her case for the retention of the 3/11 arrangement were as follows:  the high degree of conflict prevents cohesive co-parenting, (b) x is settled into routine and ms ermans does not consider disruption to be in x’s best interests, and (c) the distance between the parents respective residences and the child’s school would increase travel time which is not in the child’s benefit.   x is settled into routine and ms ermans does not consider disruption to be in x’s best interests, and (c) the distance between the parents respective residences and the child’s school would increase travel time which is not in the child’s benefit.   the distance between the parents respective residences and the child’s school would increase travel time which is not in the child’s benefit.
81 mr byrne took ms ermans through various changes to arrangements for the time spent by the child with her respective parents which had occurred since separation. in effect, mr byrne put to ms ermans that, in the past, the child had been cared for by mr agombar and the paternal grandparents for the majority of weekdays and by ms ermans for the majority of evenings. although ms ermans that this had occurred, she said that, “i believe it’s a situation that i was placed in, given i was left with no alternative.” she went on to explain that she felt she had no alternative because her work commitments meant that five day care was required for x.
82 ms ermans said that the previous care arrangements were not appropriate. she stated that:
i believe it was inappropriate in the volume of travel that was involved for x, the early travel required for x, the volume of travel per day that was required for me to complete that drop-off and pick-up and also attend to my work commitments. i also believe ... it was not appropriate in how it come about ... it was my original request that x attend crèche two days a week and that she would attend care under her grandmother three days a week. my reasoning behind x attending crèche was to socialise her with other children so she was able to be around other children, being she’s an only child, that she would not receive that interaction when over at her grandmother’s, and i did attempt to place x into childcare. that didn’t go very well, and i withdrew x from crèche for that reason as to not put her through that, as to not put the crèche and anyone involved with the crèche through that, and i felt i was then left with the option – or no option bar to facilitate the request of going to her grandmother’s five days per week as care was required due to my work commitments, and also it basically maintained the status quo and avoided conflict – avoided further conflict.
83 ms ermans later gave evidence that her work commitments have changed in in light of covid-19 in that she now has work from home arrangements.
84 ms ermans also gave evidence that given that x now attended school, the earlier care arrangement was no longer required.
85 ms ermans was then questioned on whether this would mean that she still required the ongoing assistance of her sister, to which she had referred to in her affidavit. ms ermans initially said that her sister’s ongoing assistance was not required because of her new covid-19 work from home arrangements. however, later, ms ermans acknowledged that her sister’s assistance might be required on an ongoing basis if her covid-19 work arrangements subsequently changed.
86 mr byrne then cross-examined ms ermans about her effectively having put a stop to mr agombar’s plan to take x on a holiday to new south wales. in response, ms ermans said:
in hindsight, i would agree with you. in reflection upon the event, i think i would have been best served to potentially leave, diffuse the situation, communicate with mr agombar in that we take some time and some space, and i refer to a small amount of time and space, to calm the situation and then revisit in progressing with the situation and the travel and once it had been rationally discussed and so forth, to alleviate, i guess, the concerns i would have – i had for x.
87 ms ermans appeared to accept that she may have overreacted by unilaterally deciding to refuse to provide x into her father’s care after the country g telephone conversation in march 2020 which is referred to above.
88 mr byrne put to ms ermans that the family report recommended more time than the orders that ms ermans was seeking, being a dinner on a school night. ms ermans then accepted that the family report recommended that it was appropriate for further time with mr agombar to be considered, and in response she said, “i do accept that and i do ... believe there’s flexibility to include what is recommended.”
89 the following exchange then took place:
mr byrne well, you don’t have to answer this without advice, if necessary, but does your answer mean that you’re considering changing your proposal for this court? ms ermans i feel that there is, you know, always room for negotiation post – post the – the – the orders. it – it’s – it’s – it’s my – it’s my hope that for x that there can be some common ground found that – despite orders, that at some point in time maybe we can reach a place where there – there is – there is flexibility based on what x at any time might request.
submissions
90 both parties adopted a holistic approach in relation to their submissions regarding which care arrangements were in the child’s best interests. that is, rather than arguing that their respective positions were in the best interests of the child by reference to each of the separate subsections of s 60cc or s 65daa of the family law act 1975, each counsel took an overall approach to the orders which they contended were in the child’s best interests.
the mother’s closing submissions
91 mr carne submitted that ms ermans essentially sought to maintain the status quo, whereby the child continues to spend three nights with mr agombar each fortnight.
92 amongst other things, in broad terms, mr carne submitted that the nature and extent of conflict between the mother and the father, expressed in paragraph 90 of the family report, remained an impediment to the equal time arrangement sought by the father. that is, in effect, mr carne argued that the high degree of parental conflict in the past was likely to continue with the consequence that the child would be exposed to it.
93 mr carne developed this contention by submitting that mr agombar continued to hold adverse opinions about ms ermans and her new partner with the result that such opinions would trigger future conflict to which the child would be exposed.
94 in effect, mr carne submitted that, when analysed, the father’s evidence exposed that he had not yet gained a sufficient level of insight into the need for him to shield the child from adult conflict. mr carne submitted that his cross examination of mr f supported his submission that the father had not yet gained such insight.
95 with respect to whether the court should order any and, if so, what any alteration to the regime with respect to time which the child is to spend with her respective parents, mr carne submitted:
and so, your honour, the question that you put to dr e really was, “well, what turns on it? three nights – if i accept everything about mr agombar that he – whether i accept that he has developed no insight or the insight that he has developed is pretty limited, what turns on it”. whether it’s three nights or a few more is – really comes down to what dr e identified. that, predominantly, x needs to be in a household and in an environment where she’s not being constantly exposed or questioned or put under pressure about what’s happening in her household, having views – or negative views about her other parent conveyed to her. that’s not – she’s not of an age where that’s of – where she’s necessarily got all of the resources that she needs to be able to deal with that. now, there’s no real suggestion in this case, your honour, that x is not a psychologically well adapted young girl. for all intents and purposes she seems to be doing very well. nor is there any dispute, your honour, that both of her parents love her. but the issue comes down to – and this is what dr e clearly identifies, in my submission, in her report. the concern is about it having too much time and x being exposed to those kind of behaviours which, in my submission, remain largely unabated.
96 mr carne also contended that a significant increase in time with the father would disrupt x’s routine and increase her travel time to and from school.
97 however, mr carne accepted that, if the father’s time were to be extended, increasing his weekend time to include monday morning was appropriate, since this would reduce the number of changeovers between the parties and, in this way, the potential for conflict.
98 mr carne submitted that i should prefer ms ermans’ evidence to that of mr agombar.
99 amongst other things, mr carne sought to persuade me of this by submitting that the evidence reflected a pattern of abuse by mr agombar of ms ermans. he submitted that such evidence could be found in the mother’s affidavit including:  the text messages referred to paragraphs 32 and 34 and annexed to that affidavit, (b) paragraphs 39 and 40, which refer to the mother’s account of the facts giving rise to the ivo against the father, (c) paragraph 44, which relates to mr agombar’s consent to the final orders in that ivo proceeding and the mother’s continued concern about what she describes as his controlling behaviour.   paragraphs 39 and 40, which refer to the mother’s account of the facts giving rise to the ivo against the father, (c) paragraph 44, which relates to mr agombar’s consent to the final orders in that ivo proceeding and the mother’s continued concern about what she describes as his controlling behaviour.   paragraph 44, which relates to mr agombar’s consent to the final orders in that ivo proceeding and the mother’s continued concern about what she describes as his controlling behaviour.
100 mr carne also invited my attention to paragraphs 41 to 43, which concerns the mother’s account of the ivo against her partner, mr j and other issues at school changeovers. he submitted that such matters demonstrate a pattern of abuse.
101 mr carne submitted that if i were to order an increase in the time to be spent by the child with her father then this should be constrained to the sunday night at the conclusion of his weekend time.
102 mr carne made submissions in relation to the various specific subsidiary issues in dispute between the parties. amongst other things, with respect to:   returning to the mother’s residence before holiday changeover taking place at 5 p.m. – mr carne submitted that x likes to come home after school, take afternoon tea and pack her bag, as well as connect with her mother before she leaves for the holiday period, (b) the location of changeover if not at school – mr carne submitted that the family report recommends that changeover take place ‘at school, a local library or a park’, and that x is used to the current arrangement. however, he accepted that the changeover location suggested by the father was the mid-point between the parties, (c) the time of the telephone calls – mr carne submitted that the earlier time of 5:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. was the time x was used to and it suited her routine, although he also conceded that the earlier time did not always work because of various circumstances that arise, (d) whether facetime should be used – mr carne submitted that that mr agombar had used it in the past as a form of surveillance for both ms ermans living arrangements and her parenting style, which has the effect of fuelling the potential for conflict and is inconvenient for that reason, and (e) which parent should hold x’s passport – mr carne submitted that as a matter of practicality the passport should stay with the birth certificate which is already held by the mother, and should x remain in the primary care of the mother, then the passport should also stay with her as the it may be required for primary identification or other purposes.   the location of changeover if not at school – mr carne submitted that the family report recommends that changeover take place ‘at school, a local library or a park’, and that x is used to the current arrangement. however, he accepted that the changeover location suggested by the father was the mid-point between the parties, (c) the time of the telephone calls – mr carne submitted that the earlier time of 5:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. was the time x was used to and it suited her routine, although he also conceded that the earlier time did not always work because of various circumstances that arise, (d) whether facetime should be used – mr carne submitted that that mr agombar had used it in the past as a form of surveillance for both ms ermans living arrangements and her parenting style, which has the effect of fuelling the potential for conflict and is inconvenient for that reason, and (e) which parent should hold x’s passport – mr carne submitted that as a matter of practicality the passport should stay with the birth certificate which is already held by the mother, and should x remain in the primary care of the mother, then the passport should also stay with her as the it may be required for primary identification or other purposes.   the time of the telephone calls – mr carne submitted that the earlier time of 5:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. was the time x was used to and it suited her routine, although he also conceded that the earlier time did not always work because of various circumstances that arise, (d) whether facetime should be used – mr carne submitted that that mr agombar had used it in the past as a form of surveillance for both ms ermans living arrangements and her parenting style, which has the effect of fuelling the potential for conflict and is inconvenient for that reason, and (e) which parent should hold x’s passport – mr carne submitted that as a matter of practicality the passport should stay with the birth certificate which is already held by the mother, and should x remain in the primary care of the mother, then the passport should also stay with her as the it may be required for primary identification or other purposes.   whether facetime should be used – mr carne submitted that that mr agombar had used it in the past as a form of surveillance for both ms ermans living arrangements and her parenting style, which has the effect of fuelling the potential for conflict and is inconvenient for that reason, and (e) which parent should hold x’s passport – mr carne submitted that as a matter of practicality the passport should stay with the birth certificate which is already held by the mother, and should x remain in the primary care of the mother, then the passport should also stay with her as the it may be required for primary identification or other purposes.   which parent should hold x’s passport – mr carne submitted that as a matter of practicality the passport should stay with the birth certificate which is already held by the mother, and should x remain in the primary care of the mother, then the passport should also stay with her as the it may be required for primary identification or other purposes.
the father’s closing submissions
103 again, mr byrne adopted a holistic approach to the matters set out in s 60cc of the family law act when submitting that it was in x’s best interests to grant the father’s application for equal shared care.
104 mr byrne submitted that the issue which had received most attention throughout the trial was the determination of the extant level of conflict between the parties and its likely influence on the child’s care regime in the future.
105 he submitted that this was also a significant focus of the family report as well as the oral evidence of dr e.
106 mr byrne submitted that:
now, with regard to the actual verbal discussions between the parties, it is certainly alleged by the mother that the father has spoken abusively towards her, obviously, there’s the phrase that my learned friend has drawn your attention towards. now, that is denied by my client, but i would also emphasise that this is not a situation where the mother has sworn her affidavit that that sort of language was routinely used or frequently used, she has drawn the court’s attention to, again, one specific example over a considerable period since separation. even if – and, of course, it’s my submission that the court should not – but even if the court was minded to prefer the mother evidence in this matter on that issue, in my submission, it does not follow that, merely because there was an example that the court has found to constitute abuse on one occasion, that in any way constitutes a pattern of abuse which is directly relevant to the child’s – or living circumstances. now, i would draw the court’s attention again to those paragraphs referenced by my learned friend 33, 34, 40 and 41.
107 in effect, mr byrne submitted that there was a sharp distinction between the father’s level of insight into his contribution to that conflict in the period prior to the completion of the family report (that is, up to 24 june 2020) and subsequently, including at the time of trial.
108 mr byrne argued that submissions made on the mother’s behalf conflated those two periods and in accurately asserted that the father continued to exhibit the impugned behaviours in which he had engaged before the family report was completed.
109 in support of those submissions, mr byrne pointed out that the text messages which mr carne had characterised as abusive, were sent between 2015 and 2019, a period which ended well prior to the completion of the family report.
110 mr byrne went on to note that the circumstances relating to the father’s ivo, as described in paragraph 40 of the mother’s affidavit, had also occurred before the family report was completed.
111 in effect, mr byrne submitted that although, by paragraph 41 of ms ermans’ affidavit, she gave an account of the father’s behaviour in 2021 in connection with mr j’s ivo which was adverse to him, that account was contested. he submitted that given that the mother did not call her partner, i should draw the inference that he not have supported her testimony or allegations with respect to the incident in question: jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8, (1959) 101 clr 298. he submitted that, in any event, as a single event it could not be considered as a pattern of abuse.
112 with respect to the father’s denigration of the mother, mr byrne submitted:
now, much like the metaphorical dog that did not bark in the night time, in my submission, the mother’s affidavit is telling in the absence of any allegations that, since the family report, the child has returned from time with the father complaining about the mother’s partner or saying inappropriate things to the mother’s partner or repeating comments by my client with regard to the mother’s partner. so, in my submission, the court can draw the inference that there has not been conduct of that kind such as would cause the mother concern since the family report was before the court.
113 mr byrne submitted that the absence of recent or substantiated allegations, made against the father since the writing of the family report, allowed me to find that the father no longer engaged in his past alleged impugned behaviours. in this regard, amongst other things mr byrne submitted that:
there’s no evidence before the court that the father has pressured the child since the family report with regard to the father’s partner, all the evidence relates to alleged conduct prior to the family report. so, in my submission, the primary factor that the court has to consider with regards to the level of conflict between the parties is the actual nature of the interactions between them since the family report and, in conjunction with that, the court would need to consider what positive steps the father has taken to address the issues with regard to conflict as flagged by the family report writer. now, as i’ve put previously, it’s common ground the father has engaged with a psychologist as recommended. it’s common ground that the father – and, to her credit, the mother – have completed a parenting after separation course and – in my submission, this is the most conclusion to draw – the absence of significant allegations with regard to the father’s conduct since that time, in my submission, allows the court to draw the inference that the father has not just taken those individual steps, he has appropriately adjusted his conduct in line with the 20 recommendations of the family report and, therefore, it should not give the court concern that the child be exposed to inappropriate conduct and inappropriate views if the father’s application with regard to a share care situation is granted. now, i will turn to a couple of the other matters with regard to the child’s regime.
114 with respect to the child being settled in her routine, mr byrne submitted that the court should adopt dr e’s view that, if the court were minded to change the current care arrangements, then any short term disruption would be outweighed by the long term benefits of the new regime.
115 mr byrne made submissions about mother’s evidence in relation to the travel time. he noted that the father said the school was 35 minutes from his residence and that the mother said it was 10 minutes from her residence. mr byrne sought to highlight an inconsistency in the mother’s evidence that it was a minimum 50 minute trip between her residence and the father’s residence. mr byrne pointed out that this would make the father’s trip to the school 40 minutes as opposed to the 35 minutes suggested.
116 mr byrne submitted that, should the court reject the father’s application for shared care of the child, rather than making the orders sought in the mother’s response, the court should significantly expand the father’s time spent with the child. in effect, mr byrne argued that this would give proper emphasis to the statutory object of the child having the benefit of both of her parents having a meaningful involvement in her life, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests.[7]
117 in further support of this submission, mr byrne relied on dr e’s evidence that the current arrangement whereby the child spent three nights per fortnight with the father was not a lot of time for child to spend with him.
118 mr byrne accepted that dr e did not support an equal shared care arrangement.
119 mr byrne submitted that, in response to questions from him, the mother accepted that attitudes can change and, given time, the parties could adopt healthier attitudes going forward. mr byrne, in effect submitted that, in light of this and the long standing nature of final parenting orders, the care arrangements for the child should reflect how the level of conflict had receded over recent time, which he submitted would continue to be the case as time moves forward. accordingly, in effect, he submitted that equal shared care should be ordered or, at least, the time which the court bordered that the child spend with the father be increased.
120 mr byrne’s submissions with respect to the contested issues other than the question whether the court should order equal shared care included that:  dr e said that there is a real benefit to school interposing between the child spending time in one parent’s residence and spending time in the other’s as this allowed the child gradually to adjust to the alternating parenting styles. accordingly, changeovers should be from the conclusion of school and not 5 p.m. as sought by the mother, (b) the current changeover location is not consistent with the family report, and neither is the father’s suggested location. in all the circumstances, using a mid-point changeover location is a reasonable solution. (c) the mother conceded the current time for telephone calls, of 5:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., was occasionally delayed, which means that the later time of 7:00 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. was more stable for the child. (d) facetime was an appropriate mode of communication because at times when mr agombar could not physically see x, he should use conventional technology that enables him to see her virtually. (e) given there is already equal care in the holiday period, then there is equal chance that the parties will require the use of the passport, which was conceded in the mother’s cross-examination.   the current changeover location is not consistent with the family report, and neither is the father’s suggested location. in all the circumstances, using a mid-point changeover location is a reasonable solution. (c) the mother conceded the current time for telephone calls, of 5:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., was occasionally delayed, which means that the later time of 7:00 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. was more stable for the child. (d) facetime was an appropriate mode of communication because at times when mr agombar could not physically see x, he should use conventional technology that enables him to see her virtually. (e) given there is already equal care in the holiday period, then there is equal chance that the parties will require the use of the passport, which was conceded in the mother’s cross-examination.   the mother conceded the current time for telephone calls, of 5:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., was occasionally delayed, which means that the later time of 7:00 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. was more stable for the child. (d) facetime was an appropriate mode of communication because at times when mr agombar could not physically see x, he should use conventional technology that enables him to see her virtually. (e) given there is already equal care in the holiday period, then there is equal chance that the parties will require the use of the passport, which was conceded in the mother’s cross-examination.   facetime was an appropriate mode of communication because at times when mr agombar could not physically see x, he should use conventional technology that enables him to see her virtually. (e) given there is already equal care in the holiday period, then there is equal chance that the parties will require the use of the passport, which was conceded in the mother’s cross-examination.   given there is already equal care in the holiday period, then there is equal chance that the parties will require the use of the passport, which was conceded in the mother’s cross-examination.
consideration
overview
121 i have considered all of the evidence and the parties’ submissions. amongst other things, i have also considered the:  objects of and principles underlying part vii of the family law act, including, as expressed in s 60b, (b) factors which i must consider in determining what is in the child’s best interests under s 60cc(2) and the relevant considerations which i may consider under s 60cc (3), and (c) matters which i must consider to determine whether to order equal shared care or substantial and significant time with each parent is appropriate as set out in s 65daa.   factors which i must consider in determining what is in the child’s best interests under s 60cc(2) and the relevant considerations which i may consider under s 60cc (3), and (c) matters which i must consider to determine whether to order equal shared care or substantial and significant time with each parent is appropriate as set out in s 65daa.   matters which i must consider to determine whether to order equal shared care or substantial and significant time with each parent is appropriate as set out in s 65daa.
122 in light of such consideration, in broad terms, i have decided to:  refuse the father’s application insofar as it seeks equal shared care, (b) instead, order a regime whereby the child spends five nights per fortnight with her father, nine with her mother and equal holiday time with each of her parents, and (c) make various orders with respect to the subsidiary disputes between the parties, as set out below.   instead, order a regime whereby the child spends five nights per fortnight with her father, nine with her mother and equal holiday time with each of her parents, and (c) make various orders with respect to the subsidiary disputes between the parties, as set out below.   make various orders with respect to the subsidiary disputes between the parties, as set out below.
123 i set out, below my:  reasons for reaching this conclusion, (b) determination of the subsidiary disputes between the parties, and (c) reasons for such determination.   determination of the subsidiary disputes between the parties, and (c) reasons for such determination.   reasons for such determination.
124 the parties have agreed that there should be an order for equal shared parental responsibility for the child. in circumstances where both the mother and the father have spent significant time with the child, the family report writer encourages the continuation of such a course and there is a bipartisan application for an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the presumption in s 65da(1) is not displaced. rather, that presumption is buttressed and i will make such an order.
whether to order equal shared care
125 for many years the child’s care arrangements had been agreed between the parties without the need for court orders.
126 the evidence suggests that such arrangements worked from the time at which the parties separated, when the child was approximately six months old, until about the time that the mother re-partnered, which was shortly after the child started school in 2019.
127 the family report recorded that x “presented as a delightful, energetic and sociable child”. moreover, it will be recalled that the mother’s counsel submitted that “there’s no real suggestion ...that x is not a psychologically well adapted young girl”. again, likewise, that report noted that “x was progressing well socially and academically, with no apparent concerns”.
128 however, the family report also highlighted that, amongst other things, x was aware of the adult conflict regarding her care arrangements. given the centrality of that conflict to the outcome of the primary controversy between the parties, it is useful to repeat the critical passage of the family report with respect to that issue. again, paragraph 90 of that report includes the following:
with the above in mind, an equal shared care arrangement currently presents as impractical for a number of reasons. such as: the high degree of parental conflict, the distance between the residences and x’s school, mr agombar’s reliance on the paternal grandparents for assistances in caring for x, and mr agombar’s lack of insight about the impact on x of exposing her to adult conflict. it also fails to consider that x appears quite settled at present and has been coping well with the current arrangements...
129 as observed above, the family report also noted that the child felt caught in the middle of warring parties.
130 again, in determining the father’s application for equal shared care, i have considered all of the evidence and submissions which have a bearing on the primary considerations which i must consider under s 60cc(2), the relevant additional considerations which i may consider under s 60cc(3) and the matters which i must consider under s 65daa.
131 however, the matters set out below were most significant in my determination to refuse the father’s application for equal shared care and, instead, to make an order for a care arrangement by which the child spends five nights a fortnight and in effect equal holiday time, with her father.
132 first, paragraph 90 of the family report makes clear that in dr e’s opinion, as an independent expert, the degree of parental conflict – at least when taken together with the other matters referred to in that paragraph – is too great for there to be an equal shared care arrangement.
133 i found dr e to be a most impressive witness.
134 secondly, i have had regard to the submissions made by mr byrne to the effect that the father has garnered significant insight into his contribution to the adult conflict, and the need to shield the child from that conflict, since the time at which the family report was completed. i have given careful consideration to the evidence of the father and his treating psychologist, mr f, to this effect.
135 thirdly, i accept that since the completion of the report, the father has had 15 sessions with the psychologist as well as undertaking the parenting orders program.
136 fourthly, however, having considered the father’s evidence in the context of the evidence as a whole and, in particular, having observed him give his oral evidence, i consider that the father’s insight is not yet at a level which would make it in the best interests of the child to order an equal shared care arrangement.
137 amongst other things, i base this conclusion on the following:  the father made efforts in his evidence to demonstrate that he had gained insight into the need to shield the child from adult conflict and that his mistrust or disapproval of the mother’s parenting, as well as his concerns in connection with her new partner, had abated. despite this, i consider that the substance and tone of the father’s relevant evidence reflected that he harboured a residual level of mistrust or disapproval such that it carried sufficient potential for ongoing parental conflict to which the child would likely be exposed to militate against granting his application for equal shared care. (b) i agree with counsel for the mother that the father’s evidence in cross examination with respect to his mistrust of the mother provides a good example of his residual mistrust and disapproval of her parenting. i have extracted some of the relevant transcript of such cross examination in paragraphs 68 and 69 above. (c) in my view it is telling that the father urged upon the court that, on the one hand, he harboured no mistrust of the mother but with almost his next breath stated with respect to her affidavit: “...“oh my god”, ... she has resorted to throwing so much mud and telling lies, lacks honesty throughout the whole affidavit the whole affidavit and then you’re asking me do i still trust her or can i trust her, you know. and it’s not about trust for me anymore...”. (d) again, shortly after this, the father said: “...we just have different value systems as to how we go about with navigating certain things that she wasn’t prepared to communicate with, but i tried to”. (e) in the case of each of his statements extracted above, the father endeavours to demonstrate insight and the abatement of his concerns with the mother but yet at the same time criticises and/or blames her. (f) moreover, the issue lies not only in what the father said but the way in which he said it. that is, his tone when giving the evidence in question indicated to that he had a residual degree of disapproval and/or mistrust of the mother. (g) further, in my view, it is telling that the father engaged in such criticism and blame of the mother – in a tone which reflected ongoing disapproval and/or mistrust of her – in circumstances in which it must have been clear to him that it was in his interests to persuade the court that he had resolved any ill feeling towards the mother to the point where he was capable of shielding the child from it. this suggests that the father still has difficulty in implementing or adopting whatever insight he has gained. (h) in all of the circumstances, i consider that there is at the very least a significant prospect of some ongoing parental conflict to which the child will be exposed. there is an appreciable chance that such risks will be exacerbated by an equal shared care arrangement. my conclusion in this regard is supported by the evidence of dr e and, in particular, paragraph 90 of her report.   i agree with counsel for the mother that the father’s evidence in cross examination with respect to his mistrust of the mother provides a good example of his residual mistrust and disapproval of her parenting. i have extracted some of the relevant transcript of such cross examination in paragraphs 68 and 69 above. (c) in my view it is telling that the father urged upon the court that, on the one hand, he harboured no mistrust of the mother but with almost his next breath stated with respect to her affidavit: “...“oh my god”, ... she has resorted to throwing so much mud and telling lies, lacks honesty throughout the whole affidavit the whole affidavit and then you’re asking me do i still trust her or can i trust her, you know. and it’s not about trust for me anymore...”. (d) again, shortly after this, the father said: “...we just have different value systems as to how we go about with navigating certain things that she wasn’t prepared to communicate with, but i tried to”. (e) in the case of each of his statements extracted above, the father endeavours to demonstrate insight and the abatement of his concerns with the mother but yet at the same time criticises and/or blames her. (f) moreover, the issue lies not only in what the father said but the way in which he said it. that is, his tone when giving the evidence in question indicated to that he had a residual degree of disapproval and/or mistrust of the mother. (g) further, in my view, it is telling that the father engaged in such criticism and blame of the mother – in a tone which reflected ongoing disapproval and/or mistrust of her – in circumstances in which it must have been clear to him that it was in his interests to persuade the court that he had resolved any ill feeling towards the mother to the point where he was capable of shielding the child from it. this suggests that the father still has difficulty in implementing or adopting whatever insight he has gained. (h) in all of the circumstances, i consider that there is at the very least a significant prospect of some ongoing parental conflict to which the child will be exposed. there is an appreciable chance that such risks will be exacerbated by an equal shared care arrangement. my conclusion in this regard is supported by the evidence of dr e and, in particular, paragraph 90 of her report.   in my view it is telling that the father urged upon the court that, on the one hand, he harboured no mistrust of the mother but with almost his next breath stated with respect to her affidavit: “...“oh my god”, ... she has resorted to throwing so much mud and telling lies, lacks honesty throughout the whole affidavit the whole affidavit and then you’re asking me do i still trust her or can i trust her, you know. and it’s not about trust for me anymore...”. (d) again, shortly after this, the father said: “...we just have different value systems as to how we go about with navigating certain things that she wasn’t prepared to communicate with, but i tried to”. (e) in the case of each of his statements extracted above, the father endeavours to demonstrate insight and the abatement of his concerns with the mother but yet at the same time criticises and/or blames her. (f) moreover, the issue lies not only in what the father said but the way in which he said it. that is, his tone when giving the evidence in question indicated to that he had a residual degree of disapproval and/or mistrust of the mother. (g) further, in my view, it is telling that the father engaged in such criticism and blame of the mother – in a tone which reflected ongoing disapproval and/or mistrust of her – in circumstances in which it must have been clear to him that it was in his interests to persuade the court that he had resolved any ill feeling towards the mother to the point where he was capable of shielding the child from it. this suggests that the father still has difficulty in implementing or adopting whatever insight he has gained. (h) in all of the circumstances, i consider that there is at the very least a significant prospect of some ongoing parental conflict to which the child will be exposed. there is an appreciable chance that such risks will be exacerbated by an equal shared care arrangement. my conclusion in this regard is supported by the evidence of dr e and, in particular, paragraph 90 of her report.   again, shortly after this, the father said: “...we just have different value systems as to how we go about with navigating certain things that she wasn’t prepared to communicate with, but i tried to”. (e) in the case of each of his statements extracted above, the father endeavours to demonstrate insight and the abatement of his concerns with the mother but yet at the same time criticises and/or blames her. (f) moreover, the issue lies not only in what the father said but the way in which he said it. that is, his tone when giving the evidence in question indicated to that he had a residual degree of disapproval and/or mistrust of the mother. (g) further, in my view, it is telling that the father engaged in such criticism and blame of the mother – in a tone which reflected ongoing disapproval and/or mistrust of her – in circumstances in which it must have been clear to him that it was in his interests to persuade the court that he had resolved any ill feeling towards the mother to the point where he was capable of shielding the child from it. this suggests that the father still has difficulty in implementing or adopting whatever insight he has gained. (h) in all of the circumstances, i consider that there is at the very least a significant prospect of some ongoing parental conflict to which the child will be exposed. there is an appreciable chance that such risks will be exacerbated by an equal shared care arrangement. my conclusion in this regard is supported by the evidence of dr e and, in particular, paragraph 90 of her report.   in the case of each of his statements extracted above, the father endeavours to demonstrate insight and the abatement of his concerns with the mother but yet at the same time criticises and/or blames her. (f) moreover, the issue lies not only in what the father said but the way in which he said it. that is, his tone when giving the evidence in question indicated to that he had a residual degree of disapproval and/or mistrust of the mother. (g) further, in my view, it is telling that the father engaged in such criticism and blame of the mother – in a tone which reflected ongoing disapproval and/or mistrust of her – in circumstances in which it must have been clear to him that it was in his interests to persuade the court that he had resolved any ill feeling towards the mother to the point where he was capable of shielding the child from it. this suggests that the father still has difficulty in implementing or adopting whatever insight he has gained. (h) in all of the circumstances, i consider that there is at the very least a significant prospect of some ongoing parental conflict to which the child will be exposed. there is an appreciable chance that such risks will be exacerbated by an equal shared care arrangement. my conclusion in this regard is supported by the evidence of dr e and, in particular, paragraph 90 of her report.   moreover, the issue lies not only in what the father said but the way in which he said it. that is, his tone when giving the evidence in question indicated to that he had a residual degree of disapproval and/or mistrust of the mother. (g) further, in my view, it is telling that the father engaged in such criticism and blame of the mother – in a tone which reflected ongoing disapproval and/or mistrust of her – in circumstances in which it must have been clear to him that it was in his interests to persuade the court that he had resolved any ill feeling towards the mother to the point where he was capable of shielding the child from it. this suggests that the father still has difficulty in implementing or adopting whatever insight he has gained. (h) in all of the circumstances, i consider that there is at the very least a significant prospect of some ongoing parental conflict to which the child will be exposed. there is an appreciable chance that such risks will be exacerbated by an equal shared care arrangement. my conclusion in this regard is supported by the evidence of dr e and, in particular, paragraph 90 of her report.   further, in my view, it is telling that the father engaged in such criticism and blame of the mother – in a tone which reflected ongoing disapproval and/or mistrust of her – in circumstances in which it must have been clear to him that it was in his interests to persuade the court that he had resolved any ill feeling towards the mother to the point where he was capable of shielding the child from it. this suggests that the father still has difficulty in implementing or adopting whatever insight he has gained. (h) in all of the circumstances, i consider that there is at the very least a significant prospect of some ongoing parental conflict to which the child will be exposed. there is an appreciable chance that such risks will be exacerbated by an equal shared care arrangement. my conclusion in this regard is supported by the evidence of dr e and, in particular, paragraph 90 of her report.   in all of the circumstances, i consider that there is at the very least a significant prospect of some ongoing parental conflict to which the child will be exposed. there is an appreciable chance that such risks will be exacerbated by an equal shared care arrangement. my conclusion in this regard is supported by the evidence of dr e and, in particular, paragraph 90 of her report.
138 fifthly, in reaching this conclusion, i have considered the evidence of mr f, including his report. i consider the following matters to be of significance with respect to his evidence:  first, mr f has given evidence to the effect that in his view the father was engaged in their psychological consultations, developed significant insight from them and was willing to take on board his recommendations and those of dr e. set against this backdrop, mr f stated that in his view there was no impediment to an equal shared care arrangement. (b) secondly, as dr e noted, the real question was whether the father had been able to adapt, that is, whether he had been able to adopt the more positive behaviours that he had learned, or sought to learn, through the process of counselling and any insight gained from it. (c) thirdly, despite the view expressed by mr f, i have had the advantage of assessing the father’s oral evidence. that evidence leads me to the conclusion which i have expressed above, namely, that the father’s insight or adoption of that insight is as yet insufficient to permit me to conclude that an equal shared care arrangement is in the best interests of the child. (d) fourthly, when pressed to state where he considered the father to be on the continuum of gaining insight, mr f expressed the view that he was somewhere between 50 and 100 percent. this is a very broad range and in my view, not reflective of a high degree of confidence that the task is completed.   secondly, as dr e noted, the real question was whether the father had been able to adapt, that is, whether he had been able to adopt the more positive behaviours that he had learned, or sought to learn, through the process of counselling and any insight gained from it. (c) thirdly, despite the view expressed by mr f, i have had the advantage of assessing the father’s oral evidence. that evidence leads me to the conclusion which i have expressed above, namely, that the father’s insight or adoption of that insight is as yet insufficient to permit me to conclude that an equal shared care arrangement is in the best interests of the child. (d) fourthly, when pressed to state where he considered the father to be on the continuum of gaining insight, mr f expressed the view that he was somewhere between 50 and 100 percent. this is a very broad range and in my view, not reflective of a high degree of confidence that the task is completed.   thirdly, despite the view expressed by mr f, i have had the advantage of assessing the father’s oral evidence. that evidence leads me to the conclusion which i have expressed above, namely, that the father’s insight or adoption of that insight is as yet insufficient to permit me to conclude that an equal shared care arrangement is in the best interests of the child. (d) fourthly, when pressed to state where he considered the father to be on the continuum of gaining insight, mr f expressed the view that he was somewhere between 50 and 100 percent. this is a very broad range and in my view, not reflective of a high degree of confidence that the task is completed.   fourthly, when pressed to state where he considered the father to be on the continuum of gaining insight, mr f expressed the view that he was somewhere between 50 and 100 percent. this is a very broad range and in my view, not reflective of a high degree of confidence that the task is completed.
139 sixthly, this is so despite the fact that i accept that the father has made a real effort to gain insight into his contribution to the parental conflict. i also accept that he has engaged in such effort as a result of his love and devotion to his daughter.
140 moreover, i accept that the father has gained some insight as a result of his effort and that he will continue to do his best to avoid or minimise parental conflict and to shield the child from such conflict as may occur.
141 seventhly, my conclusion that an order for equal shared care is not in the best interests of the child is reinforced when viewed together with other matters upon which dr e placed weight in paragraph 90 of the family report. again, such matters were  the distance between the parties’ residences and x’s school, (b) mr agombar’s reliance on the paternal grandmother for assistances in caring for x, and (c) the fact that x appears quite settled at present and has been coping well with the current arrangements.   mr agombar’s reliance on the paternal grandmother for assistances in caring for x, and (c) the fact that x appears quite settled at present and has been coping well with the current arrangements.   the fact that x appears quite settled at present and has been coping well with the current arrangements.
142 the first six matters to which i have referred above militate against granting the father’s application for equal shared care are relevant to considerations to which i must have regard under s 60cc(2) and, in particular, s 60cc(2)(b). the seventh matter to which i have referred above militate against the grant of the application additionally, at least under s 60cc(3)(d). accordingly, such matters likewise militate against the grant of the application for equal shared care under s 65daa(1).
143 in scvg v kld[8] at [75], the full court of the family court observed that:
... it is only when the application of findings made pursuant to s 60cc result in an affirmative answer to the questions posed in ss 65daa(1)(a) and (2)(c) that (subject to compliance with the balance of s 65daa) the court may make an order for either equal time or substantial and significant time (mrr v gr (2010) 240 clr 461).
allocation of time
144 it will be recalled that dr e:  in answer to a question from the court, accepted that – even if the father had gained no insight since the time at which her report was written – she would not reduce his time to be spent with the child. (b) in answer to a question from the court, also accepted that, even in those circumstances, three nights per fortnight during term was the minimum time which the father should spend with the child. (c) noted in her report that: “there is merit in considering increasing x’s time with mr agombar to include an opportunity for mr agombar to be more involved in x’s schooling”. (d) expressed the view in her oral evidence that the current care arrangements did not provide the father with “a lot of time”. (e) expressed the view in her oral evidence that if the court were minded to order that the child spend a greater number of school nights with her father, it was preferable to add a block of two nights rather than one. dr e’s said that she considered that this is generally less disruptive for a child as it allows them to adjust more fully to each respective parenting style.   in answer to a question from the court, also accepted that, even in those circumstances, three nights per fortnight during term was the minimum time which the father should spend with the child. (c) noted in her report that: “there is merit in considering increasing x’s time with mr agombar to include an opportunity for mr agombar to be more involved in x’s schooling”. (d) expressed the view in her oral evidence that the current care arrangements did not provide the father with “a lot of time”. (e) expressed the view in her oral evidence that if the court were minded to order that the child spend a greater number of school nights with her father, it was preferable to add a block of two nights rather than one. dr e’s said that she considered that this is generally less disruptive for a child as it allows them to adjust more fully to each respective parenting style.   noted in her report that: “there is merit in considering increasing x’s time with mr agombar to include an opportunity for mr agombar to be more involved in x’s schooling”. (d) expressed the view in her oral evidence that the current care arrangements did not provide the father with “a lot of time”. (e) expressed the view in her oral evidence that if the court were minded to order that the child spend a greater number of school nights with her father, it was preferable to add a block of two nights rather than one. dr e’s said that she considered that this is generally less disruptive for a child as it allows them to adjust more fully to each respective parenting style.   expressed the view in her oral evidence that the current care arrangements did not provide the father with “a lot of time”. (e) expressed the view in her oral evidence that if the court were minded to order that the child spend a greater number of school nights with her father, it was preferable to add a block of two nights rather than one. dr e’s said that she considered that this is generally less disruptive for a child as it allows them to adjust more fully to each respective parenting style.   expressed the view in her oral evidence that if the court were minded to order that the child spend a greater number of school nights with her father, it was preferable to add a block of two nights rather than one. dr e’s said that she considered that this is generally less disruptive for a child as it allows them to adjust more fully to each respective parenting style.
145 the mother does not take any issue with the maintenance of the current care arrangements. this attitude works on the premise that the mother does not have concern with the child spending time with her father, rather the only controversy between the parties is the extent of that time.
146 indeed, as observed above, in cross examination the mother acknowledged that the family report recommended that the time to be spent by the father with the child be increased and gave the following evidence:
“i do accept that and i do ... believe there’s flexibility to include what is recommended.”
i feel that there is, you know, always room for negotiation post – post the – the – the orders. it – it’s – it’s – it’s my – it’s my hope that for x that there can be some common ground found that – despite orders, that at some point in time maybe we can reach a place where there – there is – there is flexibility based on what x at any time might request.
147 in light of this, the views of dr e referred to above with respect to the child spending additional time with her father, as well as the operation of s 60cc(2)(a) and 65daa(2) i consider that the time to be spent by the father with the child should be increased from a 3/11 arrangement to a 9/5 arrangement effective as at the commencement of the next cycle. to be clear, in my view such an increase in the time to be spent by the child with her father is practicable, promotes the prospect of her spending substantial and significant time with each parent and is in her best interests.
148 i will hear the parties as to where they are in the cycle.
149 in reaching this conclusion, i have had regard to all the relevant evidence as well as the parties’ submissions.
150 amongst other things, i have considered submissions put on behalf of the mother to the effect that this would be disruptive. however, consistently with the view expressed by dr e, i have concluded that any short term disruption will be exceeded by the long term benefit to the child.
151 likewise, i have considered the view expressed by dr e that ideally such a change would take place at the commencement of the school year or the start of a term. however, the current school year is still in its nascent stages.
152 in addition to the considerations set out in s 60cc(3) of the family law act to which i have referred above, amongst other things, i have considered the following matters under that subsection:   the family report records that x expressed concerns about being stuck in the middle of parental conflict in regard to the care arrangements, although not a great deal of weight is placed on those views given x’s young age. however, the report also records that x expressed positive views about her relationship with both parents, as well as the paternal grandparents (again i note that the paternal grandfather has passed away) and raised no concerns in connection with the nature of the relationship with the mother’s new partner. (b) both parents have made concerted efforts to spend time and communicate with the child, as well as be involved with and maintain the child’s standard of living. some concerns were raised about the father’s reliance on the paternal grandmother for assistance with care but, by his evidence, the father exhibited genuine affection and a commitment to participating in all areas of the child’s life. i have considered whether there were practical difficulties associated with the child spending time with one parent that might substantially affect the child’s relations with the other parent. the mother raised the practical concern of the child’s travel time but i do not consider that her suggested travel time, of 50 minutes, between her residence and the father’s residence was sufficient to create significant practical difficulties in the context of the orders which i propose making. nor do i consider the travel times to school, which were estimated to be less than 50 minutes, would create such difficulties. in any case, dr e’s evidence was that the normal situation is that as the child gets older this travel time becomes more tolerable, and the long term nature of the orders falls against attributing the travel time argument a great deal of weight. (c) both parents demonstrated that they were employed, and had the time management flexibly within their respective employment situations, to provide for the needs of the child, be they material, intellectual, emotional or otherwise. (d) in relation to the lifestyle, culture and traditions of the parties, i did observe that there were differences between the parents particularly in relation to the father’s religious beliefs and how they should form part of the child’s upbringing. on the evidence, this issue has not provided an impediment to the current care arrangements. there is no reason why the allocation of an extra two nights per fortnight of time to be spent by the child with her father should exacerbate this. i take this opportunity to impress upon the parties the importance of not drawing the child into any conflict on this issue. (e) i have dealt with the issue of alleged family violence above, but i would add the following: (i) the nature of the father’s ivo concerned alleged verbal abuse about the mother’s parenting style and her new partner. this incident occurred at a changeover when mr agombar was planning to take x on an interstate holiday. mr agombar has consented to final orders without admissions. (ii) the nature of the mr j’s ivo concerned alleged threats towards the father that occurred at school changeovers. (iii) in both cases, the events that led to the allegations in the respective ivos allegedly occurred in front of the child. this clearly means that the child was exposed to conflict and family violence if the allegations are true. (iv) i am not in a position to adjudicate whether the allegations are true. (v) however, again, the mother did not submit that the allegations which she made in this regard disqualified the father from enjoying the time which he sought to spend with the child. to the contrary, she maintained that the current arrangements were satisfactory with and, moreover, indicated in cross-examination that she may have flexibility in her position and be prepared to negotiate an increase in time to be spent between the child and the father.   both parents have made concerted efforts to spend time and communicate with the child, as well as be involved with and maintain the child’s standard of living. some concerns were raised about the father’s reliance on the paternal grandmother for assistance with care but, by his evidence, the father exhibited genuine affection and a commitment to participating in all areas of the child’s life. i have considered whether there were practical difficulties associated with the child spending time with one parent that might substantially affect the child’s relations with the other parent. the mother raised the practical concern of the child’s travel time but i do not consider that her suggested travel time, of 50 minutes, between her residence and the father’s residence was sufficient to create significant practical difficulties in the context of the orders which i propose making. nor do i consider the travel times to school, which were estimated to be less than 50 minutes, would create such difficulties. in any case, dr e’s evidence was that the normal situation is that as the child gets older this travel time becomes more tolerable, and the long term nature of the orders falls against attributing the travel time argument a great deal of weight. (c) both parents demonstrated that they were employed, and had the time management flexibly within their respective employment situations, to provide for the needs of the child, be they material, intellectual, emotional or otherwise. (d) in relation to the lifestyle, culture and traditions of the parties, i did observe that there were differences between the parents particularly in relation to the father’s religious beliefs and how they should form part of the child’s upbringing. on the evidence, this issue has not provided an impediment to the current care arrangements. there is no reason why the allocation of an extra two nights per fortnight of time to be spent by the child with her father should exacerbate this. i take this opportunity to impress upon the parties the importance of not drawing the child into any conflict on this issue. (e) i have dealt with the issue of alleged family violence above, but i would add the following: (i) the nature of the father’s ivo concerned alleged verbal abuse about the mother’s parenting style and her new partner. this incident occurred at a changeover when mr agombar was planning to take x on an interstate holiday. mr agombar has consented to final orders without admissions. (ii) the nature of the mr j’s ivo concerned alleged threats towards the father that occurred at school changeovers. (iii) in both cases, the events that led to the allegations in the respective ivos allegedly occurred in front of the child. this clearly means that the child was exposed to conflict and family violence if the allegations are true. (iv) i am not in a position to adjudicate whether the allegations are true. (v) however, again, the mother did not submit that the allegations which she made in this regard disqualified the father from enjoying the time which he sought to spend with the child. to the contrary, she maintained that the current arrangements were satisfactory with and, moreover, indicated in cross-examination that she may have flexibility in her position and be prepared to negotiate an increase in time to be spent between the child and the father.   both parents demonstrated that they were employed, and had the time management flexibly within their respective employment situations, to provide for the needs of the child, be they material, intellectual, emotional or otherwise. (d) in relation to the lifestyle, culture and traditions of the parties, i did observe that there were differences between the parents particularly in relation to the father’s religious beliefs and how they should form part of the child’s upbringing. on the evidence, this issue has not provided an impediment to the current care arrangements. there is no reason why the allocation of an extra two nights per fortnight of time to be spent by the child with her father should exacerbate this. i take this opportunity to impress upon the parties the importance of not drawing the child into any conflict on this issue. (e) i have dealt with the issue of alleged family violence above, but i would add the following: (i) the nature of the father’s ivo concerned alleged verbal abuse about the mother’s parenting style and her new partner. this incident occurred at a changeover when mr agombar was planning to take x on an interstate holiday. mr agombar has consented to final orders without admissions. (ii) the nature of the mr j’s ivo concerned alleged threats towards the father that occurred at school changeovers. (iii) in both cases, the events that led to the allegations in the respective ivos allegedly occurred in front of the child. this clearly means that the child was exposed to conflict and family violence if the allegations are true. (iv) i am not in a position to adjudicate whether the allegations are true. (v) however, again, the mother did not submit that the allegations which she made in this regard disqualified the father from enjoying the time which he sought to spend with the child. to the contrary, she maintained that the current arrangements were satisfactory with and, moreover, indicated in cross-examination that she may have flexibility in her position and be prepared to negotiate an increase in time to be spent between the child and the father.   in relation to the lifestyle, culture and traditions of the parties, i did observe that there were differences between the parents particularly in relation to the father’s religious beliefs and how they should form part of the child’s upbringing. on the evidence, this issue has not provided an impediment to the current care arrangements. there is no reason why the allocation of an extra two nights per fortnight of time to be spent by the child with her father should exacerbate this. i take this opportunity to impress upon the parties the importance of not drawing the child into any conflict on this issue. (e) i have dealt with the issue of alleged family violence above, but i would add the following: (i) the nature of the father’s ivo concerned alleged verbal abuse about the mother’s parenting style and her new partner. this incident occurred at a changeover when mr agombar was planning to take x on an interstate holiday. mr agombar has consented to final orders without admissions. (ii) the nature of the mr j’s ivo concerned alleged threats towards the father that occurred at school changeovers. (iii) in both cases, the events that led to the allegations in the respective ivos allegedly occurred in front of the child. this clearly means that the child was exposed to conflict and family violence if the allegations are true. (iv) i am not in a position to adjudicate whether the allegations are true. (v) however, again, the mother did not submit that the allegations which she made in this regard disqualified the father from enjoying the time which he sought to spend with the child. to the contrary, she maintained that the current arrangements were satisfactory with and, moreover, indicated in cross-examination that she may have flexibility in her position and be prepared to negotiate an increase in time to be spent between the child and the father.   i have dealt with the issue of alleged family violence above, but i would add the following: (i) the nature of the father’s ivo concerned alleged verbal abuse about the mother’s parenting style and her new partner. this incident occurred at a changeover when mr agombar was planning to take x on an interstate holiday. mr agombar has consented to final orders without admissions. (ii) the nature of the mr j’s ivo concerned alleged threats towards the father that occurred at school changeovers. (iii) in both cases, the events that led to the allegations in the respective ivos allegedly occurred in front of the child. this clearly means that the child was exposed to conflict and family violence if the allegations are true. (iv) i am not in a position to adjudicate whether the allegations are true. (v) however, again, the mother did not submit that the allegations which she made in this regard disqualified the father from enjoying the time which he sought to spend with the child. to the contrary, she maintained that the current arrangements were satisfactory with and, moreover, indicated in cross-examination that she may have flexibility in her position and be prepared to negotiate an increase in time to be spent between the child and the father.   the nature of the father’s ivo concerned alleged verbal abuse about the mother’s parenting style and her new partner. this incident occurred at a changeover when mr agombar was planning to take x on an interstate holiday. mr agombar has consented to final orders without admissions. (ii) the nature of the mr j’s ivo concerned alleged threats towards the father that occurred at school changeovers. (iii) in both cases, the events that led to the allegations in the respective ivos allegedly occurred in front of the child. this clearly means that the child was exposed to conflict and family violence if the allegations are true. (iv) i am not in a position to adjudicate whether the allegations are true. (v) however, again, the mother did not submit that the allegations which she made in this regard disqualified the father from enjoying the time which he sought to spend with the child. to the contrary, she maintained that the current arrangements were satisfactory with and, moreover, indicated in cross-examination that she may have flexibility in her position and be prepared to negotiate an increase in time to be spent between the child and the father.  ) the nature of the mr j’s ivo concerned alleged threats towards the father that occurred at school changeovers. (iii) in both cases, the events that led to the allegations in the respective ivos allegedly occurred in front of the child. this clearly means that the child was exposed to conflict and family violence if the allegations are true. (iv) i am not in a position to adjudicate whether the allegations are true. (v) however, again, the mother did not submit that the allegations which she made in this regard disqualified the father from enjoying the time which he sought to spend with the child. to the contrary, she maintained that the current arrangements were satisfactory with and, moreover, indicated in cross-examination that she may have flexibility in her position and be prepared to negotiate an increase in time to be spent between the child and the father.  i) in both cases, the events that led to the allegations in the respective ivos allegedly occurred in front of the child. this clearly means that the child was exposed to conflict and family violence if the allegations are true. (iv) i am not in a position to adjudicate whether the allegations are true. (v) however, again, the mother did not submit that the allegations which she made in this regard disqualified the father from enjoying the time which he sought to spend with the child. to the contrary, she maintained that the current arrangements were satisfactory with and, moreover, indicated in cross-examination that she may have flexibility in her position and be prepared to negotiate an increase in time to be spent between the child and the father.  ) i am not in a position to adjudicate whether the allegations are true. (v) however, again, the mother did not submit that the allegations which she made in this regard disqualified the father from enjoying the time which he sought to spend with the child. to the contrary, she maintained that the current arrangements were satisfactory with and, moreover, indicated in cross-examination that she may have flexibility in her position and be prepared to negotiate an increase in time to be spent between the child and the father.   however, again, the mother did not submit that the allegations which she made in this regard disqualified the father from enjoying the time which he sought to spend with the child. to the contrary, she maintained that the current arrangements were satisfactory with and, moreover, indicated in cross-examination that she may have flexibility in her position and be prepared to negotiate an increase in time to be spent between the child and the father.
subsidiary issues
153 in relation to the subsidiary issues, i make the following findings which are designed to reduce the potential for conflict between the parties and consequently the likelihood that x will be exposed to that conflict.
154 with respect to the contested issues other than the primary issue of equal shared care, i will make the orders to the following effect which i consider to be in the child’s best interests for the following reasons:   changeovers that occur immediately before school holidays are to occur from the conclusion of school, and not at 5 p.m. from the mother’s residence. i propose to make such an order in light of dr e’s evidence that it was in the best interests of the child to use school time as a natural adjustment period between the parties’ different parenting styles. (b) the non-school changeovers take place at the mid-point between the parties’ residence. it was common ground that the father’s proposed changeover point, being the mcdonald’s restaurant located on c road north, is the midpoint. as the father’s counsel submitted, using the midpoint between the parties, breaks up the child’s travel time with the prospect of making the trip more palatable for her. it was also worth mentioning that neither parties’ proposed location was consistent with the recommendation in family report. that location was “that changeovers occur at school, a local library or a park.” (c) telephone and facetime calls are to be at the later time, of 7:00 p.m. to 7:30 p.m., as suggested by the father. this is because in her evidence, the mother conceded that the earlier time was not always convenient and was sometimes abandoned for that reason. it is in the child’s best interests that those calls take place, and if the earlier time is less workable, then the later time is to be preferred. (d) i have included an order for communication by facetime despite the fact that the mother contested the making of such an order. i have taken into account the mother’s evidence and submission that the use of facetime has the potential to be productive conflict. in effect, the basis of the mother’s concern in this regard was that, by receiving vision of the mother’s residence, the father has been and may be triggered into using the facetime as a means of manipulating the child to surveil the mother on his behalf. plainly, it is desirable to avoid conflict. however, i make the order for the following reasons: (i) in my view, video communication is more personal for the child and the father than a telephone call with the consequence that, absent other considerations, it better promotes their relationship and is therefore in her best interests, (ii) secondly, pursuant to the orders, it is incumbent upon the mother to initiate the call. accordingly, the mother is, at least to some extent, able to regulate where the call takes place. the mother may encourage the call to take place, for example, in the child’s bedroom which may ameliorate any temptation which the father might otherwise have to deploy facetime as a means of having his daughter engage in proxy surveillance of the mother. (iii) as explored above, i consider that the father has gained some insight into avoiding conflict as a result of the psychological consultation and parenting course which he has undertaken. accordingly, i consider that there is a fair prospect that he will heed my exhortation to him not to misuse of facetime communications with his daughter. (e) the mother should hold the child’s passport. first, the child will live with her secondly, the mother has custody of the birth certificate and it is practical at the child’s identity documents remain together.   the non-school changeovers take place at the mid-point between the parties’ residence. it was common ground that the father’s proposed changeover point, being the mcdonald’s restaurant located on c road north, is the midpoint. as the father’s counsel submitted, using the midpoint between the parties, breaks up the child’s travel time with the prospect of making the trip more palatable for her. it was also worth mentioning that neither parties’ proposed location was consistent with the recommendation in family report. that location was “that changeovers occur at school, a local library or a park.” (c) telephone and facetime calls are to be at the later time, of 7:00 p.m. to 7:30 p.m., as suggested by the father. this is because in her evidence, the mother conceded that the earlier time was not always convenient and was sometimes abandoned for that reason. it is in the child’s best interests that those calls take place, and if the earlier time is less workable, then the later time is to be preferred. (d) i have included an order for communication by facetime despite the fact that the mother contested the making of such an order. i have taken into account the mother’s evidence and submission that the use of facetime has the potential to be productive conflict. in effect, the basis of the mother’s concern in this regard was that, by receiving vision of the mother’s residence, the father has been and may be triggered into using the facetime as a means of manipulating the child to surveil the mother on his behalf. plainly, it is desirable to avoid conflict. however, i make the order for the following reasons: (i) in my view, video communication is more personal for the child and the father than a telephone call with the consequence that, absent other considerations, it better promotes their relationship and is therefore in her best interests, (ii) secondly, pursuant to the orders, it is incumbent upon the mother to initiate the call. accordingly, the mother is, at least to some extent, able to regulate where the call takes place. the mother may encourage the call to take place, for example, in the child’s bedroom which may ameliorate any temptation which the father might otherwise have to deploy facetime as a means of having his daughter engage in proxy surveillance of the mother. (iii) as explored above, i consider that the father has gained some insight into avoiding conflict as a result of the psychological consultation and parenting course which he has undertaken. accordingly, i consider that there is a fair prospect that he will heed my exhortation to him not to misuse of facetime communications with his daughter. (e) the mother should hold the child’s passport. first, the child will live with her secondly, the mother has custody of the birth certificate and it is practical at the child’s identity documents remain together.   telephone and facetime calls are to be at the later time, of 7:00 p.m. to 7:30 p.m., as suggested by the father. this is because in her evidence, the mother conceded that the earlier time was not always convenient and was sometimes abandoned for that reason. it is in the child’s best interests that those calls take place, and if the earlier time is less workable, then the later time is to be preferred. (d) i have included an order for communication by facetime despite the fact that the mother contested the making of such an order. i have taken into account the mother’s evidence and submission that the use of facetime has the potential to be productive conflict. in effect, the basis of the mother’s concern in this regard was that, by receiving vision of the mother’s residence, the father has been and may be triggered into using the facetime as a means of manipulating the child to surveil the mother on his behalf. plainly, it is desirable to avoid conflict. however, i make the order for the following reasons: (i) in my view, video communication is more personal for the child and the father than a telephone call with the consequence that, absent other considerations, it better promotes their relationship and is therefore in her best interests, (ii) secondly, pursuant to the orders, it is incumbent upon the mother to initiate the call. accordingly, the mother is, at least to some extent, able to regulate where the call takes place. the mother may encourage the call to take place, for example, in the child’s bedroom which may ameliorate any temptation which the father might otherwise have to deploy facetime as a means of having his daughter engage in proxy surveillance of the mother. (iii) as explored above, i consider that the father has gained some insight into avoiding conflict as a result of the psychological consultation and parenting course which he has undertaken. accordingly, i consider that there is a fair prospect that he will heed my exhortation to him not to misuse of facetime communications with his daughter. (e) the mother should hold the child’s passport. first, the child will live with her secondly, the mother has custody of the birth certificate and it is practical at the child’s identity documents remain together.   i have included an order for communication by facetime despite the fact that the mother contested the making of such an order. i have taken into account the mother’s evidence and submission that the use of facetime has the potential to be productive conflict. in effect, the basis of the mother’s concern in this regard was that, by receiving vision of the mother’s residence, the father has been and may be triggered into using the facetime as a means of manipulating the child to surveil the mother on his behalf. plainly, it is desirable to avoid conflict. however, i make the order for the following reasons: (i) in my view, video communication is more personal for the child and the father than a telephone call with the consequence that, absent other considerations, it better promotes their relationship and is therefore in her best interests, (ii) secondly, pursuant to the orders, it is incumbent upon the mother to initiate the call. accordingly, the mother is, at least to some extent, able to regulate where the call takes place. the mother may encourage the call to take place, for example, in the child’s bedroom which may ameliorate any temptation which the father might otherwise have to deploy facetime as a means of having his daughter engage in proxy surveillance of the mother. (iii) as explored above, i consider that the father has gained some insight into avoiding conflict as a result of the psychological consultation and parenting course which he has undertaken. accordingly, i consider that there is a fair prospect that he will heed my exhortation to him not to misuse of facetime communications with his daughter. (e) the mother should hold the child’s passport. first, the child will live with her secondly, the mother has custody of the birth certificate and it is practical at the child’s identity documents remain together.   in my view, video communication is more personal for the child and the father than a telephone call with the consequence that, absent other considerations, it better promotes their relationship and is therefore in her best interests, (ii) secondly, pursuant to the orders, it is incumbent upon the mother to initiate the call. accordingly, the mother is, at least to some extent, able to regulate where the call takes place. the mother may encourage the call to take place, for example, in the child’s bedroom which may ameliorate any temptation which the father might otherwise have to deploy facetime as a means of having his daughter engage in proxy surveillance of the mother. (iii) as explored above, i consider that the father has gained some insight into avoiding conflict as a result of the psychological consultation and parenting course which he has undertaken. accordingly, i consider that there is a fair prospect that he will heed my exhortation to him not to misuse of facetime communications with his daughter.  ) secondly, pursuant to the orders, it is incumbent upon the mother to initiate the call. accordingly, the mother is, at least to some extent, able to regulate where the call takes place. the mother may encourage the call to take place, for example, in the child’s bedroom which may ameliorate any temptation which the father might otherwise have to deploy facetime as a means of having his daughter engage in proxy surveillance of the mother. (iii) as explored above, i consider that the father has gained some insight into avoiding conflict as a result of the psychological consultation and parenting course which he has undertaken. accordingly, i consider that there is a fair prospect that he will heed my exhortation to him not to misuse of facetime communications with his daughter.  i) as explored above, i consider that the father has gained some insight into avoiding conflict as a result of the psychological consultation and parenting course which he has undertaken. accordingly, i consider that there is a fair prospect that he will heed my exhortation to him not to misuse of facetime communications with his daughter.   the mother should hold the child’s passport. first, the child will live with her secondly, the mother has custody of the birth certificate and it is practical at the child’s identity documents remain together.
associate: dated: 22 february 2022
dated: 22 february 2022
[1] family report [81].[2] ibid [83].[3] ibid [62].[4] ibid [63].[5] ibid [64].[6] ibid [65].[7] for example, family law act s 60b(a). [8] [2014] famcafc 42.