last updated: 7 july 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
jones & munrow [2022] fedcfamc2f 368
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
exchange of information  keep the other parent informed at all times of their residential address and contact telephone number and to notify the other parent at least 21 days prior to relocating their residence beyond a 20 kilometre radius from where they currently reside, (b) keep the other parent informed of the names and addresses of any treating medical or other allied health practitioners who treat the children and authorise those practitioners to provide the other parent with information that they are lawfully able to provide about the children, (c) inform the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable of any medical condition, significant health issue or significant illness suffered by the children and authorise any treating medical practitioner to release the children’s medical information to the other parent.   keep the other parent informed of the names and addresses of any treating medical or other allied health practitioners who treat the children and authorise those practitioners to provide the other parent with information that they are lawfully able to provide about the children, (c) inform the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable of any medical condition, significant health issue or significant illness suffered by the children and authorise any treating medical practitioner to release the children’s medical information to the other parent.   inform the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable of any medical condition, significant health issue or significant illness suffered by the children and authorise any treating medical practitioner to release the children’s medical information to the other parent.   respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the children about the personal life of the other parent, (b) speak of the other parent respectfully, (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of the children and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.   speak of the other parent respectfully, (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of the children and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.   not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of the children and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.
living arrangements for the children
school holidays
12.1 in even numbered years: 12.1.1 for the term 1 holidays, for the first week of the school holiday period from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.1.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.1.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.1.4 for the term 4 holidays, for the second half of the school holiday period until the friday before school recommences. 12.2 in odd numbered years: 12.2.1 for the term 1 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.2.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.2.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the first week of the holiday period commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.2.4 for the term 4 holidays for the first half of the school holiday period, commencing on the first saturday.
12.1.1 for the term 1 holidays, for the first week of the school holiday period from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.1.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.1.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.1.4 for the term 4 holidays, for the second half of the school holiday period until the friday before school recommences. 12.2 in odd numbered years: 12.2.1 for the term 1 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.2.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.2.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the first week of the holiday period commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.2.4 for the term 4 holidays for the first half of the school holiday period, commencing on the first saturday.
12.1.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.1.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.1.4 for the term 4 holidays, for the second half of the school holiday period until the friday before school recommences. 12.2 in odd numbered years: 12.2.1 for the term 1 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.2.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.2.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the first week of the holiday period commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.2.4 for the term 4 holidays for the first half of the school holiday period, commencing on the first saturday.
12.1.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.1.4 for the term 4 holidays, for the second half of the school holiday period until the friday before school recommences. 12.2 in odd numbered years: 12.2.1 for the term 1 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.2.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.2.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the first week of the holiday period commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.2.4 for the term 4 holidays for the first half of the school holiday period, commencing on the first saturday.
12.1.4 for the term 4 holidays, for the second half of the school holiday period until the friday before school recommences. 12.2 in odd numbered years: 12.2.1 for the term 1 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.2.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.2.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the first week of the holiday period commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.2.4 for the term 4 holidays for the first half of the school holiday period, commencing on the first saturday.
12.2 in odd numbered years: 12.2.1 for the term 1 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.2.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.2.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the first week of the holiday period commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.2.4 for the term 4 holidays for the first half of the school holiday period, commencing on the first saturday.
12.2.1 for the term 1 holidays, for the second week of the school holiday period commencing from the second sunday of the school holiday period until the following sunday. 12.2.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.2.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the first week of the holiday period commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.2.4 for the term 4 holidays for the first half of the school holiday period, commencing on the first saturday.
12.2.2 in the term 2 holidays, commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the saturday prior to the commencement of the school term. 12.2.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the first week of the holiday period commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.2.4 for the term 4 holidays for the first half of the school holiday period, commencing on the first saturday.
12.2.3 in the term 3 holidays, for the first week of the holiday period commencing from the first saturday of the school holiday period until the following saturday. 12.2.4 for the term 4 holidays for the first half of the school holiday period, commencing on the first saturday.
12.2.4 for the term 4 holidays for the first half of the school holiday period, commencing on the first saturday.
special occasions
x’s birthday
15.1 in the event that x’s birthday falls on a date that the children would not ordinarily spend time with the father in accordance with these orders, the father shall spend time with the children as follows: (a) if the birthday falls on a school day, in brisbane from the conclusion of school on x’s birthday until the commencement of school two days following x’s birthday (or 9am if a non-school day) so that the children spend two consecutive nights with the father. (b) if the birthday falls on a weekend during the school term, in brisbane from after school friday until the commencement of school on monday.   if the birthday falls on a school day, in brisbane from the conclusion of school on x’s birthday until the commencement of school two days following x’s birthday (or 9am if a non-school day) so that the children spend two consecutive nights with the father. (b) if the birthday falls on a weekend during the school term, in brisbane from after school friday until the commencement of school on monday.   if the birthday falls on a weekend during the school term, in brisbane from after school friday until the commencement of school on monday.
16.1 in the event that x’s birthday falls on a date that the children would otherwise spend with the father in accordance with these orders, the father’s time with the children shall be suspended and the mother shall spend time with the children as follows: (a) on a school day, in brisbane from the conclusion of school on x’s birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9am if a non-school day). (b) on a weekend during the school term, in brisbane from 10am friday until 4pm sunday and the father shall elect to have make up time with the children should he wish to do so in brisbane from after school on friday (or 9am if a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) on either the weekend immediately preceding x’s birthday or the weekend immediately following x’s birthday provided that he give the mother 14 days’ written notice of his election.   on a school day, in brisbane from the conclusion of school on x’s birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9am if a non-school day). (b) on a weekend during the school term, in brisbane from 10am friday until 4pm sunday and the father shall elect to have make up time with the children should he wish to do so in brisbane from after school on friday (or 9am if a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) on either the weekend immediately preceding x’s birthday or the weekend immediately following x’s birthday provided that he give the mother 14 days’ written notice of his election.   on a weekend during the school term, in brisbane from 10am friday until 4pm sunday and the father shall elect to have make up time with the children should he wish to do so in brisbane from after school on friday (or 9am if a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) on either the weekend immediately preceding x’s birthday or the weekend immediately following x’s birthday provided that he give the mother 14 days’ written notice of his election.
father’s day
mother’s day
christmas
telephone calls  ensure that the children are available to receive the communication, (b) arrange for the children to communicate with the father on the following night if, for any unforeseen circumstance, the children miss the video or telephone call with the father, (c) do all things reasonably necessary to ensure that the children have privacy during the conversation.   arrange for the children to communicate with the father on the following night if, for any unforeseen circumstance, the children miss the video or telephone call with the father, (c) do all things reasonably necessary to ensure that the children have privacy during the conversation.   do all things reasonably necessary to ensure that the children have privacy during the conversation.   ensure that the children are available to receive the communication, (b) arrange for the children to communicate with the mother on the following night if, for any unforeseen circumstance, the children miss the video or telephone call with the father, (c) do all things reasonably necessary to ensure that the children have privacy during the conversation.   arrange for the children to communicate with the mother on the following night if, for any unforeseen circumstance, the children miss the video or telephone call with the father, (c) do all things reasonably necessary to ensure that the children have privacy during the conversation.
changeover  at the commencement of time with the father in accordance with these orders, the mother shall deliver the children to brisbane airport and the father shall collect the children from sydney airport. (b) at the conclusion of time with the father in accordance with these orders, the father shall deliver the children to sydney airport and the mother shall collect the children from brisbane airport. (c) the children’s time with the father shall commence from the time of the children’s arrival in sydney (to be no later than 11am) and conclude at the time of arrival in brisbane of the returning flight (to be no later than 11am).   at the conclusion of time with the father in accordance with these orders, the father shall deliver the children to sydney airport and the mother shall collect the children from brisbane airport. (c) the children’s time with the father shall commence from the time of the children’s arrival in sydney (to be no later than 11am) and conclude at the time of arrival in brisbane of the returning flight (to be no later than 11am).   the children’s time with the father shall commence from the time of the children’s arrival in sydney (to be no later than 11am) and conclude at the time of arrival in brisbane of the returning flight (to be no later than 11am).
passports and travel
dispute resolution  either attend counselling or mediation with an organisation recognised under the family law act 1975 (as amended) or by the commonwealth attorney- general, or (b) participate in family dispute resolution with a family relationship centre or a person authorised under s.10g of the family law act 1975 (as amended).   participate in family dispute resolution with a family relationship centre or a person authorised under s.10g of the family law act 1975 (as amended).
parenting orders programme
non-denigration
other orders  disseminating any information of the mother’s obtained through these proceedings, or viewed by the father, including any images or documents filed and images held by the mother in her dropbox, email accounts, google photos or any other cloud account or device in the mother’s name, whether held in her name or with any other person. (b) disseminating any images obtained or viewed by him or derived from any documents filed or held by the mother.   disseminating any images obtained or viewed by him or derived from any documents filed or held by the mother.
reasons for judgmentex tempore
judge young
background  the details of the time the children were to spend with the father, there being substantial agreement that it would be about half the school holidays, but disagreement about the details and whether the mother would be obliged to travel to sydney with the children once a term so they might spend time with the father. (b) the terms of injunctive orders concerning private images belonging to the mother, some of them intimate, and or some injunctions concerning communications with third parties by the father about those matters.   the terms of injunctive orders concerning private images belonging to the mother, some of them intimate, and or some injunctions concerning communications with third parties by the father about those matters.
credibility
forensics
ms jones says that her husband is kind to her children as well as being reliable, but she has no warmth towards him and finds him dull and boring.
another passage said:
ms jones is also finishing a master’s degree and hopes to gain a more senior leadership role going forward with more pay so she can leave her husband.
on 10 july 2020 it was noted:
her husband has been made redundant and as a result she was more motivated to leave him.
on 25 november the following note was made:
ms jones has presented previously stating she no longer loves her husband and would like to be separated from him.
she had separated from her husband in 2018, but they were still living in the same house.
the mother described “severe stress” and a –
...significant fear something would go wrong with the children.
there was no complaint of family violence or conduct by the father that might be interpreted as family violence. dr c diagnosed a:
...depressive disorder, possibly induced by severe stress related to the breakup of her marriage.
in circumstances where the mother might be expected to raise a complaint that she was subjected to family violence or coercive and controlling behaviour to her counsellor, her general practitioner or her psychiatrist, she did not. the most serious criticism she made of the father that he was “dull and boring”. she said also that he was:
...kind and patient with the children.
i am satisfied that the mother was not subjected to family violence, coercive and controlling behaviour or threatening behaviour by the father, and her claims to the contrary are untrue.
associate: dated: 28 march 2022
dated: 28 march 2022
[1] anton piller kg v manufacturing processes ltd [1976] 1