last updated: 9 june 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
clanton & lachman [2022] fedcfamc2f 401
orders
the court orders that:
1. that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children x born 2010 and y born 2012 (“the children”) in relation to all matters relating to the children’s health and in relation to all matters relating to the children’s education.
2. that the parents have shared parental responsibility for the children in relation to all parental responsibility matters other than those relating to the children’s health and those relating to the children’s education.
3. that the children live with their mother.
4. that the children spend time with their father as follows:  for four successive saturdays from 9.00 am until 5.00 pm, the first such occasion to be saturday, 8 april 2022, (b) thereafter for four occasions on alternate weekends from 9.00 am on saturday until 5.00 pm on sunday, the first such occasion to commence on saturday, 6 may 2022, (c) thereafter, each alternative weekend during school term time from the end of school (or 3.00 pm if not a school day) on friday until the start of school (or 9.00 am if not a school day) on monday or until 6.00 pm on sunday if the father is not in a position to deliver the children to school on time for the start of school on the monday if that monday is a school day, the first such occasion to commence on friday, 22 july 2022, (d) during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in 2022 from the end of school attendance for term 2 until 5.00 pm on the first tuesday of that school holiday, (e) from the school holidays at the end of term 3 2022 and thereafter for each school holidays, for half of the school holidays being the first half of school holidays that commence in in even-numbered year and for the second half of school holidays that commence in an odd number year, changeovers being at 5.00 pm on the middle day of the school holidays, (f) that in the event that the children are not otherwise spending time with their father on father’s day, from 9.00 am until 6.00 pm on father’s day, (g) in odd-numbered years from 12 noon on 25 december until 12 noon on 26 december, (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parents in writing.   thereafter for four occasions on alternate weekends from 9.00 am on saturday until 5.00 pm on sunday, the first such occasion to commence on saturday, 6 may 2022, (c) thereafter, each alternative weekend during school term time from the end of school (or 3.00 pm if not a school day) on friday until the start of school (or 9.00 am if not a school day) on monday or until 6.00 pm on sunday if the father is not in a position to deliver the children to school on time for the start of school on the monday if that monday is a school day, the first such occasion to commence on friday, 22 july 2022, (d) during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in 2022 from the end of school attendance for term 2 until 5.00 pm on the first tuesday of that school holiday, (e) from the school holidays at the end of term 3 2022 and thereafter for each school holidays, for half of the school holidays being the first half of school holidays that commence in in even-numbered year and for the second half of school holidays that commence in an odd number year, changeovers being at 5.00 pm on the middle day of the school holidays, (f) that in the event that the children are not otherwise spending time with their father on father’s day, from 9.00 am until 6.00 pm on father’s day, (g) in odd-numbered years from 12 noon on 25 december until 12 noon on 26 december, (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parents in writing.   thereafter, each alternative weekend during school term time from the end of school (or 3.00 pm if not a school day) on friday until the start of school (or 9.00 am if not a school day) on monday or until 6.00 pm on sunday if the father is not in a position to deliver the children to school on time for the start of school on the monday if that monday is a school day, the first such occasion to commence on friday, 22 july 2022, (d) during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in 2022 from the end of school attendance for term 2 until 5.00 pm on the first tuesday of that school holiday, (e) from the school holidays at the end of term 3 2022 and thereafter for each school holidays, for half of the school holidays being the first half of school holidays that commence in in even-numbered year and for the second half of school holidays that commence in an odd number year, changeovers being at 5.00 pm on the middle day of the school holidays, (f) that in the event that the children are not otherwise spending time with their father on father’s day, from 9.00 am until 6.00 pm on father’s day, (g) in odd-numbered years from 12 noon on 25 december until 12 noon on 26 december, (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parents in writing.   during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in 2022 from the end of school attendance for term 2 until 5.00 pm on the first tuesday of that school holiday, (e) from the school holidays at the end of term 3 2022 and thereafter for each school holidays, for half of the school holidays being the first half of school holidays that commence in in even-numbered year and for the second half of school holidays that commence in an odd number year, changeovers being at 5.00 pm on the middle day of the school holidays, (f) that in the event that the children are not otherwise spending time with their father on father’s day, from 9.00 am until 6.00 pm on father’s day, (g) in odd-numbered years from 12 noon on 25 december until 12 noon on 26 december, (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parents in writing.   from the school holidays at the end of term 3 2022 and thereafter for each school holidays, for half of the school holidays being the first half of school holidays that commence in in even-numbered year and for the second half of school holidays that commence in an odd number year, changeovers being at 5.00 pm on the middle day of the school holidays, (f) that in the event that the children are not otherwise spending time with their father on father’s day, from 9.00 am until 6.00 pm on father’s day, (g) in odd-numbered years from 12 noon on 25 december until 12 noon on 26 december, (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parents in writing.   that in the event that the children are not otherwise spending time with their father on father’s day, from 9.00 am until 6.00 pm on father’s day, (g) in odd-numbered years from 12 noon on 25 december until 12 noon on 26 december, (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parents in writing.   in odd-numbered years from 12 noon on 25 december until 12 noon on 26 december, (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parents in writing.   at such other times as may be agreed between the parents in writing.
5. that notwithstanding any other order, the children shall be in their mother’s care:  on mother's day from 9.00 am until 6.00 pm, (b) in even-numbered years from 12 noon on 25 december until 12 noon on 26 december.   in even-numbered years from 12 noon on 25 december until 12 noon on 26 december.
6. that any changeovers that do not occur at the children’s school or schools shall occur at suburb c park on the corner of d street and b street, suburb c.
7. that each of the parents shall keep the other parent informed of any changes to the parent’s telephone contact details and an email address for communication, and the father shall keep the mother informed of his current residential address at all times.
8. that the mother shall keep the father informed of any health issues affecting either of the children and of the details of the school or schools the children attend and shall authorise the school or schools the children attend to make available to the father copies of all of the children’s school reports and of any correspondence relating to the children or either of them, including as to any behavioural issues, and including the school providing to the father his own access codes for any school website to be accessed to obtain any such information.
9. that each of the parents is restrained from denigrating the other parent, any member of the other parent’s family, or any member of the other parent’s household in the presence of, or within the hearing of, either of the children.
10. that each of the parents is restrained from allowing either of the children to remain in the presence of or within either of the children’s hearing of any other person who is denigrating the other parent, any member of the other parent’s family, or any member of the other parent’s household.
11. that the father is restrained from attending any of the children’s extra-curricular activities that occur during time that they are not spending time with their father pursuant to these orders.
12. that the father shall do all things necessary to facilitate the children attending at their scheduled extra-curricular activities during the time that the children spend with him, provided that the father is notified of the said extra-curricular activities no less than 14 days before the date they are scheduled to occur.
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction
1 the applicant mother, ms clanton (“the mother”), and the respondent father, mr lachman (“the father”), are the parents of x, born 2010 and y, born 2012.
2 the parents began a de facto relationship in either 2006 on the father’s evidence, or september 2008 on the mother’s evidence. they separated in 2013 when x was three years and four months of age and y was one year and five months of age. the parents ceased to live together in 2012 when the father left the former matrimonial home and a provisional advo was issued by authorised police for the protection of the mother from the father, made final by order of the local court at suburb e. x was two years and three months of age and y was three months of age at the time.
3 despite the parents’ physical separation from that time, the mother did not consider the parties to be separated until mid-2013.
4 at the time of the hearing, x was 10 years and nine months of age and y was eight years and ten months of age. each child is now over a year older due to the time that has passed subsequent to the hearing and the regrettable delay in the delivery of these reasons and the making of final orders.
5 the main issues for determination are:  the allocation of parental responsibility for the children, (b) the time that the children should spend with their father and whether such time should be subject to any conditions associated with risks to the children when spending time with the father as asserted by the mother, (c) in particular in relation to risk, whether or not an order should be made requiring the father to undertake a mental health assessment by one of two named mental health professionals prior to commencement of him spending any time with the children, and (d) a further issue for each of the parties is travel by the children outside of the commonwealth of australia.   the time that the children should spend with their father and whether such time should be subject to any conditions associated with risks to the children when spending time with the father as asserted by the mother, (c) in particular in relation to risk, whether or not an order should be made requiring the father to undertake a mental health assessment by one of two named mental health professionals prior to commencement of him spending any time with the children, and (d) a further issue for each of the parties is travel by the children outside of the commonwealth of australia.   in particular in relation to risk, whether or not an order should be made requiring the father to undertake a mental health assessment by one of two named mental health professionals prior to commencement of him spending any time with the children, and (d) a further issue for each of the parties is travel by the children outside of the commonwealth of australia.   a further issue for each of the parties is travel by the children outside of the commonwealth of australia.
6 the final hearing took place from 18 to 20 november 2020 with final submissions being made before the court on 11 december 2020. the mother was represented on hearing by mr hill of counsel, and the father was represented on hearing by mr strik of counsel.
7 as stated above, it is regrettable that more than a year has elapsed since conclusion of the hearing and the making of final orders in consequence of these reasons. i apologise to the children, to the mother, to the father and to the legal practitioners involved for that delay.
the proceedings
8 the proceedings were commenced by the mother filing an initiating application on 19 september 2017. at the first mention before judge harper (as his honour then was) on 1 november 2017, an interim order was made restraining the father from attending at the children’s schools, the father was directed to file and serve his response and supporting documents by 8 december 2017, and the matter was adjourned to 15 february 2018. the father did not comply with the direction for filing documents.
9 on 9 february 2018, the mother filed an amended initiating application (the amendments to orders are detailed later in these reasons) and the matter was again before the court on 15 february 2018 when judge monahan made orders for the parties to attend a child dispute conference on 23 march 2018. the father was ordered to file and serve his response and supporting documents within four weeks and the matter was adjourned for a mention on 6 april 2018. again, the father did not comply with the direction in relation to filing documents.
10 on 6 april 2018, the matter was again before judge harper, and his honour directed the father to file and serve his response by 13 april 2018 and adjourned the matter to 3 may 2018 for call-over for allocation of hearing dates. on 13 april 2018, the father filed his response and supporting documents.
11 on 3 may 2018, the matter was before judge henderson (as her honour then was). there was an exchange between her honour and the father in court, the details of which form part of the evidence upon hearing, and her honour made interim orders that, pending further orders:  the children would live with their mother, (b) the mother would have sole parental responsibility for them, (c) the father would be restrained from attending the children’s schools or approaching them in the school grounds at any time during school hours or engaging in any conduct which may disrupt the orderly schooling of the children, (d) the father would be required to attend f service and attend any anger management courses and courses to assist in putting the needs of the children before his own or as directed by the staff at f service, and (e) the father would be required to pay the mother’s costs in the sum of $278 within 30 days.   the mother would have sole parental responsibility for them, (c) the father would be restrained from attending the children’s schools or approaching them in the school grounds at any time during school hours or engaging in any conduct which may disrupt the orderly schooling of the children, (d) the father would be required to attend f service and attend any anger management courses and courses to assist in putting the needs of the children before his own or as directed by the staff at f service, and (e) the father would be required to pay the mother’s costs in the sum of $278 within 30 days.   the father would be restrained from attending the children’s schools or approaching them in the school grounds at any time during school hours or engaging in any conduct which may disrupt the orderly schooling of the children, (d) the father would be required to attend f service and attend any anger management courses and courses to assist in putting the needs of the children before his own or as directed by the staff at f service, and (e) the father would be required to pay the mother’s costs in the sum of $278 within 30 days.   the father would be required to attend f service and attend any anger management courses and courses to assist in putting the needs of the children before his own or as directed by the staff at f service, and (e) the father would be required to pay the mother’s costs in the sum of $278 within 30 days.   the father would be required to pay the mother’s costs in the sum of $278 within 30 days.
12 notably, no order was made by her honour on the interim basis in relation to the father spending time with the children. the matter was adjourned for further mention to 27 september 2018.
13 on 27 september 2018, the matter came on before judge harper, and his honour made an order under section 62g of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”) for the preparation of a family report for the assistance of the court on final hearing. judge harper adjourned the matter to 3 may 2019 for call-over for allocation of final hearing dates.
14 on 3 may 2019, the matter came on before me for call-over and was adjourned to 14 october 2019 as the family report preparation process had not begun.
15 interviews for the family report occurred at the sydney registry of the court on 2 september 2019. the report dated 11 october 2019 was released by order on 14 october 2019, and the proceedings were adjourned to 18 december 2019, at which time the matter was set down for a final hearing from 18 to 20 november 2020 and trial directions were made.
16 the final hearing proceeded on 18 to 20 november 2020 with final submissions being made before the court on 11 december 2020.
17 at no time throughout the course of the proceedings were any interim orders made in relation to the father spending time with the children.
the parties’ positions on hearing – orders sought
18 the orders sought by the mother went through some evolution from the commencement of proceedings with her initiating application filed 19 september 2017 and the case outline document presented by her counsel on hearing, which referenced her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018. the reasons for that evolution are found in the facts in evidence in the hearing.
19 in her original initiating application, the mother sought in short summary, that:  the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, (b) the children live with her and that they spend time with their father during school term, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday to 4pm on sunday, or if monday was a public holiday, until start of school on tuesday, and at such time during school holidays as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time, (c) orders for specific time between the children and their father on father’s day and at christmas, and similarly, for the children to be in her care for a specific time on mother’s day and at christmas, (d) an order restraining the father from consuming alcohol or taking any illicit drugs within 24 hours of the time he is to spend with the children or whilst they were in his care, (e) a suite of the usual orders in relation to exchange of information between the parties as to contact information, medical matters for the children, and education matters, (f) for each parent to be at liberty to attend the children’s schools for the purpose of any function or activity normally attended by parents, (g) for the mother to be at liberty to take the children overseas for a holiday for periods of up to 28 days on certain conditions of notice to the father and make up time for the father, and (h) an order that “the father refrain from attending the children’s schools or approaching the children other that in accordance with these orders”.   the children live with her and that they spend time with their father during school term, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday to 4pm on sunday, or if monday was a public holiday, until start of school on tuesday, and at such time during school holidays as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time, (c) orders for specific time between the children and their father on father’s day and at christmas, and similarly, for the children to be in her care for a specific time on mother’s day and at christmas, (d) an order restraining the father from consuming alcohol or taking any illicit drugs within 24 hours of the time he is to spend with the children or whilst they were in his care, (e) a suite of the usual orders in relation to exchange of information between the parties as to contact information, medical matters for the children, and education matters, (f) for each parent to be at liberty to attend the children’s schools for the purpose of any function or activity normally attended by parents, (g) for the mother to be at liberty to take the children overseas for a holiday for periods of up to 28 days on certain conditions of notice to the father and make up time for the father, and (h) an order that “the father refrain from attending the children’s schools or approaching the children other that in accordance with these orders”.   orders for specific time between the children and their father on father’s day and at christmas, and similarly, for the children to be in her care for a specific time on mother’s day and at christmas, (d) an order restraining the father from consuming alcohol or taking any illicit drugs within 24 hours of the time he is to spend with the children or whilst they were in his care, (e) a suite of the usual orders in relation to exchange of information between the parties as to contact information, medical matters for the children, and education matters, (f) for each parent to be at liberty to attend the children’s schools for the purpose of any function or activity normally attended by parents, (g) for the mother to be at liberty to take the children overseas for a holiday for periods of up to 28 days on certain conditions of notice to the father and make up time for the father, and (h) an order that “the father refrain from attending the children’s schools or approaching the children other that in accordance with these orders”.   an order restraining the father from consuming alcohol or taking any illicit drugs within 24 hours of the time he is to spend with the children or whilst they were in his care, (e) a suite of the usual orders in relation to exchange of information between the parties as to contact information, medical matters for the children, and education matters, (f) for each parent to be at liberty to attend the children’s schools for the purpose of any function or activity normally attended by parents, (g) for the mother to be at liberty to take the children overseas for a holiday for periods of up to 28 days on certain conditions of notice to the father and make up time for the father, and (h) an order that “the father refrain from attending the children’s schools or approaching the children other that in accordance with these orders”.   a suite of the usual orders in relation to exchange of information between the parties as to contact information, medical matters for the children, and education matters, (f) for each parent to be at liberty to attend the children’s schools for the purpose of any function or activity normally attended by parents, (g) for the mother to be at liberty to take the children overseas for a holiday for periods of up to 28 days on certain conditions of notice to the father and make up time for the father, and (h) an order that “the father refrain from attending the children’s schools or approaching the children other that in accordance with these orders”.   for each parent to be at liberty to attend the children’s schools for the purpose of any function or activity normally attended by parents, (g) for the mother to be at liberty to take the children overseas for a holiday for periods of up to 28 days on certain conditions of notice to the father and make up time for the father, and (h) an order that “the father refrain from attending the children’s schools or approaching the children other that in accordance with these orders”.   for the mother to be at liberty to take the children overseas for a holiday for periods of up to 28 days on certain conditions of notice to the father and make up time for the father, and (h) an order that “the father refrain from attending the children’s schools or approaching the children other that in accordance with these orders”.   an order that “the father refrain from attending the children’s schools or approaching the children other that in accordance with these orders”.
20 the mother’s amended initiating application of 9 february 2018 varied her final orders sought by contracting the alternate weekend time between the father and children during school term time to 9am saturday to 3.30pm on sunday, and such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time. the amended orders also sought a widening of the order giving the parents liberty to attend the children’s schools to include extracurricular activities, and added an order in relation to changeovers at the start and end of the father’s time taking place at suburb c park.
21 the orders sought by the mother on final hearing were “radically different to those sought in her initiating application and previous amended initiating application. the change being, on the mother’s case, in consequence of events that occurred subsequent to february 2018 and, in particular, in late november 2019”. at hearing, the mother sought the following orders:   that all prior parenting orders in relation to the children be discharged, (b) that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children, (c) that the children live with the mother, (d) that the father undertake a mental health assessment by either dr h or dr g at his own cost, to assess whether the father has cognitive or learning difficulties or a personality disorder that may impact upon his parenting ability, (e) within seven days from the date of these orders, the father shall obtain referrals for such assessments, (f) that forthwith, upon obtaining the said referrals, the father arrange to undertake the first available assessments and inform the mother of the date of those assessments, (g) that the father provide copies and have leave to provide copies of the family report and the judgment to those conducting the said assessments and his gp, (h) that the father provide the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, (i) that the father do all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and he shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days from the date of assessments, and (j) upon the father’s completion of treatment, if necessary, then the mother seeks the balance (after the f service course at order 3) of the orders in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018.   that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children, (c) that the children live with the mother, (d) that the father undertake a mental health assessment by either dr h or dr g at his own cost, to assess whether the father has cognitive or learning difficulties or a personality disorder that may impact upon his parenting ability, (e) within seven days from the date of these orders, the father shall obtain referrals for such assessments, (f) that forthwith, upon obtaining the said referrals, the father arrange to undertake the first available assessments and inform the mother of the date of those assessments, (g) that the father provide copies and have leave to provide copies of the family report and the judgment to those conducting the said assessments and his gp, (h) that the father provide the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, (i) that the father do all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and he shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days from the date of assessments, and (j) upon the father’s completion of treatment, if necessary, then the mother seeks the balance (after the f service course at order 3) of the orders in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018.   that the children live with the mother, (d) that the father undertake a mental health assessment by either dr h or dr g at his own cost, to assess whether the father has cognitive or learning difficulties or a personality disorder that may impact upon his parenting ability, (e) within seven days from the date of these orders, the father shall obtain referrals for such assessments, (f) that forthwith, upon obtaining the said referrals, the father arrange to undertake the first available assessments and inform the mother of the date of those assessments, (g) that the father provide copies and have leave to provide copies of the family report and the judgment to those conducting the said assessments and his gp, (h) that the father provide the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, (i) that the father do all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and he shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days from the date of assessments, and (j) upon the father’s completion of treatment, if necessary, then the mother seeks the balance (after the f service course at order 3) of the orders in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018.   that the father undertake a mental health assessment by either dr h or dr g at his own cost, to assess whether the father has cognitive or learning difficulties or a personality disorder that may impact upon his parenting ability, (e) within seven days from the date of these orders, the father shall obtain referrals for such assessments, (f) that forthwith, upon obtaining the said referrals, the father arrange to undertake the first available assessments and inform the mother of the date of those assessments, (g) that the father provide copies and have leave to provide copies of the family report and the judgment to those conducting the said assessments and his gp, (h) that the father provide the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, (i) that the father do all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and he shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days from the date of assessments, and (j) upon the father’s completion of treatment, if necessary, then the mother seeks the balance (after the f service course at order 3) of the orders in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018.   within seven days from the date of these orders, the father shall obtain referrals for such assessments, (f) that forthwith, upon obtaining the said referrals, the father arrange to undertake the first available assessments and inform the mother of the date of those assessments, (g) that the father provide copies and have leave to provide copies of the family report and the judgment to those conducting the said assessments and his gp, (h) that the father provide the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, (i) that the father do all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and he shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days from the date of assessments, and (j) upon the father’s completion of treatment, if necessary, then the mother seeks the balance (after the f service course at order 3) of the orders in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018.   that forthwith, upon obtaining the said referrals, the father arrange to undertake the first available assessments and inform the mother of the date of those assessments, (g) that the father provide copies and have leave to provide copies of the family report and the judgment to those conducting the said assessments and his gp, (h) that the father provide the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, (i) that the father do all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and he shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days from the date of assessments, and (j) upon the father’s completion of treatment, if necessary, then the mother seeks the balance (after the f service course at order 3) of the orders in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018.   that the father provide copies and have leave to provide copies of the family report and the judgment to those conducting the said assessments and his gp, (h) that the father provide the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, (i) that the father do all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and he shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days from the date of assessments, and (j) upon the father’s completion of treatment, if necessary, then the mother seeks the balance (after the f service course at order 3) of the orders in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018.   that the father provide the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, (i) that the father do all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and he shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days from the date of assessments, and (j) upon the father’s completion of treatment, if necessary, then the mother seeks the balance (after the f service course at order 3) of the orders in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018.   that the father do all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and he shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days from the date of assessments, and (j) upon the father’s completion of treatment, if necessary, then the mother seeks the balance (after the f service course at order 3) of the orders in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018.   upon the father’s completion of treatment, if necessary, then the mother seeks the balance (after the f service course at order 3) of the orders in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018.
22 the orders sought by the mother then resume in line with those sought in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018 at order 3, as follows:
3. that upon the father complying with order 6 of the orders made by her honour henderson j at this honourable court on 3 may 2018 by attending [f service] and any anger management courses and courses to assist him with putting the needs of his children before his own or as directed by the staff at [f service], and upon providing the original copy of the completion certificates together with letter from [f service] confirming that he has attended and successfully completed all such courses to the mother, then the following shall apply:- (a) for a period of at least 24 months from the date of these orders and subject to order 5 herein:- (i) each alternate sunday from 9 am until 1 pm on a supervised basis at [j service] or such other recognised children’s contact centre as may be agreed between the parties in writing: (ii) on special occasions, in accordance with order 4 herein on a supervised basis at [j service] or such other recognised children’s contact centre as may be agreed between the parties in writing: and (iii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time. (b) after the father has attended 50 such visits in accordance with order 3 (a) and subject to orders 5, 9, 10, 11 and 12 herein:-   for a period of at least 24 months from the date of these orders and subject to order 5 herein:- (i) each alternate sunday from 9 am until 1 pm on a supervised basis at [j service] or such other recognised children’s contact centre as may be agreed between the parties in writing: (ii) on special occasions, in accordance with order 4 herein on a supervised basis at [j service] or such other recognised children’s contact centre as may be agreed between the parties in writing: and (iii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time. (b) after the father has attended 50 such visits in accordance with order 3 (a) and subject to orders 5, 9, 10, 11 and 12 herein:-   each alternate sunday from 9 am until 1 pm on a supervised basis at [j service] or such other recognised children’s contact centre as may be agreed between the parties in writing: (ii) on special occasions, in accordance with order 4 herein on a supervised basis at [j service] or such other recognised children’s contact centre as may be agreed between the parties in writing: and (iii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.  ) on special occasions, in accordance with order 4 herein on a supervised basis at [j service] or such other recognised children’s contact centre as may be agreed between the parties in writing: and (iii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.  i) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.   after the father has attended 50 such visits in accordance with order 3 (a) and subject to orders 5, 9, 10, 11 and 12 herein:-  each alternate sunday from 9 am until 1 pm, (ii) on special occasions, in accordance with order 4 herein: and (iii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.
4. that in addition to order 3 herein, the children shall spend time with the father during the following periods:   from 2 pm until 5 pm on christmas day: and (b) from 2 pm until 5 pm on father’s day.
5. that subject to order 4(a) herein, the father's time with the children pursuant to these orders shall be suspended during the children’s school holiday periods. 6. that for the purposes of order 3(a) herein, each party must: (a) contact [j service] or such other recognised children’s contact centre as the parties may agree in writing (“the contact service) within seven days and arrange an appointment for assessment for suitability for the children’s supervised time with the father pursuant to these orders:   contact [j service] or such other recognised children’s contact centre as the parties may agree in writing (“the contact service) within seven days and arrange an appointment for assessment for suitability for the children’s supervised time with the father pursuant to these orders:   attend the assessment, (c) comply with any appointments made by the contact service of the children’s supervised time with the father pursuant to these orders, (d) comply with all reasonable rules of the contact service, (e) comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the contact service, and (f) provide the contact service with a copy of all documents prepared and/or filed in these proceedings including but not limited to a copy of all the documents filed by each party and all court memoranda and/or orders.   comply with any appointments made by the contact service of the children’s supervised time with the father pursuant to these orders,   comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the contact service, and (f) provide the contact service with a copy of all documents prepared and/or filed in these proceedings including but not limited to a copy of all the documents filed by each party and all court memoranda and/or orders.   provide the contact service with a copy of all documents prepared and/or filed in these proceedings including but not limited to a copy of all the documents filed by each party and all court memoranda and/or orders.
7. that also for the purposes of order 3(a) herein: (a) the father shall pay the fees for the supervision charged by the contact service on each occasion of supervision, (b) the mother shall deliver the children to the location at which the father is to spend supervised time with the children and shall collect the children from such location at the conclusion thereof: (c) in the event that the contact service offers supervised time in relation to the time which the children are to spend with the father, only at times which are less regular than specified in order 3(a) herein, then the visit shall occur at the times which are offered by the contact service, (d) the period of the time the children spend with the father pursuant to these orders may vary by reason of the closure of the contact services during school and public holiday periods, and in such event, the next occasion for the child to spend time with the parent or person/s shall occur at times when the services can be provided by the contact service, and (e) the contact service may recommend the parties or either of them to participate in the program or programs, and in that event, either party must take all reasonable steps to comply with much recommendation. 8. for the purposes of order 3(b) herein, the father shall collect the children from the mother's care at [suburb c park] located at the corner of [d street] and [b street] at the commencement of each such period, and shall return the children to the mother’s care at the said park at the conclusion of each such period, or otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing. 9. that the father refrain from consuming any alcohol or taking any illicit drugs within 24 hours of the time when he is to spend time with the children or whilst the children are in his care. 10. that the father keep the mother informed of his current residential address, mobile and landline telephone numbers and any available email addresses and advise the mother of any change thereto within seven days of such change. 11. that in the event of childhood illness or emergency, during the time the father spends with the children pursuant to these orders, the father shall contact the mother forthwith to inform her. 12. that the father, his servants and agents be hereby restrained by injunction from: (a) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the mother, and (b) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children, or any of them, and from permitting any other person to do so. 13. that the mother be at liberty to approach the australian passport office and/or other relevant authority to apply for and obtain a passport for the children, namely [x] born ... 2010, and y born ... 2012. 14. that the mother shall be at liberty to take the children overseas for holiday purposes. 15. that for the purposes of orders 13 and 14 herein: (a) the father’s time with the children pursuant to these orders shall be suspended for the duration of the children’s overseas holiday and such time foregone shall be duly made up to the father by the mother upon the children’s return from the overseas holiday, and (b) that the mother be entitled to keep the children’s passports in her possession and control. 16. that order 4 of the orders made by her honour judge henderson at this honourable court on 3 may 2018 injuncting and restraining the father from attending the children’s school or approaching them on the school grounds at any time during school hours or engaging in any conduct which may disrupt the orderly schooling of the children be made on a final basis. 17. that the father be injuncted and restrained from attending any of the children’s extracurricular activities. 18. that for the purposes of these orders, ratification or agreement in writing shall be deemed to include text messages and/or email.   the father shall pay the fees for the supervision charged by the contact service on each occasion of supervision, (b) the mother shall deliver the children to the location at which the father is to spend supervised time with the children and shall collect the children from such location at the conclusion thereof: (c) in the event that the contact service offers supervised time in relation to the time which the children are to spend with the father, only at times which are less regular than specified in order 3(a) herein, then the visit shall occur at the times which are offered by the contact service, (d) the period of the time the children spend with the father pursuant to these orders may vary by reason of the closure of the contact services during school and public holiday periods, and in such event, the next occasion for the child to spend time with the parent or person/s shall occur at times when the services can be provided by the contact service, and (e) the contact service may recommend the parties or either of them to participate in the program or programs, and in that event, either party must take all reasonable steps to comply with much recommendation.   the mother shall deliver the children to the location at which the father is to spend supervised time with the children and shall collect the children from such location at the conclusion thereof: (c) in the event that the contact service offers supervised time in relation to the time which the children are to spend with the father, only at times which are less regular than specified in order 3(a) herein, then the visit shall occur at the times which are offered by the contact service, (d) the period of the time the children spend with the father pursuant to these orders may vary by reason of the closure of the contact services during school and public holiday periods, and in such event, the next occasion for the child to spend time with the parent or person/s shall occur at times when the services can be provided by the contact service, and (e) the contact service may recommend the parties or either of them to participate in the program or programs, and in that event, either party must take all reasonable steps to comply with much recommendation.   in the event that the contact service offers supervised time in relation to the time which the children are to spend with the father, only at times which are less regular than specified in order 3(a) herein, then the visit shall occur at the times which are offered by the contact service, (d) the period of the time the children spend with the father pursuant to these orders may vary by reason of the closure of the contact services during school and public holiday periods, and in such event, the next occasion for the child to spend time with the parent or person/s shall occur at times when the services can be provided by the contact service, and (e) the contact service may recommend the parties or either of them to participate in the program or programs, and in that event, either party must take all reasonable steps to comply with much recommendation.   the period of the time the children spend with the father pursuant to these orders may vary by reason of the closure of the contact services during school and public holiday periods, and in such event, the next occasion for the child to spend time with the parent or person/s shall occur at times when the services can be provided by the contact service, and (e) the contact service may recommend the parties or either of them to participate in the program or programs, and in that event, either party must take all reasonable steps to comply with much recommendation.   the contact service may recommend the parties or either of them to participate in the program or programs, and in that event, either party must take all reasonable steps to comply with much recommendation.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the mother, and (b) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children, or any of them, and from permitting any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children, or any of them, and from permitting any other person to do so.   the father’s time with the children pursuant to these orders shall be suspended for the duration of the children’s overseas holiday and such time foregone shall be duly made up to the father by the mother upon the children’s return from the overseas holiday, and (b) that the mother be entitled to keep the children’s passports in her possession and control.   that the mother be entitled to keep the children’s passports in her possession and control.
23 the orders sought on hearing by the father are those contained in his amended response of 23 october 2020, as follows:
1. that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the care, welfare and development of the children, namely [x] born ... 2010, and [y] born ... 2012 (hereinafter called “the children”). 2. that the children shall live with the mother. 3. that the children shall spend time with the respondent father as follows:   during school term: (i) subject to orders 3(b) and 3(c), 4, 5, and 12(a) herein, each alternate weekend from 3 pm friday to 5 pm on sunday commencing the first friday after the making of these orders, and (ii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time. (b) during school holidays, half of the school holiday period commencing from 3 pm friday of the weekend that the school holiday period starts and continuing until 5pm on the middle saturday or wednesday of the school holiday period (whichever is nearest to the middle day of the school holiday period). (c) on other days of significance: (i) if father’s day falls on a weekend when the children are not already spending time with the father, then the children are to spend time with the father on sunday from 9am to 5pm, (ii) at christmas, in even years, commencing 2020, from 12pm on 24 december until 12pm on 25 december, and in odd years, commencing 2021, from 12 pm on 25 december until 12 pm on 26 december, (iii) new year, in even/odd numbered years commencing 2020/2021 from 12 pm on 31 december to 12pm on 1 january, and in odd/even numbered years commencing 2021/2022 from 12 pm on 1 january until 12 pm on 2 january, (iv) on [y]’s birthday ... in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm on ... until 3pm ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm on ... until 3 pm ..., (v) for [x]’s birthday, ..., in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., (vi) for the father’s birthday, ..., if the father’s birthday falls on a weekend (including a friday) from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday, otherwise if the father’s birthday falls on a weekday, for the weekend immediately following the father’s birthday, from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday. (d) changeover shall occur outside mcdonald’s at [suburb k shopping centre], except when the children are being collected or returned on a school day, in which case the father will collect the children from school or deliver them to school as the case may be.   subject to orders 3(b) and 3(c), 4, 5, and 12(a) herein, each alternate weekend from 3 pm friday to 5 pm on sunday commencing the first friday after the making of these orders, and (ii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.  ) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing from time to time.   during school holidays, half of the school holiday period commencing from 3 pm friday of the weekend that the school holiday period starts and continuing until 5pm on the middle saturday or wednesday of the school holiday period (whichever is nearest to the middle day of the school holiday period). (c) on other days of significance: (i) if father’s day falls on a weekend when the children are not already spending time with the father, then the children are to spend time with the father on sunday from 9am to 5pm, (ii) at christmas, in even years, commencing 2020, from 12pm on 24 december until 12pm on 25 december, and in odd years, commencing 2021, from 12 pm on 25 december until 12 pm on 26 december, (iii) new year, in even/odd numbered years commencing 2020/2021 from 12 pm on 31 december to 12pm on 1 january, and in odd/even numbered years commencing 2021/2022 from 12 pm on 1 january until 12 pm on 2 january, (iv) on [y]’s birthday ... in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm on ... until 3pm ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm on ... until 3 pm ..., (v) for [x]’s birthday, ..., in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., (vi) for the father’s birthday, ..., if the father’s birthday falls on a weekend (including a friday) from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday, otherwise if the father’s birthday falls on a weekday, for the weekend immediately following the father’s birthday, from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday. (d) changeover shall occur outside mcdonald’s at [suburb k shopping centre], except when the children are being collected or returned on a school day, in which case the father will collect the children from school or deliver them to school as the case may be.   on other days of significance: (i) if father’s day falls on a weekend when the children are not already spending time with the father, then the children are to spend time with the father on sunday from 9am to 5pm, (ii) at christmas, in even years, commencing 2020, from 12pm on 24 december until 12pm on 25 december, and in odd years, commencing 2021, from 12 pm on 25 december until 12 pm on 26 december, (iii) new year, in even/odd numbered years commencing 2020/2021 from 12 pm on 31 december to 12pm on 1 january, and in odd/even numbered years commencing 2021/2022 from 12 pm on 1 january until 12 pm on 2 january, (iv) on [y]’s birthday ... in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm on ... until 3pm ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm on ... until 3 pm ..., (v) for [x]’s birthday, ..., in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., (vi) for the father’s birthday, ..., if the father’s birthday falls on a weekend (including a friday) from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday, otherwise if the father’s birthday falls on a weekday, for the weekend immediately following the father’s birthday, from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday. (d) changeover shall occur outside mcdonald’s at [suburb k shopping centre], except when the children are being collected or returned on a school day, in which case the father will collect the children from school or deliver them to school as the case may be.   if father’s day falls on a weekend when the children are not already spending time with the father, then the children are to spend time with the father on sunday from 9am to 5pm, (ii) at christmas, in even years, commencing 2020, from 12pm on 24 december until 12pm on 25 december, and in odd years, commencing 2021, from 12 pm on 25 december until 12 pm on 26 december, (iii) new year, in even/odd numbered years commencing 2020/2021 from 12 pm on 31 december to 12pm on 1 january, and in odd/even numbered years commencing 2021/2022 from 12 pm on 1 january until 12 pm on 2 january, (iv) on [y]’s birthday ... in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm on ... until 3pm ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm on ... until 3 pm ..., (v) for [x]’s birthday, ..., in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., (vi) for the father’s birthday, ..., if the father’s birthday falls on a weekend (including a friday) from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday, otherwise if the father’s birthday falls on a weekday, for the weekend immediately following the father’s birthday, from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday.  ) at christmas, in even years, commencing 2020, from 12pm on 24 december until 12pm on 25 december, and in odd years, commencing 2021, from 12 pm on 25 december until 12 pm on 26 december, (iii) new year, in even/odd numbered years commencing 2020/2021 from 12 pm on 31 december to 12pm on 1 january, and in odd/even numbered years commencing 2021/2022 from 12 pm on 1 january until 12 pm on 2 january, (iv) on [y]’s birthday ... in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm on ... until 3pm ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm on ... until 3 pm ..., (v) for [x]’s birthday, ..., in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., (vi) for the father’s birthday, ..., if the father’s birthday falls on a weekend (including a friday) from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday, otherwise if the father’s birthday falls on a weekday, for the weekend immediately following the father’s birthday, from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday.  i) new year, in even/odd numbered years commencing 2020/2021 from 12 pm on 31 december to 12pm on 1 january, and in odd/even numbered years commencing 2021/2022 from 12 pm on 1 january until 12 pm on 2 january, (iv) on [y]’s birthday ... in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm on ... until 3pm ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm on ... until 3 pm ..., (v) for [x]’s birthday, ..., in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., (vi) for the father’s birthday, ..., if the father’s birthday falls on a weekend (including a friday) from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday, otherwise if the father’s birthday falls on a weekday, for the weekend immediately following the father’s birthday, from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday.  ) on [y]’s birthday ... in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm on ... until 3pm ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm on ... until 3 pm ..., (v) for [x]’s birthday, ..., in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., (vi) for the father’s birthday, ..., if the father’s birthday falls on a weekend (including a friday) from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday, otherwise if the father’s birthday falls on a weekday, for the weekend immediately following the father’s birthday, from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday.   for [x]’s birthday, ..., in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., and in even numbered years commencing 2022 from 3pm or the conclusion of school on ... until 3pm or the commencement of school on ..., (vi) for the father’s birthday, ..., if the father’s birthday falls on a weekend (including a friday) from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday, otherwise if the father’s birthday falls on a weekday, for the weekend immediately following the father’s birthday, from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday.  ) for the father’s birthday, ..., if the father’s birthday falls on a weekend (including a friday) from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday, otherwise if the father’s birthday falls on a weekday, for the weekend immediately following the father’s birthday, from 3pm on the friday until 5pm on the sunday.   changeover shall occur outside mcdonald’s at [suburb k shopping centre], except when the children are being collected or returned on a school day, in which case the father will collect the children from school or deliver them to school as the case may be.
4. that the provisions of order 3 be suspended so far as they conflict with the following provisions of this order, to allow the mother to spend time with the children as follows: (a) if mother’s day falls on a weekend when the children are not already spending time with the mother, then the children are to spend time with the mother on sunday from 9am to 5pm. (b) at christmas, in even numbered years commencing 2020 from 12 pm on 25 december until 12pm on 26 december, and in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 12pm on 24 december until 12pm on 25 december. 5. that each parent refrain from consuming any alcohol or taking any illicit drugs within 12 hours from the time that he/she is to spend with the children or while the children are in his/her care. 6. that each parent keep the other informed of their current residential address, mobile number, and landline telephone numbers (where applicable) and any available email addresses and advise the other parent of any change thereto within seven days of such change. 7. that in the event of a child’s illness or emergency, the parent with whom the child or children are with shall contact the other parent forthwith to inform them. that each parent shall be entitled to have full access to all medical records of each child and be informed of any proposed medical procedure not less than 60 days before the procedure is due to take place, and that any such procedure that requires the consent of a parent shall not proceed unless both parents give their written consent. that each parent shall be informed of any counselling or psychology or psychiatric appointments made for either of the children no less than 14 days before the appointment including contact details of the practitioner. 8. that the parents, their servants and agents be hereby restrained by injunction from: (a) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party, and (b) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children, or any of them, and from permitting any other person to do so. 9. that both parents be permitted to liaise directly with the children’s school and sporting bodies to receive school notices, information, newsletters, school reports, school photographs and any other necessary information about the children’s progress. 10. that each party is at liberty to attend the children’s school(s) and extracurricular activities for the purposes of any function or activity normally attended by parents. 11. that each parent shall be at liberty to take the children overseas for holiday purposes for a period of up to 28 days on one occasion in any calendar year, provided that the parent gives the other parent advance notice in writing of such travel of not less than 60 days, including a copy of the itinerary, travel destinations and contact telephone numbers for the children during their holiday overseas. 12. that for the purposes of order 11 herein: (a) the other parent’s time with the children pursuant to these orders shall be suspended for the duration of the children’s overseas holiday and such time forgone shall be made up to the other parent within 45 days of the children’s return from the overseas holiday, and (b) upon the mother providing to the father appropriate completed passport application forms for the children, the father shall consent to, sign and return said forms to the mother within 14 days of being provided with the forms, and (c) the father shall give all necessary consents and do all things necessary to ensure that the children have valid passports at all times subject to providing any required documentation to the father no less than 14 days before it is required, and (d) the mother be entitled to keep the children’s passports in her possession and control subject to order 12(e), and (e) that when the father gives the mother notice of his intention to take the children overseas for holiday purposes, the mother shall make the children’s passports available to the father no less than 45 days before the father’s travel with the children is due to commence, and the father shall have possession and control of the passports for the period until the travel starts, the period of the travel, and up to seven days following the travel whereupon the children’s passports shall be returned by the father to the mother, (f) however, this order 12 does not come into effect until the mother has given the father the original ... hospital birth certificate for the father to retain in his possession and control. 13. that the parties notify each other in writing, namely by text message or by email, if either party intends to take the children interstate at least 72 hours prior to intended travel, and the travelling party is to provide to the non-travelling party the suburb and telephone number(s) where the children will be staying. 14. that the parties notify each other in writing, namely by text message or email, if either party intends to take the children intrastate for a period in excess of 48, prior to the intended travel, and the travelling and the travelling party is to provide to the non-travelling party the suburb and telephone number(s) of where the children will be staying. 15. that for the purposes of these orders, notification or agreement in writing shall be deemed to include text message or email. 16. changeovers shall occur outside mcdonald’s at [suburb k shopping centre], except when the children are being collected or returned on a school day, in which case the father will collect the children from school or deliver them to school as the case may be. 17. during the time that the father spends with the children pursuant to these orders, the father shall do all things necessary to facilitate the children’s attendance at their scheduled extracurricular activities during such time, provided that the father is notified of the said extracurricular activities no less than 14 days before the date they are scheduled to occur.   if mother’s day falls on a weekend when the children are not already spending time with the mother, then the children are to spend time with the mother on sunday from 9am to 5pm. (b) at christmas, in even numbered years commencing 2020 from 12 pm on 25 december until 12pm on 26 december, and in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 12pm on 24 december until 12pm on 25 december.   at christmas, in even numbered years commencing 2020 from 12 pm on 25 december until 12pm on 26 december, and in odd numbered years commencing 2021 from 12pm on 24 december until 12pm on 25 december.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party, and (b) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children, or any of them, and from permitting any other person to do so.   the other parent’s time with the children pursuant to these orders shall be suspended for the duration of the children’s overseas holiday and such time forgone shall be made up to the other parent within 45 days of the children’s return from the overseas holiday, and (b) upon the mother providing to the father appropriate completed passport application forms for the children, the father shall consent to, sign and return said forms to the mother within 14 days of being provided with the forms, and (c) the father shall give all necessary consents and do all things necessary to ensure that the children have valid passports at all times subject to providing any required documentation to the father no less than 14 days before it is required, and (d) the mother be entitled to keep the children’s passports in her possession and control subject to order 12(e), and (e) that when the father gives the mother notice of his intention to take the children overseas for holiday purposes, the mother shall make the children’s passports available to the father no less than 45 days before the father’s travel with the children is due to commence, and the father shall have possession and control of the passports for the period until the travel starts, the period of the travel, and up to seven days following the travel whereupon the children’s passports shall be returned by the father to the mother, (f) however, this order 12 does not come into effect until the mother has given the father the original ... hospital birth certificate for the father to retain in his possession and control.   upon the mother providing to the father appropriate completed passport application forms for the children, the father shall consent to, sign and return said forms to the mother within 14 days of being provided with the forms, and (c) the father shall give all necessary consents and do all things necessary to ensure that the children have valid passports at all times subject to providing any required documentation to the father no less than 14 days before it is required, and (d) the mother be entitled to keep the children’s passports in her possession and control subject to order 12(e), and (e) that when the father gives the mother notice of his intention to take the children overseas for holiday purposes, the mother shall make the children’s passports available to the father no less than 45 days before the father’s travel with the children is due to commence, and the father shall have possession and control of the passports for the period until the travel starts, the period of the travel, and up to seven days following the travel whereupon the children’s passports shall be returned by the father to the mother, (f) however, this order 12 does not come into effect until the mother has given the father the original ... hospital birth certificate for the father to retain in his possession and control.   the father shall give all necessary consents and do all things necessary to ensure that the children have valid passports at all times subject to providing any required documentation to the father no less than 14 days before it is required, and (d) the mother be entitled to keep the children’s passports in her possession and control subject to order 12(e), and (e) that when the father gives the mother notice of his intention to take the children overseas for holiday purposes, the mother shall make the children’s passports available to the father no less than 45 days before the father’s travel with the children is due to commence, and the father shall have possession and control of the passports for the period until the travel starts, the period of the travel, and up to seven days following the travel whereupon the children’s passports shall be returned by the father to the mother, (f) however, this order 12 does not come into effect until the mother has given the father the original ... hospital birth certificate for the father to retain in his possession and control.   the mother be entitled to keep the children’s passports in her possession and control subject to order 12(e), and (e) that when the father gives the mother notice of his intention to take the children overseas for holiday purposes, the mother shall make the children’s passports available to the father no less than 45 days before the father’s travel with the children is due to commence, and the father shall have possession and control of the passports for the period until the travel starts, the period of the travel, and up to seven days following the travel whereupon the children’s passports shall be returned by the father to the mother, (f) however, this order 12 does not come into effect until the mother has given the father the original ... hospital birth certificate for the father to retain in his possession and control.   that when the father gives the mother notice of his intention to take the children overseas for holiday purposes, the mother shall make the children’s passports available to the father no less than 45 days before the father’s travel with the children is due to commence, and the father shall have possession and control of the passports for the period until the travel starts, the period of the travel, and up to seven days following the travel whereupon the children’s passports shall be returned by the father to the mother, (f) however, this order 12 does not come into effect until the mother has given the father the original ... hospital birth certificate for the father to retain in his possession and control.   however, this order 12 does not come into effect until the mother has given the father the original ... hospital birth certificate for the father to retain in his possession and control.
the materials relied upon at hearing
24 the mother relied upon the following material:   a case outline document prepared by her counsel mr hill dated 15 november and filed 16 november 2020, (b) her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018, (c) her affidavit affirmed 21 october 2020, (d) notice of risk filed 19 september 2017, (e) exhibit a1, being a medical certificate for the father addressed “to the [suburb e] magistrate” provided by dr l on about 25 june 2020, (f) exhibit a2, being a copy of page 659 from dsm-5 in relation to the material under the heading “antisocial personality disorder” and before the heading “diagnostic features.”, and (g) a transcript of proceedings on 18 may 2020 before her honour judge henderson.   her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018, (c) her affidavit affirmed 21 october 2020, (d) notice of risk filed 19 september 2017, (e) exhibit a1, being a medical certificate for the father addressed “to the [suburb e] magistrate” provided by dr l on about 25 june 2020, (f) exhibit a2, being a copy of page 659 from dsm-5 in relation to the material under the heading “antisocial personality disorder” and before the heading “diagnostic features.”, and (g) a transcript of proceedings on 18 may 2020 before her honour judge henderson.   her affidavit affirmed 21 october 2020, (d) notice of risk filed 19 september 2017, (e) exhibit a1, being a medical certificate for the father addressed “to the [suburb e] magistrate” provided by dr l on about 25 june 2020, (f) exhibit a2, being a copy of page 659 from dsm-5 in relation to the material under the heading “antisocial personality disorder” and before the heading “diagnostic features.”, and (g) a transcript of proceedings on 18 may 2020 before her honour judge henderson.   notice of risk filed 19 september 2017, (e) exhibit a1, being a medical certificate for the father addressed “to the [suburb e] magistrate” provided by dr l on about 25 june 2020, (f) exhibit a2, being a copy of page 659 from dsm-5 in relation to the material under the heading “antisocial personality disorder” and before the heading “diagnostic features.”, and (g) a transcript of proceedings on 18 may 2020 before her honour judge henderson.   exhibit a1, being a medical certificate for the father addressed “to the [suburb e] magistrate” provided by dr l on about 25 june 2020, (f) exhibit a2, being a copy of page 659 from dsm-5 in relation to the material under the heading “antisocial personality disorder” and before the heading “diagnostic features.”, and (g) a transcript of proceedings on 18 may 2020 before her honour judge henderson.   exhibit a2, being a copy of page 659 from dsm-5 in relation to the material under the heading “antisocial personality disorder” and before the heading “diagnostic features.”, and (g) a transcript of proceedings on 18 may 2020 before her honour judge henderson.   a transcript of proceedings on 18 may 2020 before her honour judge henderson.
25 i have included the transcript in this list on the basis that the transcript was admitted before the court in hard copy upon hearing and referred to in cross-examination of the father, cross-examination of the mother, cross-examination of ms m and in submissions. i read the transcript in full on the bench during the hearing.
26 the mother was cross-examined by mr strik for the father, and re-examined as to one matter only by mr hill.
27 mr hill made submissions for the mother, being written submissions in his case outline document and oral submissions on 11 december 2020. in the course of those oral submissions, mr hill referred the court to two particular authorities that relate to the orders sought by the mother in the case outline document for the father to undergo a mental health assessment and comply with any treatment recommendations made in the assessment. those authorities will be referred to hereunder in discussion of the matter.
28 mr hill provided to the court for the court’s assistance, but did not tender into evidence, a full copy of an article, “unacceptable risk: a return to basics” by the honourable john fogarty am.[1] the provision of the article to the court was not objected to in any manner on behalf of the father. accordingly, i have read the whole of that article, not as forming part of the evidence in the case, but as part of the submissions on behalf of the mother.
29 the father relied on the following material:   case outline document prepared by his counsel, mr strik, dated and filed 11 november 2020, (b) his amended response filed 23 october 2020, (c) his affidavit affirmed and filed 23 october 2020, (d) the affidavit of ms m, the father’s non-cohabitive partner, affirmed 22 october and filed 23 october 2020, (e) exhibit r1, being a screenshot of text messages between the parents dated 17 november 2019, (f) exhibit r2, being a bundle of six photographs, the first dated 5 october 2019 the others dated 6 october 2019, (g) exhibit r3, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 22 november 2019, (h) exhibit r4, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 23 and 24 november (not dated on the document but upon the evidence on hearing dated 2019), and (i) exhibit r5, being nine photographs depicting variously the father and the children dated 2, 3 and 4 november 2019.   his amended response filed 23 october 2020, (c) his affidavit affirmed and filed 23 october 2020, (d) the affidavit of ms m, the father’s non-cohabitive partner, affirmed 22 october and filed 23 october 2020, (e) exhibit r1, being a screenshot of text messages between the parents dated 17 november 2019, (f) exhibit r2, being a bundle of six photographs, the first dated 5 october 2019 the others dated 6 october 2019, (g) exhibit r3, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 22 november 2019, (h) exhibit r4, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 23 and 24 november (not dated on the document but upon the evidence on hearing dated 2019), and (i) exhibit r5, being nine photographs depicting variously the father and the children dated 2, 3 and 4 november 2019.   his affidavit affirmed and filed 23 october 2020, (d) the affidavit of ms m, the father’s non-cohabitive partner, affirmed 22 october and filed 23 october 2020, (e) exhibit r1, being a screenshot of text messages between the parents dated 17 november 2019, (f) exhibit r2, being a bundle of six photographs, the first dated 5 october 2019 the others dated 6 october 2019, (g) exhibit r3, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 22 november 2019, (h) exhibit r4, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 23 and 24 november (not dated on the document but upon the evidence on hearing dated 2019), and (i) exhibit r5, being nine photographs depicting variously the father and the children dated 2, 3 and 4 november 2019.   the affidavit of ms m, the father’s non-cohabitive partner, affirmed 22 october and filed 23 october 2020, (e) exhibit r1, being a screenshot of text messages between the parents dated 17 november 2019, (f) exhibit r2, being a bundle of six photographs, the first dated 5 october 2019 the others dated 6 october 2019, (g) exhibit r3, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 22 november 2019, (h) exhibit r4, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 23 and 24 november (not dated on the document but upon the evidence on hearing dated 2019), and (i) exhibit r5, being nine photographs depicting variously the father and the children dated 2, 3 and 4 november 2019.   exhibit r1, being a screenshot of text messages between the parents dated 17 november 2019, (f) exhibit r2, being a bundle of six photographs, the first dated 5 october 2019 the others dated 6 october 2019, (g) exhibit r3, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 22 november 2019, (h) exhibit r4, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 23 and 24 november (not dated on the document but upon the evidence on hearing dated 2019), and (i) exhibit r5, being nine photographs depicting variously the father and the children dated 2, 3 and 4 november 2019.   exhibit r2, being a bundle of six photographs, the first dated 5 october 2019 the others dated 6 october 2019, (g) exhibit r3, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 22 november 2019, (h) exhibit r4, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 23 and 24 november (not dated on the document but upon the evidence on hearing dated 2019), and (i) exhibit r5, being nine photographs depicting variously the father and the children dated 2, 3 and 4 november 2019.   exhibit r3, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 22 november 2019, (h) exhibit r4, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 23 and 24 november (not dated on the document but upon the evidence on hearing dated 2019), and (i) exhibit r5, being nine photographs depicting variously the father and the children dated 2, 3 and 4 november 2019.   exhibit r4, being a screenshot of text messages between the parties on 23 and 24 november (not dated on the document but upon the evidence on hearing dated 2019), and (i) exhibit r5, being nine photographs depicting variously the father and the children dated 2, 3 and 4 november 2019.   exhibit r5, being nine photographs depicting variously the father and the children dated 2, 3 and 4 november 2019.
30 the father was cross-examined by mr hill for the mother and re-examined by mr strik. at the end of that re-examination, and by leave, there was a further examination-in-chief of the father by mr strik in relation to certain documents that were thereafter tendered on behalf of the father and became exhibits r1 to r5 inclusive.
31 the husband’s witness, ms m, gave oral evidence-in-chief in addition to her affidavit evidence and she was then cross-examined by mr hill for the mother.
32 a family report was prepared pursuant to the order made by judge harper on 27 september 2018. that family report dated 11 october 2019 was prepared by family consultant ms n. prior to cross-examination of ms n by mr hill for the mother and mr strik for the father, the family report was marked as exhibit c1 by the court’s own volition because the document was not tendered on behalf of either party.
33 in preparing these reasons, i have reviewed all of the materials relied upon by each of the parties including the exhibits, the oral evidence of each of the parties and of ms m as the father’s witness, the family report (exhibit ct1), and the whole of the oral evidence of ms n. i have also reviewed the submissions both written and oral made on behalf of each of the parties.
the evidence
34 the mother was born in 1975 and was 45 years of age at hearing. the father was born in 1978 and was 42 years of age at hearing.
35 the mother works part-time as a professional. the father is unemployed though is qualified as a tradesman.
36 the parties commenced cohabitation in either 2006 on the father’s evidence or 2008 on the mother’s evidence. x was born in 2010 and y in 2012.
37 the parties initially commenced their cohabitation living together in a rental accommodation at suburb o in new south wales and then moved to a rental apartment in suburb p in 2009. sometime thereafter but before mid-2010, the parties moved to another rental property at suburb c. in mid-2010, the parties and x moved in to reside at the mother’s parent’s home in q street, suburb c on a rent-free basis.
38 on 15 may 2012 a final apprehended domestic violence order (“advo") was made in the local court at suburb e for the protection of the mother from the father and provided in addition to the “statutory orders” that the father:
must not reside at the premises at which the [mother] may from time to time reside, or other specified premises: home – [q street, suburb c], nsw.
and further that the father:
must not approach the [mother] or any such premises or place at which the [mother] from time to time reside or work within 12 hours of consuming intoxicating liquor or illicit drugs.
39 despite the terms of the order, the parties continued to live together at the mother’s parent’s home at suburb c until they moved as a family to reside in rental accommodation at suburb r in the s region in queensland in 2012.
40 shortly after the family moved to the s region, they received some legal advice in relation to the terms of the advo. the father moved out of the home occupied by the mother and the children and began residing with his older brother in suburb t. on the evidence, neither party considered the de facto relationship ended at that time.
41 both parties consider that the de facto relationship ended in mid-2013 when the mother and children moved back to new south wales to reside at her parents’ home at suburb c.
42 when the family moved to the s region in 2012, the father had been assigned a local parole officer at suburb t in the s region in consequence of the local court proceedings in 2012, and as part of the terms of his conviction for what i presume were domestic violence offences at that time, although it was not made explicit in any of the evidence. he continued on a 24-month good behaviour bond, one of the terms of which was a requirement that he complete a 24-week domestic violence program in queensland. at the time the mother and children returned to reside in new south wales in mid-2013, the father had not completed the required course and in consequence, he stayed in queensland residing with his brother at suburb t until he completed the course.
43 the principal cause of the mother’s return to reside in new south wales in mid-2013 was taking up a job opportunity as a senior professional at u company in sydney. at this time, and throughout the parties’ separation up to the time of the hearing, the mother was solely responsible as between the parties for the financial support of the children. further, she required the support that was provided to her by her family in new south wales, particularly in residing with her parents at suburb c.
44 after the mother and children returned to sydney, on the mother’s evidence the father travelled to sydney by airplane “on average once each month”,[2] staying at his parents’ home in suburb v. the father spent time with the children from 5pm on friday, until sometime between 11am and 4pm on sunday, then returned to the s region.
45 having completed his required domestic violence program in queensland, the father returned to reside in sydney sometime in mid-2014 on the mother’s evidence, or “just before christmas 2014” on the father’s evidence.
46 on the father’s return to residing in new south wales, the parents reached agreement that the father would spend time with the children each alternate weekend from friday afternoon until 4.30pm on sunday afternoon and that he would speak to the children by telephone once each week. during the alternate weekends, the children resided with their father at the paternal grandparents’ home at suburb v.
47 the father gives evidence that his calls to the children during the week were sometimes unanswered.
48 the mother gives evidence that the father displayed aggressive and violent behaviour toward the mother verbally during phone calls and on occasions of changeovers.
49 it is beyond dispute in the evidence of both parties that the mother has been the primary caregiver for the children since the time of their birth. for most of the time since the parties began living at different homes in 2012 the mother has been the children’s sole caregiver.
50 when x was born, the mother took four months maternity leave and then returned to work full-time in mid-2010, placing x into long day care at suburb e and thereafter at w kindergarten at suburb c. when y was born, the mother took five months maternity leave and then when she returned to work, both x and y were placed in long day care from 7.30am until 5.30pm to 6pm each weekday.
51 the father asserts in his evidence that both parents consumed alcohol to excess during their domestic relationship and that there were incidents of family violence perpetrated by each party against the other. in 2012, the father attended a course to address his issues of alcohol. the mother asserts that both parties consumed alcohol together during their relationship and that while her consumption was “not problematic”, she told the family report writer that she used alcohol as an “escape” due to being a victim of family violence and her feelings of isolation when residing in queensland.[3] she asserts that the father on the other hand “was frequently intoxicated and drank excessively in their relationship” [4], and that he:
...regularly drank between six to eight beers approximately four to five times per week. on average, i observed [mr lachman] to be intoxicated approximately four times per week.[5]
52 both parties assert in their evidence that alcohol was not in any way a problem for them at the time of hearing and neither party was able to present evidence that there was a misuse of alcohol by the other parent in the years leading up to the hearing, or at the time of the hearing, or that misuse of alcohol by either parent represented a risk to the children.
53 the mother gives evidence of family violence perpetrated by the father against her, leading to a chain of advo applications and orders throughout their relationship. the father largely evades the issue of his family violence in his affidavit evidence, referring to the mother’s applications for advos and such orders being made, but not going into any detail of any of the alleged incidents.
54 the court was not provided with any documentation providing criminal history records for the father and there is very little explicit detail in the admitted evidence in relation to any charges or convictions. however, it is a necessary implication in the evidence of both of the parties that there were charges and convictions against the father during the parties’ relationship for domestic violence offences. this includes the father being placed on a 24-month good behaviour bond in 2012 at the time that a final avdo was made for the protection of the mother from the father, leading to the requirement that he complete the 24-week domestic violence program in queensland. there are other such implications further in the evidence that will be detailed below.
55 the mother gives evidence in relation to particular incidents of family violence, summarised as follows below.   in 2007, prior to the parties’ cohabitation commencing, the father stamped on the mother’s hands and fingers, causing bruising. (b) in 2009, the father broke a bag belonging to the mother and then wrapped a t-shirt around her neck and pulled it tight, causing her to be unable to breathe consistently. after about two minutes, the mother broke free, having sustained injuries to her neck, causing redness and inflammation. as a result of this occasion in 2009, the police were called and the father was taken by police to the z hospital psychiatric ward. the police took out a provisional advo for the mother’s protection from the father. the provisional advo caused the father to move to reside at his parents’ home until the advo matter had been heard before a court. following this event, the mother requested that police not pursue a final advo before the court and the proceedings were terminated.   in 2009, the father broke a bag belonging to the mother and then wrapped a t-shirt around her neck and pulled it tight, causing her to be unable to breathe consistently. after about two minutes, the mother broke free, having sustained injuries to her neck, causing redness and inflammation. as a result of this occasion in 2009, the police were called and the father was taken by police to the z hospital psychiatric ward. the police took out a provisional advo for the mother’s protection from the father. the provisional advo caused the father to move to reside at his parents’ home until the advo matter had been heard before a court. following this event, the mother requested that police not pursue a final advo before the court and the proceedings were terminated.
as a result of this occasion in 2009, the police were called and the father was taken by police to the z hospital psychiatric ward. the police took out a provisional advo for the mother’s protection from the father. the provisional advo caused the father to move to reside at his parents’ home until the advo matter had been heard before a court. following this event, the mother requested that police not pursue a final advo before the court and the proceedings were terminated.
56 the father does not mention this incident in his affidavit evidence and the mother was not cross-examined about her evidence in relation to either the 2007 or the 2009 incidents of domestic violence by the father, although she was specifically cross-examined about other assertions made against the father by her in her affidavit.
57 i accept the mother’s evidence in relation to these incidents.
58 on 11 may 2012, during an argument between the parties at a time when the mother asserts the father was affected by alcohol, the father pushed the mother into surround sound speakers causing her to fall to the floor. the father then stamped his feet on her hands and chest, bit through a landline telephone cord and hit the mother on her head with his closed fist causing her to fall against a wall and then to the floor on her back. the father then went to the children’s bedroom and took x out of bed. the mother followed the father and grabbed x from the father. the father then left, and the mother called the police. the father then returned to the home and took hold of the maternal grandfather’s mobile phone and smashed it and then left the home again.
59 following this incident, the police issued a provisional advo for protection of the mother from the father. on 15 may 2012, the final advo for the protection of the mother from the father was made at the local court at suburb e (referred to earlier in these reasons) to continue for a period of one year. the father was also placed on a 24-month good behaviour bond, which does not form part of an apprehended domestic violence proceeding alone and, accordingly, must relate to a conviction for an offence.
60 the only cross-examination of the mother about her evidence of this incident was a question by mr strik referring to paragraphs 22 to 29 of the mother’s affidavit and asking the mother why she called the police, to which the mother replied:
i knew where that ends up, it never ends up well.
61 during cross-examination of the father, mr hill put to him that in 2012 an advo had been taken out against him for the protection of the mother, which the father agreed to. mr hill then put to the father that the advo order was issued as a result of an assault on the mother by the father, to which the father replied:
supposedly there was an assault. i don’t remember.
62 he was asked how he ended up doing the 24-week course in queensland, to which the father responded that it had been part of a court order associated with his two-year good behaviour bond. it was then put to him by mr hill that such order came about due to an assault by the father of the mother, and the father responded by admitting that he had been convicted of an assault, but that he did not recall the assault occurring. the father said he agreed to the conviction on the basis that he believed that the mother would not tell a lie.
63 when questioned about the 24-week domestic violence course he undertook in queensland as a result of the condition of his bond, the father asserted that once he had completed the course in 2013, he was “a different person”. when questioned further about what he had learned from the course and how the course had changed him, the father indicated that he accepted that he had committed the assaults referred to by the mother.
64 the father’s future conduct, following his completion of the course in queensland in 2013, indicates that he did not learn to regulate his conduct from the course.
65 on 16 june 2017, the children went into the father’s care for his ordinary weekend time pursuant to the arrangement between the parents. on 18 june 2017, he sent a message to the mother informing her that he would not be returning the children to the paternal grandfather, whom the mother had arranged to attend the changeover on her behalf, but would only return the children to her. as a result of this circumstance, the children were eventually returned to the mother by being delivered to the maternal grandfather at 5pm on monday 19 june 2017. this date was incorrectly referred to as “19 july 2017” by the mother in paragraphs 56 and 57 of her affidavit.
66 there were no court orders in place at the time, proceedings not having been commenced.
67 as a result of this occasion, the mother sent the father a text message on 7 july 2017 informing him that she would be withholding the children from spending time with him until there were court orders in place regulating their arrangement.
68 these court proceedings were commenced by the mother filing her initiating application on 19 september 2017.
69 meanwhile, a period of six weeks elapsed during which the father did not spend any time with the children. on 10 august 2017, he sent a text message to the mother informing her that he intended to collect the children from school at the end of the next day being friday 11 august 2017.
70 the mother responded by text message telling the father that she did not agree with him collecting the children “until there are some orders in place”.
71 at 7.50pm on 10 august 2017, the father attended the mother’s home and demanded to see the children outside the home. the mother refused and told the father to leave the premises. the father went to the backyard of the property, opened the kitchen window, removed the flyscreen, lifted the blinds, and climbed through the kitchen window. he then walked down the hallway to the children’s bedroom. the mother called the police and then told the father “get out of my house” upon which, the father left the children’s bedroom and left the house through the front door. the police attended after the father had left, and on 12 august 2017, the father was served with a provisional advo against him for the protection of the mother issued by an authorised police officer from aa region police station.
72 the matter was listed in the local court at suburb e on 15 august 2017. the father opposed the making of a final order, and the matter was listed for hearing. on 19 december 2017, a final advo was made for the protection of the mother from the father in the local court at suburb e. the advo was enforced for a period of 12 months and, in addition to the statutory orders, included an order that the father “must not go within 50 metres of any place where ms clanton lives or any place where she works or any place listed that cc street, suburb c, q street, suburb c”.
73 the mother does not refer to any charge matters against the father, but in the father’s affidavit at paragraph 49 when giving evidence in relation to this particular occasion, he asserts:  clanton] called the police, and i was made subject to an avo which was subsequently dropped. two months after the incident, i was charged with trespassing.
74 this evidence is contradicted by the copy of the final advo made in the local court at suburb e on 19 december 2017, with a duration of 12 months.[6]
75 during cross-examination of the father, it was put to him by mr hill that in august 2017 an advo was issued where he was listed as the defendant, with which the father agreed. it was put to him that same was issued “after an incident where you trespassed into the mother’s home”. the father responded:
i was charged with trespassing, yes, but a section 9 or section 10 was taken out.
it was then clarified between the father and myself that he was referring to what is known as a “section 10 bond” where the court finds an offence proved but does not proceed to record a conviction, and imposes a good behaviour bond.
76 then on 29 november 2019, the father telephoned the mother at a time when she was driving in her motor vehicle with the children and was unable to take the call. this date was incorrectly stated by the mother as 18 december 2019 in her affidavit. the phone call was answered by x who spoke to the father. the mother and children arrived for a weekend stay at the maternal grandparents’ home at suburb c and at 4.30pm on that day the father attended that home – either uninvited according to the mother, or by arrangement with the mother according to the father – and demanded that the children be given into his care. the mother refused and locked the doors of the property.
77 the father then began banging on a window with a key and the mother advised him that if he continued she would call the police. the father continued and the mother called the police for assistance. x pleaded with her father to stop banging on the house, whereupon the father climbed over the side gate of the property and removed the flyscreen from the bathroom window, protruded his head in through the window space and yelled at the mother:
give me my fucking children, [ms clanton].
78 the mother told the father that she had called the police and the father left the property at about 4.45pm. shortly after the father left, the police arrived. they took statements from the mother and the paternal grandfather and a photograph of the state of the bathroom window that had been interfered with by the father. a provisional advo was issued for the protection of the mother from the father by an authorised police officer.
79 the father was spoken to by police at his home on 3 december 2019 at which time they served the provisional advo order upon him and arrested him. he was then charged with malicious damage to property. the father mentions in his affidavit evidence that upon receiving the service copy of the original advo:
in the heat of the moment, i ripped up the paperwork and threw it behind my head and said “that’s what i think of that, mate”.[7]
80 the father details his version of the events in paragraphs 60 to 63 of his affidavit and nowhere gives evidence of interfering in any way with a window at the property but only of “knocking on the door and window”. further, he refers to the charges of malicious damage to property relating to the flyscreen at the maternal grandparents’ home and says:
i deny damaging the flyscreen or anything else when i attended their home to pick up my children. when i left the premises, nothing was damaged.
81 as a matter of law, the offence of malicious damage to property can be committed by changing the nature of a material object from the state in which it is found, such as the letting down of a tyre on a motor vehicle by manipulating a valve so that the air is expelled. the father did not admit removing the flyscreen from the bathroom window at the maternal grandparents’ home, but nor did he deny saying it anywhere in his written or oral evidence. he said he was convicted of “intentionally or recklessly destroying property” on 17 august 2020 in the local court at suburb e.
82 the mother annexes to her affidavit as annexure “ae”, referred to in paragraph 121, a copy of the final advo made in the local court at suburb e on 17 august 2020, with the duration of two years and providing in addition to the statutory orders, that the father:
must not approach [ms clanton], [x] or [y] or contact them in any way, unless the contact is through a lawyer. must not approach the school or any other place [ms clanton], [x] or [y] might go to for study, any place they might go to for childcare, or any place listed here: [bb street, suburb dd], [suburb dd primary school]. must not go within 100 metres of any place where [ms clanton], [x] or [y] live or any place where they work or any place listed here: [bb street, suburb dd].
83 the order notes that the father was not present in court when the order was made. the father gives evidence in paragraph 64 of his affidavit that:
i was not present on that day, and due to medical reasons was not fit to explain this to the magistrate.
84 the matter had been listed for hearing on 26 june 2020 but it was adjourned first to 13 july 2020 and then again to 17 august 2020 on the basis that the father provided to the court a medical certificate from dr l, his general practitioner. [8] the letter indicated that the father had attended that doctor’s rooms on 25 june 2020 and he was unfit to attend court on 26 june 2020:
due to severe depression and anxiety plus hypertension, put on by not being able to see his two children.
85 that would seem to be a rash diagnosis made by the doctor as to causation on the basis of a single consultation with a general practitioner.
86 in relation to the medical certificate referred to above provided to the father on 25 june 2019, the following took place during the father’s cross-examination by mr hill:-
hill: did you ask [dr l] for a referral to a psychiatrist and for a mental health plan? father: yes. hill: have you got that referral? father: i’m getting this out of the way first. hill: did you get a referral? father: i got some numbers to call, not a referral to a person or place. i didn’t want to get too involved because of a simple status of “you are not fit enough to have the children”. hill: did [dr l] not give you a referral? father: he gave me paperwork, yes. hill: have you attended a psychologist for a diagnosis of depression or anxiety? father: no, i have not seen someone. hill: do you think it would be helpful to see someone in relation to anxiety and depression? father: he’s given me tablets to help bring the anxiety down. hill: do you think it would be helpful to attend a professional to get help in relation to your anxiety? father: after the case, yes. hill: do you think the same in relation to severe depression? father: maybe i could go with my boy. it’s purely because i can’t see my children.
87 further during the cross-examination the father admitted that he attended the local court at suburb e for the final hearing of the advo proceedings and the malicious damage to property charge on 17 december 2019. during these proceedings there was what i will call “an exchange of words” between the father and the learned presiding magistrate. the father left the court before the matters were dealt with.
88 at some time between the making of the order and recording of conviction on 17 august 2020 and october 2020 the father made an application to vary or revoke the advo order and to annul the conviction recorded in his absence on 17 august 2020. that matter was set down for hearing on 25 february 2021, after the conclusion of the final hearing.
89 there has been no application by either party to reopen the evidence subsequent to the closing of the evidence on 20 november 2020 and the making of final submissions on 11 december 2020.
90 in march 2016 the mother arranged for x to commence seeing a child psychologist, ms ff. in april or may 2016, she arranged for y to also have some consultation with ms ff. from 13 july 2017, the children were having consultations with psychologist ms gg for one hour each fortnight.
91 following the events of the weekend of 16 to 18 june 2017, after which the mother withheld the children from spending time with the father, and thereafter the event of 10 august 2017 and the resultant final advo made on 19 september 2017, the father spent some time with the children by attending at their school on three occasions between august and december 2017.
92 there was a good deal of cross-examination of the father by mr hill for the mother and of the mother by mr strik for the father about these events of the father attending at the children’s school.
93 i note that the first return date of the mother’s initiating application was 1 november 2017. on this date the father attended before the court as respondent-in-person and having not filed his response. an order was made by his honour judge harper in these terms:
between now and the end of term 4 2017, the father be restrained from attending the children’s school or approaching them on the school grounds at any time during school hours or engage in any conduct which may disrupt the orderly schooling of the children.
i also note an order in the same terms was made by her honour judge henderson on 3 may 2018 on the interim basis but without being time-limited.
94 in the father’s evidence in paragraph 50, he asserts that the three occasions on which he attended the children’s school to spend time with them occurred “between august and december 2017”. obviously, any occasions occurring in december were after the injunctive order made by his honour on 1 november 2017 and in breach of the order as the children were necessarily not able to be visited during their school hours after “the end of term 4 2017”.
95 during the cross-examination of both the father and the mother, it was unclear if the visits to the children’s school by the father were in breach of his honour’s order.
96 on the mother’s affidavit evidence, the occasions occurred on:  15 august 2017 following the parties’ attendance at the local court at suburb e on that day, (b) 8 september 2017 when the father spent the second half of the school lunch period with the children, and (c) 15 september 2017 when the father took the children outside the school grounds for half an hour during the second half of their school lunch period and went to a park to have ice cream and chocolate.   8 september 2017 when the father spent the second half of the school lunch period with the children, and (c) 15 september 2017 when the father took the children outside the school grounds for half an hour during the second half of their school lunch period and went to a park to have ice cream and chocolate.   15 september 2017 when the father took the children outside the school grounds for half an hour during the second half of their school lunch period and went to a park to have ice cream and chocolate.
97 on the mother’s said evidence, there was no breach of the order. the mother’s initiating application was filed after these occasions on 19 september 2017.
98 the father did not spend any time with the children between the last occasion at the school on 15 september 2017 and the release of the family report, which occurred on 14 october 2019, other than at the interviews conducted for preparation of the family report and the observations on 2 september 2019.
99 at paragraph 100 of her affidavit, the mother asserted that:
so far as i can recall, [mr lachman] has not spent any time with our children or attempted to make contact by telephone since approximately february 2019.
100 however, that evidence is not correct.
101 the father asserts in his affidavit evidence that he spent the weekend of 23 and 24 november 2019 staying at the mother’s home with the mother and the children after they moved from suburb c to suburb dd. [9] in cross-examination, the mother conceded that on 23 november the father had come up to spend time with the children at suburb dd and that they went with him to suburb hh, but she denied the father slept over the night of 23 to 24 november 2019 at her home.
102 the father also gives evidence in his affidavit that:
after the release of the family report on 14 october 2019, [ms clanton] invited me to see the children at [suburb c primary school]’s athletics carnival on 13 september 2019. i met [ms clanton] and the children at the carnival, and we spent about two hours there... when the carnival ended, we had lunch together. afterwards, [ms clanton] brought the children to my house and they played in the pool at my house. i then went to [suburb c] to watch [y] play soccer, then returned home. [10]
103 the father annexes to his affidavit as annexure ‘a’ photographs that he asserts were taken that day. the obvious discrepancy in dates in the father’s evidence (14 october/13 september as stated above) leaves it unclear as to when this event occurred.
104 during cross-examination of the mother, it transpired that she had invited the paternal grandparents to attend the children’s athletics carnival and that the father came along uninvited.
105 the father gives evidence in his affidavit that following the athletics carnival weekend the children spent time with him over the weekend on three more occasions.[11]
106 based upon the evidence from the parties in cross-examination, i am satisfied that the father spent time with the children overnight on an occasion in october 2019, for the weekend on 2 to 4 november 2019, and on the weekend on 23 and 24 november 2019 on a daytime basis only.
107 it was put to the mother in cross-examination by mr strik for the father that given her voluntary arrangement of time between the father and the children in october and november 2019 following release of the family report, she must concede that she does not consider there is a risk to the children in spending time with the father.
108 however, the mother in answering referred to the events of 29 november 2019 (again misdescribed by her as 18 december 2019), as being, in effect, what went a step too far and caused her to take a stance in relation to the father’s time with the children as reflected in the orders sought by her on final hearing.
109 i should note that in paragraph 45(d) of her affidavit, the mother complains that the father:
did not keep me informed or share any information about what the children did during the time he spent with them. on the occasions that i said to [mr lachman], ‘what did you and the children do together?’ or, ‘what did you get up to with the children this weekend?’ [mr lachman] often replied: ‘what happens when the kids are in my care is none of your business!’
110 this forms part of a list of factors causing her to become “increasingly concerned about mr lachman’s behaviour towards our children” following the commencement of the arrangement for alternate weekend time upon his return to sydney in 2014.[12]
111 of course, neither parent is obliged to keep the other informed or share information about what the children do with that parent during their time together. i do not accept that the father’s disinclination to share that information with the mother is a cause for concern.
112 the mother gives evidence of occasions when she asserts the children were exposed to the parental dispute, all of the occasions listed by her in paragraph 45(e) of her affidavit occurring during 2016 and prior to the commencement of proceedings.
113 on 3 may 2018 judge henderson, made an order that “the father is to attend f service and attend any anger management courses and courses to assist him putting the needs of his children before his own or as directed by the staff at f service.”
114 the father conceded in cross-examination that up to the time of the hearing he had made no attempt to comply with that order.
115 the father paid no child support to the mother for the benefit of the children until 31 march 2020.
116 during the mention of the proceedings before henderson j on 3 may 2018, the husband was represented by a legal practitioner, but he addressed the bench directly in an argumentative manner culminating in the following exchange:
father: no one is listening though, are they? her honour: no. you are not listening. father: your ears are painted on, darling. her honour: you – i beg your pardon? father: your ears are painted on. her honour: leave the court right – leave the court now. yes. see you later. father: have a good one. her honour: your client has got some issues. [mr jj]: he does. my apologies. her honour: and i would not be making any order for these children to spend time with a father who behaves in that fashion in court. he has chosen not to spend time with his children for 10 months. i am going to make an order that these children live with their mother on an interim basis of...that she have sole parental responsibility and there be no time with the father and the children until a family report is prepared, and that is probably the next stage i have got to.
117 the father had been assessed to pay a sum of $36.92 per month by way of child support and his child support arrears had built up to a sum of $13,006 by march 2020. the father commenced paying $50.94 per month for the assessment and in reduction of arrears in march 2020.
118 during cross-examination, it was put to the father by mr hill, “would you prefer not to pay any child support?” to which he responded, “no. i want a system where the money is allocated to the children, not used at the bottle-o”.
119 when it was put to him by mr hill that from separation in 2013, for a period of seven years he paid no child support at all, the father responded that he “paid bits and pieces”, though there is no evidence detailing any “bits and pieces”.
120 y was assessed by psychologist ms kk on 1 june 2018 and 15 september 2018. ms kk found his behaviours and functioning consistent with a diagnosis of adhd without any accompanying intellectual impairment, language impairment, contributing medical condition or behavioural disorder. y was then again assessed, this time by paediatrician dr ll, and by occupational therapist ms nn, between 31 march 2020 and 22 june 2020. he was diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder and prescribed medication. y was referred to child psychiatrist dr mm due to manifestation of some behavioural problems. dr mm diagnosed y with various mental health disorders. there was no evidence on hearing as to causation of any of the mental health issues with which he had been diagnosed.
121 during cross-examination of the mother, the following exchange took place:
mr strik: you allege serious domestic violence by the father and yet you still allowed the father to see the children? mother: he has never done that to them, but it doesn’t mean i have to have a relationship with him.
122 on the evidence from the father, particularly in cross-examination, it transpires that he does not accept the diagnoses of y referred to above and will not accept these until there has been a second and a third diagnosis with the consultations leading to diagnosis involving him, on the basis that he cannot accept that a relevantly qualified health professional can diagnose y with any of those disorders without input from, and assessment of, both parents. when asked if he had done any research in relation to asperger’s syndrome or autism spectrum disorder he responded, “i had no reason, really, to do so”.
123 though the mother has returned to her area from residing with the children at suburb dd she declined to disclose her address in the evidence in hearing and was not required to do so. the children both attend suburb c primary school and at the time of the hearing, x was in year 5 and y was in year 3.
124 the husband was living with his parents at their three-bedroom home in suburb v. he was unemployed and in receipt of a jobseeker allowance from which a sum of $50.94 per fortnight was paid to the mother as child support. the father had been in a relationship with ms m for a period of five years leading up to the final hearing.
125 in her affidavit, ms m deposes that she was 35 years of age and has been in a relationship with the father since 2015. though they at no time cohabited, she indicates that she spends 85 per cent of her time with the father either at the paternal grandparents’ home or at her parents’ home at suburb oo.
126 ms m deposes that she had met x and y on many occasions when they were spending time with the father. she further deposes that she had at no time been a victim of family violence of any nature perpetrated by the father. during some oral evidence-in-chief at hearing, ms m deposes that between the release of the family report on 14 october 2019 and the occasion on 24 november 2019 when the father spent time with the children following their recent move with the mother to suburb dd, the children stayed with the father overnight “three to four times” at the father’s home and that she was present at the father’s home on each of those occasions.
127 during cross-examination of ms m by mr hill for the mother, she was asked what the father had told her about why the advo was placed on him in 2017. she responded by saying that the father had told her that he went to the mother’s home as he had not seen the children for six weeks and had no response to phone calls, that he knocked on the door, that he wanted to see that the children’s safety was not in jeopardy, that he climbed in a window, kissed the children and then drove home, using her motor vehicle. when asked if she could “see anything wrong with the father’s actions”, she answered “no”.
the family report
128 the family report, prepared by family consultant ms n, was tendered as exhibit ct1 by the court. ms n had conducted the child dispute conference interviews with the parents on 23 march 2018. the child dispute conference memorandum was not put into evidence at the hearing.
129 ms n conducted interviews and observations for preparation of the family report on 2 september 2019. notably, at that time, the father had not spent any time with the children since june 2017, a period of two years and two months. no interim orders for the father to spend time with the children were in place.
130 during the interview, the mother reported that the father spent time with the children on the alternate weekend basis from june 2014 until july 2016, and that such time “was enjoyed by both of the children”.[13] the report writer noted that the mother “did not seem to raise any significant concerns about [the father’s] parenting capacity”, but indicated that she terminated the father’s time with the children for a combination of reasons, including that:  he was often late to collect them, (b) he did not want additional time with them in school holidays, (c) he was including the children in the parental conflict (which was increasing), and (d) this was impacting on the children’s emotional wellbeing, and their enjoyment of time with their father.   he did not want additional time with them in school holidays, (c) he was including the children in the parental conflict (which was increasing), and (d) this was impacting on the children’s emotional wellbeing, and their enjoyment of time with their father.   he was including the children in the parental conflict (which was increasing), and (d) this was impacting on the children’s emotional wellbeing, and their enjoyment of time with their father.   this was impacting on the children’s emotional wellbeing, and their enjoyment of time with their father.
131 those concerns, together with the occasion on which the father retained the children over to a monday rather than completing a changeover with the paternal grandfather on the sunday, led to the mother ceasing the time between the father and the children in june 2017. that time was not resumed in any manner up to the time of the family report interviews. the mother indicated that her intention in suspending the time was only until clear orders regulating the father’s time with the children could be obtained through these proceedings. the report writer noted that the mother:
reflected that, ideally, the children having a parenting arrangement from after school friday until before school monday would “have worked” and eliminated much of the problems that contributed to their breakdown in the co-parenting relationship, and the parenting arrangement.[14]
132 the mother asserted that the incident in august 2017, when the father entered the mother’s property through the window caused the children to be fearful that their father would take them away from the mother and not return them to her care.
133 the mother indicated to the report writer that she believed that the children not spending any time with their father for the past two years had been “emotionally damaging and traumatic for them” and indicated that she sought “a cautious and incremental resumption of their time with him to support the children’s emotional needs in spending future time with him.”[15] in the interview, the mother initially indicated that she proposed that the children resume spending time with their father on a supervised basis, so as to provide a safe environment where they can “re-establish their relationship and trust”, [16] and prevent the father involving the children in the parental conflict.
134 the mother indicated that she supported the children having a positive relationship with their father, and for them to spend regular time with him, though she expressed concern that the father would not administer y’s medication, nor respond appropriately to y’s emotional or behavioural needs.
135 once the mother was advised by the report writer of the views expressed by the children in their interviews with the family report writer – seeking a resumption of their past parenting arrangement – the mother indicated that she would consider a parenting arrangement for the children in accordance with their views. of course, the interview was prior to the incident of 29 november 2019.
136 during interview, the father indicated to ms n that during their relationship:
he would drink to the point of blacking out, and has allegedly assaulted (the mother) on two occasions. he said that he does not recall either of these assaults due to his level of intoxication...[and] said that he agreed to attend a men’s behaviour change course to avoid receiving a prison sentence for his alleged offences. [the father] spoke about the program being very confronting, but an invaluable experience for him in which he learned about himself, his behaviour, and the dynamics of family violence. [the father] considers himself to be a changed person from attending this course. he spoke about the importance of managing behaviour, and taking responsibility for one’s behaviour, and what strategies he uses to manage his own needs.[17]
137 the father’s assertions contrast somewhat with his subsequent behaviours, both before the court and in relation to the incident occurring in november 2019.
138 it was the father’s view that the mother had ceased all of his time with the children for “no reason”. [18] he expressed the view to the report writer that his entry into the home to see the children on the night of 10 august 2017 was justified, so that he could check on the children, because the mother was refusing him access. the father expressed “very strong views that he has “done nothing wrong”, is not a “criminal” and that he will not see the children supervised under any circumstances.”[19]
139 most significantly at paragraphs 58 and 59 of the family report, ms n noted that the father:
appeared set in his position that he will not be “forced” into a parenting order as determined by the court, or the mother. he asserted that the parenting arrangement for the children is required to return to alternate weekends, but that this should extend to monday before school to avoid any further problems at handover. [the father] appeared not to accept the resumption of the children’s time with him being anything less than two days. he said, on a few occasions, that he would “walk away” from having anything to do with the children, should there be an order made that is less time than this. [the father] explained that it would be too emotionally difficult for him to have to deal with the scenario of losing any time with his children (than what the previous parenting arrangement provided for).
140 in paragraph 60 of the family report: e father] spoke about waiting until the children are older, and then explaining to them the circumstances of why he did not spend any time with them. he appeared confident that the children will be able to understand and reconnect with him. [the father] appeared to consider that the impact on the children, if he did walk away, would be significant, before which [the mother] would be solely responsible. he appeared not to be able to consider how the children may experience or interpret the possibility of their father choosing not to spend any time, or not have any relationship with them.
141 the father was cross-examined by mr hill about his intention to “walk away” if orders were not made in accordance with what he considered appropriate. mr hill read to the father paragraph 140 of the family report, where the family consultant expressed a view that the father was likely to follow through with his intention of no time should orders be made that he does not agree with. he was asked by mr hill, repeatedly, if it was still his intention to “walk away” if orders were made by the court that were less than what he agreed with. the father consistently evaded answering the question. the tenor of the father’s answers, over and over, was that he was simply following the wishes of the children as expressed in the family report to resume the pattern of spending time with him they had enjoyed previously, and that he would be failing the children if he accepted anything less.
142 eventually, i took over and put the question to him several times, “if orders are made that you do not agree with, would you then not see your children?” in response, the father continued to evade answering the direct question by persistently referring to, “it’s what my children want”, “it’s not what i agree with, it’s what my children want”. finally, after being asked by me on several occasions, “if i order that you see your children for one night per fortnight, would you do it?”, the father answered “of course i would”.
143 however, the last question put to the father in cross-examination by mr hill was:
if the court orders that your time increases gradually, are you going to walk away? i’ll put that another way. if the court starts with daytime only for a period of time, are you going to walk away?
to which the father answered immediately and clearly “yep”. following a conference with mr strik of counsel after the end of his cross-examination, and before re-examination, the father modified his position to a degree in re-examination, and indicated that he had misunderstood the meaning of the question, and thought that he was being asked if the order is made as the end point that he have daytime only with his children, would he walk away.
144 during ms n’s interview with ms m, the father’s non-cohabitative partner, ms n notes in paragraph 67:
she said that she foresees that [the father] will walk away from the children, as he has indicated, because he would not be able to emotionally cope with a parenting arrangement in which he (unjustly) lost any time with the children. [ms m] described [the father] as “headstrong” and unlikely to change his position about not spending time with the children, if he receives an unfavourable parenting arrangement. she explained that [the father] has a personality in which he is unable to manage being “told things.”
145 ms n interviewed the paternal grandparents who did not give evidence at the hearing. i noted that the paternal grandparents said that the father’s behaviour since the proceedings commenced had been “misunderstood” and that they explained that his level of anger, frustration and distress is a reflection of his love and passion for the children. ms n also notes in paragraph 76:
the paternal grandparents said that they can “understand” why [the father] is unlikely to comply with any parenting orders that are different to what he seeks. they explain that [the father] “will not be told what to do, or what to accept” by the court or by [the mother] (because he has done nothing wrong).
146 in paragraph 82 of the family report ms n notes that the mother informed her that the parents had had a meeting in january 2019 to discuss a resolution of the parenting arrangements, but that the father would not accept a parenting arrangement that was not on his terms.
147 the mother expressed serious concern that the father continues to make threats that he will walk away from the children if he does not get what he wants and that she was frightened about the impact of such on the children. when the mother expressed her view that the father blames her for the children spending no time with him and that he has no insight and takes no responsibility for his role in the current breakdown of the co-parenting relationship and the children’s parenting arrangement, ms n expresses a view that the father’s answers in the interview would support the mother’s claim in that regard. she notes that the father:
...was not able to consider the possibility that he has played any role which may have contributed to the current circumstances of the children spending no time with him.[20]
148 ms n interviewed x, who at that time was nine years of age, and y, who was seven years of age. she notes that the father had expressed strong disagreement with the diagnosis of mild autism, adhd (hyperactivity component) and sensory processing disorder for y and that:
he believes such assessment to be limited in the absence of his contribution to this.[21]
149 following the interviews with the children, the family report made the following observations about x:  spoke very affectionately about her mother and she appeared to enjoy the way her mother parents her.[22]
150 however:  said that she is “kind of scared” of her father. [x] explained that she felt this way because “mum would tell me what dad has been doing.” however, [x] then proceeded to talk very affectionately and positively about her past experiences with her father.[23]
151 further:  said that she missed her father and that she has been worried about him. she commented, “he loves me and i love him too.”[24]
152 describing her time with her father:  considered her weekends with her father as “perfect.”[25]
153 x spoke about her paternal grandparents fondly:  said that her time with her father stopped because he “broke in through the window and mum called the police.” and [x] said that this incident was “kind of scary” because she was not expecting her father to come through the window. she said that when [mr lachman] climbed inside, “daddy just wanted a hug.” [x] commented that her mother had “done the right thing” by calling the police because she was concerned that her father was going to take her.[26]
154 regarding safety:  was asked if she has ever felt unsafe in the care of her father. she said “yes” and explained that she felt unsafe when her father yells at the paternal grandfather. she has suggested that she witnessed this quite a few years ago.[27]
155 regarding her wishes to spend time with her father:  appeared to greatly desire, ultimately, the return of her previous parenting arrangement. she had some apprehension about the recommencement of such time occurring for the full weekend (friday to sunday) because of how long it had been that she had not spent any time with [the father]. she therefore suggested that her first visit with her father occur during the day only. she said that she wants to spend time with [the father] only during the day until their time together is “perfect and i know that he won’t do anything.” [x] suggested that her time with her father could occur for one or two saturdays before this is extended to saturday overnight. [x] suggests that, if that saturday overnight goes well for her (for one or two visits), then she’s happy to resume the previous parenting arrangement.[28]
156 i note that the father was asked in cross-examination by mr hill if he had read the family report recently. the father responded that he had not read it recently, but that he had skimmed over it recently and then confirmed that when he received the family report he read it completely. he took the consistent stance that his time with the children must recommence exactly as it had been up until june 2017 because that was in line with what the children wanted, despite the clearly expressed wish by x quoted above that the time progress to what it had been.
157 further, to the passages above:   said that she does not feel that her initial recommencement of time with her father requires supervision by a worker or that it needs to occur at a contact centre.[29]
158 regarding telephone communication with her father:  said that she does not speak to her father on the phone because he does not call her. she said that she is not able to call her father because her mother told her that the court does not allow this. [x] said that she would like the “rules” to change because she would like to speak to him weekly on the phone. [x] said that past phone calls with her father had not been great. she said that during these calls, [the father] swears and is verbally abusive about [the mother]. as an example, she said that her father has called her mother “a dirty old slug or something like that.”[30]
159 further:  began to cry, with joy, when she was asked if she wanted to spend time with her father following her interview. [x] told the family consultant that she very much wanted to see her father and that she is very much looking forward to this. [x] appeared also greatly excited when it was suggested that she could also spend time with the paternal grandparents and [ms m].[31]
160 in relation to the family consultant’s interview with y, i note the passages below from the family report:  ’s face instantly lit up when he was asked about his father. he indicated having a loving relationship with [his father] and he said that he always enjoys spending time with him. [y] said that his father takes him to the shops and to the park.[32]
161 further:  said that his time with his father has ceased because his father broke in through the window. he commented that this experience was frightening for him because he thought his father was going to take him.[33]
162 regarding communication with his father:  said that if he could, he would speak to his father daily on the phone.[34]
163 regarding the relationship with his parents:  said that his parents did not get along. [y] said that he has heard his father threaten his mother, commenting “dad said to mum, you better watch out”. [y] said that he has heard both parents being verbally abusive towards each other.[35]
164 regarding y’s wishes to spend time with his father: ’s face lit up with joy, when he was asked if he wanted to spend time with his father following his interview. as with [x], [y] told the family consultant that he very much wanted to see his father and he appeared also greatly excited when it was suggested that he could also spend time with the paternal grandparents and [ms m]. [36]
165 as noted above, the father advised in his cross-examination that when he received the family report he read it completely. he will therefore have read that x considered the incident in august 2017 of him entering the mother's home through the window as “kinda scary” and that y found the experience frightening because he thought his father was going to take him.
166 yet, the father attempted to repeat the exercise on 29 november 2019. i make that finding on the basis that i accept the mother’s evidence as to the events of 29 november 2019 (misdated by her as 18 december 2019), and reject the father’s version which does not directly include him approaching the window or removing the screen, as relayed by him in his affidavit and as relayed by him to ms m and repeated by her in her cross-examination. being aware that the august 2017 occasion caused the children to be frightened, he attempted to repeat the same behaviour in their presence in circumstances where he knew, or on a tiny bit of reflection ought to have known, that they would again be frightened.
167 from the observations of the children with their mother and maternal grandparents, ms n notes that the children have a close relationship with their mother and their maternal grandparents.
168 from her observation of the children with their father, ms m and the paternal grandparents, ms n notes that at the commencement of the observation both children ran toward their father and embraced him in long hugs and exchanged kisses. the children also warmly greeted ms m. she notes that both children were highly engaged and enthusiastic with those family members, particularly their father. she notes that the father gave both children multiple hugs and kisses throughout their play, which the children appeared comfortable to receive. x drew love hearts and “dad” all over the whiteboard and she wrote multiple times “i love my dad”.[37]
169 ms n notes that the observations session:
suggested that [x] and [y] both greatly missed their father and immediately and positively reconnected with him. both children appeared to adore their father, finding him playful, funny and loving their interaction with him. [x] and [y] were happy to be embraced by their father and to display their affection towards him. [mr lachman] reciprocated his interaction and affection towards the children in a loving and playful way.[38]
170 from ms n’s evaluation of the material considered by her for preparation of the report, including her interviews and observations, i note the following further passages from the family report:  and [y] each have very close relationships with [their mother] and with the maternal grandparents.[39]
171 further:
there has been a two year disruption to the children’s relationship with their father (and the paternal family) despite this, the children’s relationship with [their father] seem to be loving and well-established and both children appear to have greatly missed him. this positive, though brief, reconnection is likely a result of [y] and [x] having close relationships with their father before the order time with him ceased and generally having a positive experience of their time with him.[40]
172 regarding their father’s care:  and [y] reported feeling safe, happy and well-looked after in [their father’s] care.[41]
173 regarding the mother’s actions in suspending the father’s time with the children,
if the court was to consider that [the father] was acting in a manner which was inappropriate and involved the children in the parental conflict, then “the mother’s” actions [in stopping the children’s time with their father] could be considered protective.[42]
174 regarding family violence: th parents acknowledged] (though to differing degrees) that [the mother] was a victim of family violence perpetrated by [the father] during their relationship. their accounts of family violence suggest that the majority of this violence occurred in the context of alcohol consumption.
175 i note that subsequent to the breakup of the relationship there was no physical family violence by the father to the mother, but nevertheless there is no suggestion that the family violence incidents perpetrated by the father on 10 august 2017 and 28 november 2019 were in any way connected with alcohol consumption.
176 ms n made the following observations:
there is considered to be the possibility of further family violence being perpetrated by [the father] against [the mother] in the event that he does not obtain a favourable parenting arrangement for the children. this is because (the father) presented as a “reactive perpetrator”. where active perpetrators tend to possess qualities of poor communication, are easily frustrated, have difficulty coping with rejection and when they feel under attack, and as such, they have poor impulse control, which can escalate to violence. this assessment, however, suggests that the level of potential risk (of physical violence) is considered to be low.[43]
177 when the father was then asked in relation to family violence, “did it used to be you?” he responded, “prior to 2012, yes.”. he was then asked, “what changed?” and he replied, “the domestic violence course changed me.” he was then confronted with his behaviours on 10 august 2017 and 29 november 2019 and it was put to him that they were demonstrations of a person with the traits of a “reactive perpetrator” as described by ms n in the family report, to which the father replied “i would do anything to see my kids.”
178 when asked to expand on what she meant by “reactive perpetrator” in the family report during cross-examination by mr hill, ms n replied that a reactive perpetrator was someone who has difficulty with emotional regulation, and that their reactions in relation to family violence are usually reactions to a perceived threat or through experiencing feelings of anger or rejection, causing them to act out. she said that their actions were not a premeditated plan as is found with proactive perpetrators who have a goal of ongoing family violence.
179 then once mr hill had outlined to ms n the events of 29 november 2019 as given in the mother’s evidence, he asked ms n “where you used the words ‘risk of physical violence is low’, what words would you use now, on the mother's scenario?”. to which ms n replied:
potentially “moderate”.
180 mr hill then asked ms n:
when things escalate to violence, in terms of a reactive perpetrator, what do you understand from the research that violence looks like?
to which ms n replied:
when a reactive perpetrator is confronted with a situation that angers or threatens them, their behaviour changes and escalates quickly, they become angry and that can lead to acts of physical violence and aggression.
mr hill then asked:
what type of physical violence?
and i interposed the description:
the whole range, from a push to a killing.
to which ms n responded:
correct.
181 ms n then indicated that short of physical violence, the typical reactions of a reactive perpetrator to being angered or feeling threatened commonly included verbal abuse and emotional abuse.
182 ms n notes: e father’s] ... refusal on an interim basis to consider an incremental approach to the children’s resumption of time with him is unlikely to have been of benefit to the children. this resulted in a two-year period of the children having no access to their non-resident parent, whom they likely had a significant relationship and attachment to. this would have likely caused the children to feel confused, abandoned, sad and unsupported by him. his approach seems to have supported his own agenda (trying to validate that he has done nothing wrong) rather than ensuring that the children’s needs were met as best as possible within the context of a parenting dispute.[44]
183 ms n notes that the father’s responses suggested that:
he lacks insight into the direct impact on [y] and [x], if he decided to spend no time with them. this may suggest significant immaturity and some limitations in (the father’s) parenting capacity in understanding and meeting the children’s needs.[45]
then:
overwhelmingly, the family consultant considers that (the father) is very likely to follow through with his intention (of no time) should orders be made that he does not agree with. it is considered that the children are at great risk of having no relationship with their father through their childhood, if orders are made that are not supported by (the father). [46]
i have made comment on this opinion by ms n earlier in these reasons.
184 regarding the father’s proposal: e father) ultimately seeks that the children spend time with him for friday after school until monday before school on alternate weekends. in many ways, his proposal could be considered the most optimal parenting arrangement...based on the information available to this assessment, (the father) presented as a father who is confident and capable of meeting the children’s needs when they spend time with him. the addition of the sunday night, being only one night per fortnight, is likely a parenting arrangement which the children can adjust to and benefit from, given their ages. moreover, importantly, it changes the children’s handover (proposed to occur at school). this is likely to be of immense benefit for the children as it removes the possibility for the children being exposed to parental conflict, which may occur at handover.[47]
there is considered to be a great risk to the children, if a cautious and prolonged approach to a resumption of their time is ordered. this is because the children very likely may lose their relationship with their father, if such orders are made because (the father) has made it clear that he does not support such an order and that he will walk away from the children. this may have a devastating impact on the emotional wellbeing of the children. they may experience significant feelings of grief, loss and abandonment, a loss of connection to their paternal family. based on the nature of [x]’s and [y]’s relationship with their father and the paternal family, this is not considered to be in their best interests. [48]
of course, the father’s evidence to the effect that he may or would “walk away” from the children if orders are made providing for any less time than he had up to june 2017 is to a large extent for practical purposes an attempt to hold the court’s decision-making process to ransom – “give me what i want, because it’s what the children want, or the children won’t get anything and so will be damaged.” there is a middle ground.
185 ms n recommends:  and [y] having no future relationship with their father in the formative years of their childhood, could adversely impact on their identity formation, relationships and connection to the paternal family long term. it may cause emotional and psychological problems for them in their adolescence. as such, it is recommended that the children have a parenting arrangement in line with [x]’s views. this being, two occasions during the day, before progression to overnight time.[49]
186 in relation to the issue of parental responsibility, ms n notes in paragraph 148 that there may be a benefit to the children in the areas of their health and education if the mother has sole parental responsibility for them as this would enable her to make the most appropriate decisions for them as their primary carer. she points out that if the court orders equal shared parental responsibility, there are strong indications that the parents would be unlikely to be able to resolve issues relating to y’s health needs, likely exposing the children to future parental conflict, which cannot be in the children’s best interests. on the other hand, an order that the mother has sole parental responsibility for the children excludes the father from important assessments and decisions about the children.
187 ms n found herself not able to make a clear recommendation about parental responsibility for the children.
188 while ms n left the determination of the issue of parental responsibility entirely to the court, she did recommend that:  the children continue to live with their mother, which was not in dispute at any time, and (b) the children spend alternate weekends with their father from after school on friday until before school on monday if he is able to take them to and from school, or (c) the children spend alternate weekends with their father from after school on friday, until sunday evening if he cannot take them to and from school, and (d) the children spend half the school holidays in a block period with their father.   the children spend alternate weekends with their father from after school on friday until before school on monday if he is able to take them to and from school, or (c) the children spend alternate weekends with their father from after school on friday, until sunday evening if he cannot take them to and from school, and (d) the children spend half the school holidays in a block period with their father.   the children spend alternate weekends with their father from after school on friday, until sunday evening if he cannot take them to and from school, and (d) the children spend half the school holidays in a block period with their father.   the children spend half the school holidays in a block period with their father.
189 ms n recommended that the term time arrangement occur in line with x’s wishes, being on alternate saturdays for two occasions, followed by two occasions of saturday to sunday on alternate weekends, followed by the weekend time as recommended. she recommended that orders in the nature of what are known as “non-denigration” orders be made and that the father liaise with y’s psychologist regarding his adhd and autism assessment.
190 during cross-examination of ms n by mr hill for the mother, he put to ms n that her conclusion at the time she prepared the family report was that the father was a low risk of physical violence with the mother and so he should get the time that he is seeking. mr hill asked ms n if that was still her position, to which she commented that it was “difficult to answer”.
191 mr hill went on to ask ms n questions about the mother’s proposed order that the father undergo a mental health assessment before recommencing any time with the children. ms n responded that she was not convinced the father needed any such assessment, that he had had weekend time with the children without incident and he was not seeking to be their primary carer. she indicated that she considered the father may benefit from some support for depression but that does not mean that he should not see the children. when referred to the concluding sentence of paragraph 139 of the family report in which she expressed a view that the father’s entrenched rigidity in relation to his views may be indicative of some possible thought process difficulties, learning or cognitive difficulties or personality disorder on his part, ms n conceded that she was not qualified to assess if the father had a personality disorder.
192 the following exchange occurred between mr hill and ms n during her cross-examination:
mr hill: is it possible to predict how the father will behave if the children disagree with something he tells them to do? [ms n]: no. it is not possible to predict. hill: as the children get older, children say or do things that parents don’t agree with. [ms n]: yes. hill: at that stage, if the father remains as he is, at a minimum there is a potential problem. [ms n]: yes. a potential problem. hill: so is the mother unreasonable in asking for a neuropsychological assessment by a person experienced in family law and children’s court jurisdiction before the children spend time with their father?” [ms n]: i don’t think it’s unreasonable to request that, but i’m not so sure it’s warranted.
193 during cross-examination of ms n, mr hill tendered into evidence what became exhibit a2, a page from the dsm-5 dealing with “antisocial personality disorder” and attempted to, in effect, extract a diagnosis or at least an agreement by ms n that the father fitted within the indicators set out in that document, a process which ms n had already she was not qualified to undertake. it was not of assistance to the court.
194 at the end of mr hill’s cross-examination, the following exchange occurred:
hill: today, what do you recommend the father should get in relation to time with the children? [ms n]: it’s a bit difficult without talking to the children to consider their views in the light of changes that have occurred. i still think on balance that the children should be spending time with their father. they are at risk of having no relationship with their dad. hill: what do you suggest in relation to the father’s time with the children, if you can say? [ms n]: alternate weekends, commencing day only and progressing to alternate weekends. i don’t really know without talking to the children. i don’t know what impact the father’s visit to the home had on the children [referring to 21 november 2019] and how they feel about that. my general assessment is that the children have an established relationship with their dad and would love to spend time with him. hill: what information would you need before you could answer that question? [ms n]: i would need to speak to the children or at least there should be a couple occasions of daytime before there is overnight time. judge: that’s what [x] suggested. [ms n]: yes. my recommendations were based on the children’s views, supported by the parents at the time. hill: the children are now protected people on an apprehended domestic violence order. the court is in your hands. if you think it is important you speak to the children before you have a level of certainty as to what the progression looks like, tell the court as the court will accommodate you. the report was in 2019, and we’re almost a year past that. there have been major changes in circumstances, such as the advo where the children are protected people. do you need to speak to the children before confidently answering what the children need going forward?[50] [ms n]: no. i don’t believe i need to speak to the children.
195 during cross-examination of ms n by mr strik for the father, he outlined to her the occasions that had emerged in the evidence during the hearing of the children spending time with the father, including overnight, in october and november 2019, and then the following exchange took place:
strik: there is evidence by the father of the children spending overnight with him in october and november 2019, and combined with [x]’s views, is your view still for some daytime visits before overnight occurs, or can it go straight to overnight due to the occasions in october and november at the paternal grandparents home? [ms n]: it could go straight to overnight time. strik: so no need for daytime. [ms n]: did any issues arise from that overnight time? judge: there is no evidence of any issues arising. [ms n]: then it could go straight to overnight time.
196 however, what was not discussed in that part of the cross-examination was that the events of 29 november 2019 had intervened between the occasions of time for the children with their father in october and november 2019 and the hearing. i also note that the hearing occurred a full 12 months after the last of those occasions of time between the father and the children, and the preparation of the family report and the incident of 29 november 2019 had occurred thereafter.
submissions
197 counsel for the mother mr hill, referred the court to the decision of the full court of the family court of australia in l & t, [51] as authority for the court’s power to make the order sought by the mother that the father undertake a mental health assessment by a named practitioner. mr hill submitted on behalf of the mother only after the father’s completion of the assessment and any treatment recommended as a consequence, that the orders proposed by the mother for time between the children and the father commence. mr hill referred the court further to the decision of federal magistrate scarlett in litchfield & beck.[52] those authorities and some further authorities on the court’s power to make an order of the nature sought by the mother will be examined later in these reasons.
198 in relation to credit, mr hill submitted for the mother that her failure to recollect the occasions following the release of the family report on 14 october 2019, and before the incident of 29 november 2019 - when the father spent time with the children, including overnight - were not matters affecting the mother’s credit. mr hill submitted this was merely a failure of recollection because she readily accepted that such occasions had occurred once shown the photographs entered as exhibits in the matter.
199 mr hill submitted that this was very much a risk case, the risk being the risk to the children of being exposed to behaviours by the father. this included the risk of family violence up to and including physical family violence against the children by the father, if orders were made for the father to spend time with the children outside the parameters proposed in the mother’s application.
200 mr hill submitted that in paragraph 136 of the family report, ms n had assessed the father as being a low risk to the children, as his trigger for being a reactive perpetrator and moving to family violence was alcohol and that his former difficulties with alcohol appeared to be under control since 2012/2013. however, mr hill submitted that the opinion so expressed in the family report did not explain the events traversed in the evidence relating to the husband’s conduct before judge henderson at the mention of the matter on 3 may 2018, the events of 10 august 2017, or the events of 29 november 2019, in relation to all of which, alcohol was not involved.
201 mr hill submitted that when these matters were pointed out to ms n in cross-examination, she then changed her assessment of the risk presented by the husband from low to moderate, and that therefore, all of her conclusions, as expressed in the evaluation and recommendation sections of the family report, did not follow.
202 further, in that regard, mr hill referred to exhibit a1, being the medical certificate from dr l, asserting that the father suffered from severe anxiety and depression, and submitted that, in the face of that evidence, the court did not know or have any evidence in relation to the current state of the father’s mental health, as to whether or not he was still affected by severe anxiety and depression, and, if so, as to how those mental health difficulties would affect the father’s parenting capacity.
203 mr hill referred to all of the evidence in relation to the father’s stated intention to “walk away” if orders are not made in compliance with his application, that is, in compliance with the wishes expressed by the children in the family report. he submitted that the father’s attitude in that regard shows clearly that he puts his own needs before those of the children, whilst trying to justify that position by asserting them to be the needs of the children.
204 in concluding, mr hill submitted that:  ms n had identified the father as a “reactive perpetrator” presenting a moderate risk to the children, (b) on all of the evidence, the court must find that the father represents an unacceptable risk to the children, (c) such unacceptable risk could only be mitigated by the making of orders relating to the father undertaking a mental health assessment and any recommended treatment, and (d) thereafter, and on completion of an f service anger management course, his time with the children should be in accordance with the orders sought by the mother in her further amended initiating application.   on all of the evidence, the court must find that the father represents an unacceptable risk to the children, (c) such unacceptable risk could only be mitigated by the making of orders relating to the father undertaking a mental health assessment and any recommended treatment, and (d) thereafter, and on completion of an f service anger management course, his time with the children should be in accordance with the orders sought by the mother in her further amended initiating application.   such unacceptable risk could only be mitigated by the making of orders relating to the father undertaking a mental health assessment and any recommended treatment, and (d) thereafter, and on completion of an f service anger management course, his time with the children should be in accordance with the orders sought by the mother in her further amended initiating application.   thereafter, and on completion of an f service anger management course, his time with the children should be in accordance with the orders sought by the mother in her further amended initiating application.
205 in his submissions on behalf of the father, mr strik of counsel, confirmed that the father sought the orders as set out in his response of 13 april 2018, plus an order regulating the communication between the parents, confining the same to sms, texts and emails, except in occasions of emergency, when direct telephone calls should apply. the application of the father before the court before me was his amended response filed 23 october 2020, which made some amendments to the response of 13 april 2018. the principal difference between the orders sought is that the amended response contracts the alternate weekend time during school terms from friday to monday to friday to sunday at 5 pm.
206 mr strik conceded for the father that the matter involved family violence, that the father accepted that fact, and stressed that the father had sought help in 2012. i note that the reality was that it was not so much that the father sought help, as that he was required by a condition of his good behaviour bond to receive help.
207 mr strik stressed that there had been no occasion of physical violence by the father to the mother since 2012, when the father had had serious issues with alcohol, to the extent that he could not remember, on his evidence, his assaults on the mother, but that he accepted that the assaults had occurred.
208 mr strik submitted that there had been “eight years without violence”, a submission with which the court cannot agree, given the events of 10 august 2017 and 29 november 2019, family violence not being confined to physical assaults. [53]
209 mr strik pointed out that the father had been in a relationship with ms m for a period of five years without there being any suggestion of violence between them. he submitted that there was no evidence of the father having any issues with misuse of alcohol since 2012.
210 on the evidence, i accept that submission.
211 mr strik stressed the evidence of ms n that there was no need, in her view, for the father to undergo a mental health assessment or treatment and that overnight time between the father and the children should commence as soon as possible, subject to some daytime lead-in occasions. he stressed that the father’s case was that the “status quo” of his time with the children, as performed from 2015 to 2017, should continue.
212 during some brief submissions in reply, mr hill stressed to the court that there was no status quo of time between the father and the children, any previous regular routine having terminated in june 2017, two and a half years before the hearing.
the law
213 in parenting proceedings under the act, the court is required to follow the legislative pathway set down in the act.
214 the court must give attention to section 60b of the act that sets out the objects of part iv of the act relating to children. those objects inform the making of parenting orders.[54] that section also contains the principles behind those objects. in this matter i have considered those objects and the principles behind those objects.
215 section 60ca of the act provides that in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child the court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. the child’s interests are not the only consideration. parents and other persons, especially partners and extended families, are almost always relevant in the matter, but the child’s interests must always be the paramount consideration.
216 in parenting proceedings, pursuant to section 65d of the act, the court may, subject to the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility in section 61da and consideration of parenting plans under section 65dab, make such parenting order as it thinks proper.[55] the court may make a parenting order that discharges, varies, suspends, or revives some or all of an earlier parenting order.[56]
217 in determining what is in a child’s best interest, the court must consider the matters set out as the primary considerations and additional considerations in section 60cc and make findings.[57]
218 section 61da provides that when making a parenting order in relation to a child the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.[58]
219 the presumption does not apply in circumstances where a parent has perpetrated family violence or abuse. the presumption, when applying, may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.[59]
220 if a parenting order provides that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, then pursuant to section 65daa, the court must consider:  whether the child spending equal time with each parent would be in the best interest of the child,[60] and (b) whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[61]   whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[61]
221 if both questions are answered ‘yes’, the court must consider making an order to provide for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.[62]
222 if the court does not make an order for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents, then the court must consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child and consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable and, if the answer to both is yes, the court is to consider making an order to provide for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.
223 what is meant by substantial and significant time is set out in section 65daa(3) of the act and includes days that fall on weekends and holidays, days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, the child being able to be involved in occasions and events special to the parents, the parents being able to be involved in occasions and events of particular significance to the child, and the parents being able to be included in the child’s daily routine.
224 if the court does not make an order for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the child’s parents, the court must then go on to determine what parenting orders are proper in the best interests of the child, per section 65d.
225 as to what is ‘proper’ and how the court’s discretion is to be exercised i note the comments of the full court of the family court of australia in the recent decision of grella & jamieson
a discretionary judgment concerning the parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.[63]
226 there is much jurisprudence on the issue of risk in parenting proceedings. the jurisprudence may be simplified by saying that the task of the court where risks are asserted is not necessarily to make a finding as to whether the actions and events asserted have actually happened or have definitely not happened, as such a finding may not be open to the court on the state of the evidence.
227 rather, the task of the court is to assess whether the evidence establishes that there is a risk to the best interests of the child. if the evidence establishes that there is such a risk, briefly expressed, the court must:  assess whether that risk is an acceptable risk or an unacceptable risk, (b) if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (c) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child. detailed exposition of the treatment of risk in parenting matters can be found in the decision of the high court in m & m[64] and the decisions of the full court of the family court of australia in a & a & the child representative,[65] napier & hepburn,[66] johnson & page,[67] deiter & deiter,[68] and eaby & speelman.[69]   if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (c) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child. detailed exposition of the treatment of risk in parenting matters can be found in the decision of the high court in m & m[64] and the decisions of the full court of the family court of australia in a & a & the child representative,[65] napier & hepburn,[66] johnson & page,[67] deiter & deiter,[68] and eaby & speelman.[69]   decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child. detailed exposition of the treatment of risk in parenting matters can be found in the decision of the high court in m & m[64] and the decisions of the full court of the family court of australia in a & a & the child representative,[65] napier & hepburn,[66] johnson & page,[67] deiter & deiter,[68] and eaby & speelman.[69]
detailed exposition of the treatment of risk in parenting matters can be found in the decision of the high court in m & m[64] and the decisions of the full court of the family court of australia in a & a & the child representative,[65] napier & hepburn,[66] johnson & page,[67] deiter & deiter,[68] and eaby & speelman.[69]
consideration
228 the mother seeks order 4 as set out in her counsel’s case outline document that the father:  undertake a mental health assessment by a practitioner of either dr h or dr g at his own cost, to assess whether the father has cognitive or learning difficulties or a personality disorder that may impact upon his parenting ability, (b) obtains referrals for such assessments within seven days of receiving orders, (c) arranges to undertake the first available assessment and inform the mother of the date of the assessments upon obtaining those referrals, (d) provides copies of the family report and judgment of the court to those conducting the assessments and his gp, (e) provides the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, and (f) does all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and makes all reasonable efforts to ensure he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days of the date of the assessments.   obtains referrals for such assessments within seven days of receiving orders, (c) arranges to undertake the first available assessment and inform the mother of the date of the assessments upon obtaining those referrals, (d) provides copies of the family report and judgment of the court to those conducting the assessments and his gp, (e) provides the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, and (f) does all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and makes all reasonable efforts to ensure he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days of the date of the assessments.   arranges to undertake the first available assessment and inform the mother of the date of the assessments upon obtaining those referrals, (d) provides copies of the family report and judgment of the court to those conducting the assessments and his gp, (e) provides the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, and (f) does all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and makes all reasonable efforts to ensure he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days of the date of the assessments.   provides copies of the family report and judgment of the court to those conducting the assessments and his gp, (e) provides the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, and (f) does all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and makes all reasonable efforts to ensure he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days of the date of the assessments.   provides the mother with copies of the said assessments within 14 days of receiving same, and (f) does all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and makes all reasonable efforts to ensure he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days of the date of the assessments.   does all things necessary to comply with all treatment recommendations made in the said assessments and makes all reasonable efforts to ensure he commences treatment in accordance with the recommendations within 28 days of the date of the assessments.
229 the orders sought by the mother then go on to be those sought from order 3 onwards in the final orders sought in her further amended initiating application filed 24 august 2018, requiring the father to:  undergo an anger management course or courses with f service, and courses to assist him with putting the needs of his children before his own, or as directed by the staff at f service (repeating the words of the order to that effect made by judge henderson on 3 may 2018), and (b) that upon completion of such courses a graduating schedule of his time with the children then commences, starting with 24 months of alternate sundays from 9am until 1pm on a supervised basis at j service or another recognised children’s contact centre, increasing after 50 such visits, and subject to other orders sought, to alternate sundays from 9am until 1pm and special occasions without supervision.   that upon completion of such courses a graduating schedule of his time with the children then commences, starting with 24 months of alternate sundays from 9am until 1pm on a supervised basis at j service or another recognised children’s contact centre, increasing after 50 such visits, and subject to other orders sought, to alternate sundays from 9am until 1pm and special occasions without supervision.
230 it is important to properly characterise the nature of the order sought by the mother for the father to undertake a mental health assessment and to follow any recommendations for treatment. if characterised as a “standalone order” or “non-conditional order”, it is outside the power of this court. if the order that the father undergo the assessment and treatment is properly characterised as a condition of spending time with the children, it is within power under any of sections 65d(1), 67zc, 68b or 114.
231 the court was referred by mr hill for the mother to l & t,[70] where the full court of the family court of australia held that there is a power under sections 65d(1), 67zc, 68b or 114 to order that a party attend upon a psychiatrist and undergo treatment as a condition of contact or residence, but there is no such power to make a non-conditional order. in examining the power of the court to make such orders under the general welfare provisions in section 67zc, the court held that the welfare and parens patriae jurisdictions will support a variety of orders but the power is not so wide as to support any order that would promote a child’s welfare, the court referring to the judgment of gaudron j in ams & aif.[71]
232 in making that determination the court said at paragraph 57:
in our view, whatever the limits of the...power are a parent cannot be required to partake in a course of conduct or cease an activity merely because it would be in the child’s best interests that the parent so do. it may clearly be demonstrated that it is in a child’s best interests that a parent remain healthy and to that end give up smoking. some would say it is essential that all adults undergo regular exercise, eat only healthy foods, and refrain from consuming alcohol. it would not be, in our view, a proper exercise of the “welfare” power for a court to place limits on a parent’s conduct unless it could be demonstrated that those limits are necessary for the welfare of the child. even then, careful consideration would need to be given to the right of the parent to conduct their life as they see fit.[72]
and at paragraph 60:
had the ongoing psychiatric treatment been imposed as a condition of contact, being, in our view, on the evidence available to her honour such an order could well have been upheld. however, the form of the order leaves it freestanding, and in our view it does not comfortably fit with any of the heads of power that we have identified. [73]
233 and in that regard the court was referring to the sections referred to above.
234 mr hill referred to l & t as being found to be still good law per the reference to that case by scarlett fm in litchfield & beck.[74] in paragraph 31 of that judgment, which related to his honour’s consideration of an urgent interim recovery order application, his honour said:
the issue of the father’s stability and mental state needs to be addressed, and i propose to make orders that his time with the child be supervised and that he attend upon a psychiatrist as a condition of spending time with the child (see l v t).[75]
235 and his honour expressed his consequent order as:
it is a condition of order (3) above [an order for the father to spend defined time with the subject child] that the father is to attend upon a psychiatrist and provide a psychiatric assessment to the court within a reasonable time after the date of these orders.[76]
236 the father’s time was being supervised by the paternal grandmother, the paternal grandfather, or another named person. i have traversed that judgment as i was referred to it by mr hill, but i note that the question has been before the full court of the family court of australia on two subsequent occasions, between which time it was also considered in a matter at first instance by his honour watts j.
237 jacks & samson, [77] examined the law on this point in the light of the amendments to part vii of the act 1975 in 2006 introduced by the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) act 2006 (cth). the order under question was one requiring the mother to do all things and follow all recommendations of a named psychiatrist who had provided an expert’s report:
...and undertake individual psychotherapy treatment, as soon as practicable after the date of these orders with such treatment to have commenced no later than [a date].[78]
238 as had been the case in l v t, the “stand alone order” for a parent to undergo psychiatric assessment and treatment was made concurrent with order providing for that parent to spend time with the children. it was described by the court in paragraph 212 as:
an order which compels the mother to undergo medical treatment which dr anne considered would require therapy over an extensive period of time, at her cost. on its face, it has no direct nexus to “any other aspect of the care, welfare, and development” of the children and is a “stand alone” order as was the order in l v t. [79]
239 the court went on to consider that section 67zc of the act – giving the court jurisdiction to make orders relating to the welfare of children in addition to the jurisdiction the court has under part vii otherwise – would provide head of power for the making of such an order if the order could be classified as necessary for the welfare of the children. that being, if the unique circumstances of a particular case provided sufficient nexus between the order and the welfare of the children.
240 the full court’s decision in jacks & samson, was referred to by watts j in bemert & swallow,[80] where in paragraph 82 his honour said:
the decision of the full court of the family court of australia in jacks & samson [2008] famcafc 173 is a case where grandparents successfully obtained an order for the psychiatric treatment of their daughter in a parenting case involving their grandchildren. the full court in that case referred to the exceptional circumstances of that case, where although the mother had not consented to the order made, she had given sworn evidence that she would attend for psychiatric treatment. the full court concluded that, pursuant tos67zc of the family law act 1975, it was necessary for the welfare of the children in that case for the mother to have the treatment. in doing so the full court distinguished previous authority (l v t [1999] famca 1699, (1999) flc 92-875, 25 fam lr 590) which was to the effect that stand alone orders requiring psychiatric treatment were not within the normal powers contained in part vii of the family law act 1975. the maternal grandfather may take some comfort from jacks & samson (supra) but the facts of this case are very different. there is no prospect that the mother would consent to any order sought by the maternal grandfather for psychiatric treatment. she is currently receiving treatment. the frequency of that treatment has increased since litigation involving the maternal grandfather has commenced. there is no suggestion in this case that the children’s parents will not remain their primary care givers and they are not seeking any parenting orders (to which a condition of psychiatric treatment might otherwise attach). i do not see any prospects in the circumstances of this case that the court would order further and different treatment for the mother relying upon section 67zc of the family law act 1975.[81]
241 finally, the matter was again visited by the full court of the family court of australia in oberlin & infeld.[82] the relevant order in that matter in the appeal was one requiring the mother to:
undertake counselling and treatment from a suitably qualified professional as recommended by the [family consultant] and is at liberty to provide a copy of the following documents to such qualified professional: a) the family report, b) the expert’s report, and c) the final orders and reasons for judgment.[83]
a) the family report, b) the expert’s report, and c) the final orders and reasons for judgment.[83]
b) the expert’s report, and c) the final orders and reasons for judgment.[83]
c) the final orders and reasons for judgment.[83]
the court found that such order was a self-standing order, untethered from any particular parenting order. the court found it was not a parenting order under section 64b(2) of the act and that therefore the only other conceivable source of power before it was section 67zc of the act, and followed jacks & samson in finding that the making of such an order within the power under section 67zc of the act would take “unique circumstances” which the court found were not present in the matter under acquittal.
242 is the order proposed by the mother in relation to the father undertaking mental health assessment and following recommendations of treatments a “stand alone” order or is it a condition of him spending time with the children by requiring compliance with that order before the parenting orders come into effect?
243 i find that to bring such an order within the scope of a parenting order as defined in section 64b of the act, the order must specifically refer to the father’s performance of any such order being a condition precedent to his proceeding to have the benefit of orders for him spending time with the children only on completion of such mental health assessment and any recommended treatments.
244 whether or not such an order ought to be made at all is to be considered hereunder in the light of my findings made along the “legislative pathway”.
section 60cc – the primary considerations
245 in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to children, the court must regard the best interests of the children as the primary consideration [section 60ca] and in determining what is in the children’s best interests, the court must give consideration to the matters set out as the primary considerations and additional considerations in section 60cc of the act.
246 the primary considerations are the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parents and any need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. in giving consideration to those matters, the court must give greater weight to the consideration of any need to protect children over the consideration of the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parents.
247 in examining the primary considerations and making appropriate findings, the court’s consideration of any asserted risks are an integral part of considering any need to protect the children and considering the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parents.
248 both children have a meaningful relationship with the mother. it is a close and loving relationship. the children have been in their mother’s primary care since 2012 when the parents began to live in separate homes even prior to their separation in mid-2013. at that time, x was three years and three months of age and y was 10 months of age. since mid-2017, the mother has been, except for some isolated and very short occasions, the sole carer for the children as between the parents, and at that time x was seven years and four months of age and y was five years and five months of age.
249 ms n notes in the family report that x and y:
...each have [a] very close relationship with [their mother] and with the maternal grandparents.[84]
250 the state of the relationship between each of the children and the father is a more complex and difficult question, given the long periods of time in the lives of these children to date when they have not spent time with or communicated their father. the reasons for that are various, from the mother withholding the children from spending time with and communicating with their father in consequence of what she considered to be matters affecting their welfare, to the father’s blank refusal to countenance entering into any informal arrangement or any informal interim orders for him to spend time with, and communicate with, the children unless such informal arrangement or interim orders were in conformity with his view that same cannot be less than the time he enjoyed with the children prior to mid-2017.
251 the remarkable thing is that we would hear from the family report that the relationship between father and children has survived the extent that is observed by ms n to be “loving and well established”. ms n stated that, “both children appear to have greatly missed him” at the time of the observations of interaction between father and children for the family report on 2 september 2019. this occurred some two years and two months (at least) after the children had last spent any time with their father. the observations of ms n were not the subject of cross-examination in relation to her opinion expressed consequent upon that observation:   and [y] were happy to embrace – be embraced by her father and to display their affection towards him. [the father] gave both children multiple hugs and kisses throughout their play, which the children appear comfortable to receive. [x] drew love hearts and “dad” all over the white board, and she wrote multiple times, “i love my dad.” [85]
252 both children had displayed immediate joy when told they would be seeing their father for the interview and expressed great eagerness for that to occur – ms n noted that:  began to cry, with joy, when she was asked if she wanted to spend time with her father following her interview.[86]
253 and: ’s face lit up with joy, when he was asked if he wanted to spend time with his father following his interview.[87]
254 to the mother’s credit, in examination she did not dispute that it was in the children’s best interests that they have a meaningful relationship with their father - if the risks elements she asserts are adequately addressed - and she accepted that the father loves his children and the children love their father.
255 however, before going on to consider whether there is benefit to the children in having a meaningful relationship with their father, i must address the other primary consideration in relation to any need to protect the children from what i will paraphrase as any unacceptable risk.
256 the mother asserts that this is a risk case. she asserts that the risks to the children are in consequence of:  the father’s inability to regulate his behaviours due to him being what ms n described as a “reactive perpetrator”, and (b) what the mother asserts may be other mental health issues affecting the father. on the latter matter, the mother asserts that the father may be affected by personality disorder, leading him to being unable to properly regulate his emotions and behaviours. this would impugn the father’s capacity to protect the children from being exposed to actions toward them that would or could amount to family violence as defined by section 4ab of the act. it would or could also impugn the father’s capacity to protect the children from being exposed to antisocial or violent behaviour by him towards others, as well as his capacity to protect them from demonstrations by him consequent upon conflict in the parenting relationship. the mother points to the father’s inability to place the children’s needs above his own, chiefly illustrated by his attitude in refusing to spend time with the children unless it was time in compliance with his demands.   what the mother asserts may be other mental health issues affecting the father. on the latter matter, the mother asserts that the father may be affected by personality disorder, leading him to being unable to properly regulate his emotions and behaviours. this would impugn the father’s capacity to protect the children from being exposed to actions toward them that would or could amount to family violence as defined by section 4ab of the act. it would or could also impugn the father’s capacity to protect the children from being exposed to antisocial or violent behaviour by him towards others, as well as his capacity to protect them from demonstrations by him consequent upon conflict in the parenting relationship. the mother points to the father’s inability to place the children’s needs above his own, chiefly illustrated by his attitude in refusing to spend time with the children unless it was time in compliance with his demands.
on the latter matter, the mother asserts that the father may be affected by personality disorder, leading him to being unable to properly regulate his emotions and behaviours. this would impugn the father’s capacity to protect the children from being exposed to actions toward them that would or could amount to family violence as defined by section 4ab of the act. it would or could also impugn the father’s capacity to protect the children from being exposed to antisocial or violent behaviour by him towards others, as well as his capacity to protect them from demonstrations by him consequent upon conflict in the parenting relationship. the mother points to the father’s inability to place the children’s needs above his own, chiefly illustrated by his attitude in refusing to spend time with the children unless it was time in compliance with his demands.
257 i note that the mother was not and has never been in a position to positively assert that the father has any mental ill-health issue.
258 are there any of those risks present in this matter, and if so, are such risks unacceptable risks?
259 the mother gave evidence of family violence perpetrated by the father in the nature of physical assaults upon her occurring in 2007, prior to their commencement of cohabitation, in 2009, and in may 2012. as a result of the incident in may 2012, the court made an advo for the protection of the mother from the father and the father was convicted of the assault on the mother and placed on a good behaviour bond for 24 months with the condition that he undertake a domestic violence course, which led to the father undertaking and completing the 24 or 26-week (the evidence varied) course in queensland during 2012/2013. the father also undertook a course in relation to his problems with alcohol abuse at that time and, it would seem, overcame his problems with alcohol as alcohol abuse has not figured as an element in the evidence thereafter.
260 however, though there are no other instances of physical family violence perpetrated by the father on the mother subsequent to the may 2012 incident despite his assertions to the contrary, the father has nevertheless not, learnt the lessons from the family violence course undertaken by him pursuant to his good behaviour bond. i find that the incidents of 10 august 2017 and 29 november 2019 were occasions of perpetration of family violence by the father affecting the mother, each of the children and, probably, as it is not specific in the evidence, the maternal grandparents as to the 2019 event.
261 further, there is the evidence of the father’s conduct before judge henderson on 3 may 2018, an occasion when he was at court and had heard the court informed by the mother’s solicitor that she was ready and willing to agree to interim orders for the father to spend time with the children, almost immediately going to a single overnight per fortnight, but he could not regulate his emotions sufficiently, or place his needs above those of the children sufficiently, to follow the process and have benefit of those orders. rather, he was insulting of the court and created a situation where no interim arrangement for his time with the children eventuated. it would seem there was a somewhat similar circumstance before the learned magistrate in the local court at suburb e, though there is no transcript thereof and the evidence was somewhat indefinite in that regard.
262 though the father has never been physically violent to the children, his actions on 10 august 2017 had the effect of making them afraid. a tiny bit of consideration by the father of the likely consequence of his actions on that day by way of effect on the children would have led him to realise, if he has any ability for such insight at all, that it could not have done other than cause the children to be upset and scared by the event.
263 similarly, in light of my finding that i accept the mother’s evidence in relation to that event over the varying picture presented by the father in his evidence, the father’s actions on 29 november 2019 can only have had the same effect upon the children. this is in circumstances where prior to that occurring, the father had available to him and on his evidence, had read and considered the family report released to him on 14 october 2019 which made it explicit for him, in the words of the children themselves, that such event made x scared and y frightened.
264 nevertheless, the incidents of 10 august 2017 and 29 november 2019 must be seen in light of the reality of what were the surrounding circumstances – the father was, in a wholly inappropriate manner and to the detriment of the children, taking the action he did in an attempt to see and spend time with his children in august 2017 and november 2019.
265 when i take the whole of the mother’s evidence in relation to family violence and behaviours by the father that caused her to have concerns about his spending time with the children into account, and at its highest, i find that there is not a risk to the children that they will be exposed to behaviours of the kind asserted by the mother to present unacceptable risk to them.
266 i am not satisfied on the evidence that there is any necessity to make the orders sought by the mother that, as a precondition to the father spending any time with the children, he undergo a mental health assessment and receive any consequent recommended treatment. mr hill, as counsel for the mother, strove mightily to present to the court a case where the court should find that the father represented an unacceptable risk to the children due to the father’s personality and mental health issues. mr hill further submitted there was sufficient possibility that the father may represent such a risk. it was submitted this gave rise to the need to ascertain the realities of any such personality or mental health issues affecting the father through assessment.
267 these submissions were made without the sort of expert evidence that would be required to establish the fact of such risk, and without evidence of behaviours and events that would give rise to the possibility of such risk.
268 i find on the whole of the evidence that there is no sufficient basis to justify the making of the order sought by the mother as a precondition to the father’s spending time with the children.
269 i do, however, find that there is sufficient evidence to justify a finding that the father still has difficulties with his emotional regulation and particularly in relation to anger management, and that there is sufficient possibility of the children being affected by the father’s problems in that regard, as time goes by. this, in line with the issues raised by mr hill with ms n during cross-examination, goes to circumstances where, in the future, the children may disagree with their father, or fail to follow his directions in some manner, leading to what was phrased in that cross-examination as “a potential problem”.
270 i consider that such risk is unacceptable, but can be mitigated and dealt with appropriately by a requirement that, as a condition of spending time with the children, the father engage in, undergo and complete an anger management course through f service – a course that he was ordered to undergo and complete by judge henderson as far back as may 2018 but with which he failed to comply.
271 accordingly, i find that other than the father’s propensity to anger just discussed, appropriately mitigated by an order of the nature i have foreshadowed, there is no unacceptable risk to the children in spending time with their father on an unsupervised basis and, after a suitable introductory period of daytime, on an overnight basis.
272 however, i cannot leave consideration of any need to protect the children and return to the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parents without addressing the father’s evidence, ultimately somewhat contradictory, that unless orders are made strictly as sought by him, and going to double overnight alternate weekends immediately, he will “walk away”.
273 the father loves his children. the children love him. it is not a matter of the father getting what he wants. that is no part of the consideration along the legislative pathway or the mandate found in the act, and only spears into consideration of the best interests of the children from the point of view of the father’s attitude - varying between feeling vindicated if orders are made exactly as he seeks, or rejecting the children if orders are not made as he seeks.
274 if it is ultimately found in these reasons that it is appropriate to make orders other than as sought by the father, for instance for a gradual increase in the amount of time between the father and the children. if the father in consequence, “walks away”, he will be rejecting and irreparably harming his children for the sole purpose of satisfying his personal need to be vindicated.
275 i am proceeding on the basis that this is a father whose love for his children is certainly sufficient to find him doing right by them, and not emotionally scarring them for his own purposes.
276 having made the above findings in relation to the asserted elements of risk in this matter, i find that it is very much to the benefit of both x and y to have a meaningful relationship with both of their parents. the mother accepts that it is to their benefit to have a meaningful relationship with their father. the father must accept that it is to their benefit, essential for them, to have a meaningful relationship with him, and that that meaningful relationship is lost, probably forever, if he walks away and dishonestly attempts to justify his walking away by linking it to what the children want as being the only criteria for what is in their best interests.
section 60cc – the additional considerations
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the children’s views – section 60cc(3)(a)
277 the children’s views come to the court through the family report. i remain conscious that the family report was based upon interviews with the children on 2 september 2019 and that just under three months later the events of 29 november 2019 occurred. this may have had an effect upon the children given the effect the children express that the events of 10 august 2017 had on them.
278 x told ms n that she missed her father and worried about him. she said, “he loves me and i love him too.” she considered that her weekends with her father, when they had occurred, had been “perfect”. she spoke fondly of her paternal grandparents. x expressed a view consistent with her wanting to recommence spending time with her father and that such time was through a short period of day times and single overnights to multi-night alternate weekend occasions.
279 x also expressed a clear wish to be able to have telephone communication with her father.
280 y also expressed a wish to be able to speak to his father on the telephone and to spend weekend time with his father.
281 at the time the children expressed those views in september 2019, x was nine of age and y was seven years of age. i give the views expressed by the children some weight as they are coupled with the observations by ms n of the children’s reaction to their father despite the two year hiatus in their having any contact with him and being their clear expressions of feeling easy and comfortable about spending time in their father’s care.
282 given their ages at the time they expressed those views, i have not given great weight to them from the bare point of view of whether or not the court should simply follow those views, however they are given considerable weight as indicia of the state of the relationship between the children and their father, despite considerable difficulties attended upon that relationship, and as indicators of the likely success of a reintroduction of time between the children and their father and for consideration of the extent to which such time should go.
the nature of the relationship of the children with each of their parents and with other persons and, in particular, their grandparents and the father’s partner, ms m – section 60cc(3)(b)
283 i have already made sufficient findings about the nature of the relationship of the children with each of their parents.
284 on the evidence, i find that the children have a relationship of closeness and comfort with both their maternal grandparents, with whom they have lived for considerable periods of time, and also their paternal grandparents, despite them having been separated from them for long periods of time. i base this finding upon the children’s comments about their paternal grandparents reported in the family report.
285 similarly, i find that the children have a comfortable relationship of familiarity with ms m, once again basing that finding upon the material reported in the family report.
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long term issues in relation to the children and to spend time with the children and to communicate with the children – section 60cc(3)(c)
286 the mother has, of course, taken every opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long term issues for the children in that she has plainly made such decisions on a unilateral basis. i make these observations in relation to their return from queensland to sydney to reside in 2013, and their various changes of residence involving distance (the move to suburb dd, for instance) and in relation to the children changing schools.
287 there is some conflicting evidence between the parties as to the extent of the mother’s communication with the father about these matters, but it would seem that the mother does inform the father about these moves, though perhaps on occasions on a “last minute” basis.
288 it is on this finding that i also base a finding that the father has not participated in making decisions about major long-term issues about the children because he has not been consulted and invited to so participate by the mother. this has led in part to the problem that arises in relation to the father’s refusal to accept the diagnoses of y in relation to adhd, autism and sensory processing disorder, and his demand that a second and third opinion be obtained with his full participation (virtually, on his evidence, the presentation of his dna!) before such diagnoses are fully accepted and before it is fully accepted that medication prescribed for y is necessary.
289 as stated earlier, this is one of the risk elements i have found is present in the matter, that in spending time with y the father may not follow the treatment recommendations of y’s medical professionals or administer y’s medication in accordance with prescription recommendations from his health professionals.
290 i find that, in consequence, an order should be made requiring the father to comply with all such recommendations and medication requirements as a condition of spending time with y. i find that it is in y’s best interests with the time that has passed and on the basis of the evidence presented by the mother in relation to y’s diagnoses, that it is not to be left open to the father to further question the diagnoses and require further investigation before he complies with the recommendations and medication requirements, whether or not he himself accepts the diagnoses.
291 the mother has taken every opportunity to spend time with the children and communicate with the children because they live with her and have done all of their lives. i find that she has been their principal caregiver throughout their lives and their sole caregiver since mid-2017, with the assistance on many occasions of the maternal grandparents.
292 i find that the father has failed to take opportunities available to him to spend time with the children and to communicate with the children. i base this finding upon the evidence that the father has taken a stance throughout the proceedings that either interim orders are made (or an informal arrangement entered into) that complies with what he demands is the minimum for his time with the children - that is, a return to the alternate weekend arrangement that prevailed between his return to sydney in late 2013 and the termination of his informal time in mid-2017 - or he would have no time. the father’s attitude in this regard was maintained by him in the hearing and under repeated cross-examination by mr hill and intervention by me. repeating the same question on a number of occasions the father was still reluctant to concede that any time was better for the children than no time with him and to abandon his position that it is what he demands or nothing. he did, in re-examination by mr strik, eventually seem to abandon that position, though still in a most prevaricating manner.
293 my finding that the father has through his own actions and decisions, failed to take every opportunity to spend time with the children and communicate with them, is a factor affecting the children’s best interest that i must bear in mind in determining what regime of time for the father to spend with the children is appropriate and, in particular, what if any graduation of time is appropriate.
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parents’ obligation to maintain the children. – section 60cc(3)(ca)
294 the mother has fulfilled completely her obligation to maintain the children. she has been their financial provider in conjunction with the father up until 2012 and she has been their sole financial support from that time until the hearing.
295 just before the hearing, the father addressed the arrears of child support and he conceded that such arrears had accumulated, on a very modest assessment, over the whole period of the parties’ separation since assessment was made.
296 the father failed to fulfil his obligation to maintain the children. paying off the arrears, which amounted to some $13,000, by an increase in the regular assessment of about $20 does not “work back” and cover his obligation for the period during which he failed to make any financial provision for them. however, in the circumstances of this case, i find that the father’s failure to fulfil his obligation to maintain the children will not have any serious detrimental effect upon the court’s determination of what time is appropriate to be ordered between the father and the children.
the likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances including the likely effect on the children of any separation from either of their parents or any other person with whom they have been living – section 60cc(3)(d)
297 the change in circumstances for the children proposed by each of the parties is that they commence spending time with their father.
298 on the father’s case, it would be time commencing on an alternate weekend basis immediately. on the mother’s case, it will be time commencing on a daytime only weekend basis for a period of two years with supervision and therefore continuing on a daytime only basis without supervision.
299 such change in circumstances, whatever it may amount to across the range of times the children may spend with their father, would be a lessening of the time that they spend with the mother. such is the nature of the relationship of the children with their mother, and the nature of the relationship with the children with their father, that a change in their circumstances by spending some time with their father and consequently less time with their mother would have no detrimental effect upon the relationship with their mother.
300 by the same token, such change in circumstances would provide to the children an opportunity to spend some time with and resume their relationship with their extended paternal family. in particular it would provide the children with a chance to spend time with their parental grandparents, whom they wish to see and spend time with, and ms m with whom they are familiar and in relation to whom there is no evidence other than that she is an appropriate person to participate in care of the children with the father during their time with him.
the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time with and communicating with their father and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the children’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis – section 60cc(3)(e)
301 there is nothing in the evidence to indicate that there is any particular practical difficulty or expense involved in the children spending time with and communicating with their father. there is no evidence of the mother’s actual current address and that circumstance is by leave of the court. the children attend school at suburb c and the father resides at suburb v. there is some travel distance involved for the children, but no issues of any particular nature are raised in the evidence in that regard. the only reference to these matters was at the end of the submissions of mr strik, who is counsel for the father, when he referred to a midpoint between suburb v and suburb c being the mcdonald’s family restaurant at the suburb k shopping centre.
302 given the findings i have made in relation to family violence and the state of relationship between the parents, and particularly the mother’s wish to preserve the confidentiality of her place of residence, i find that arrangements for changeover should address first and foremost the best interests of the children. those best interests are served by the children being kept safe from observing or hearing manifestations of the poor parenting and personal relationship between the parents.
303 accordingly, changeovers occurring at the children’s school so that there is an attendance by only the one parent, and the children have the six-hour school day between leaving one parent and going into the care of the other parent to “settle”, are to be preferred, with changeovers that cannot occur at school to take place at a neutral point. in that regard, i note the evidence of the mother’s part-time work and the father, at the time of the hearing, not being in employment. i find that it is appropriate that such neutral changeover point be of more convenience to the mother than the father, such being in the best interests of the children by easing the burden upon the mother as to both travel time and expense in view of her primary care of the children, being in this case coupled with the father’s history of, and current circumstance in relation to, his contributions to the financial support of the children.
304 in relation to any question of a place of changeover not occurring at school, and in consequence of the mother’s return to reside back in the sydney metropolitan area at some place convenient for the children to attend a suburb c primary school, the court considers the distance between the parties as being between where the father resided at suburb v and the mother resided in the suburb c area, with a convenient mid-point being the suburb k shopping centre or the mcdonalds family restaurant at the suburb k shopping centre. however, the mid-point is not necessarily the appropriate changeover place in the best interests of the children.
the capacity of each of the children’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the children) to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs – section 60cc(3)(f)
305 i find on the whole of the evidence that the mother, certainly, has full capacity to provide for the needs of the children including in their emotional and intellectual needs. the mother’s curtailment of the children’s time with their father is perfectly explicable in the light of the evidence presented by her and accepted by the court. the fact that such curtailment endured for so long a time is more a reflection on the father’s parenting capacity, being less than adequate, than the mother’s parenting capacity. it was open to the father to enter into an interim arrangement with the mother – as occurred on the mother’s initiative following the release of the family report and until the father’s actions of 29 november 2019 – but he stubbornly refused to do so unless such interim arrangement was in line with his demands, and equal to his final orders aims.
306 as indicated, the doubt which lies across the father’s capacity to provide for the emotional needs of the children comes from the issue i have just traversed – the father’s refusal to countenance a relationship with the children that is based upon anything other than his spending time with them in accordance with his stated aim, an immediate resumption of the informal arrangement that subsisted up until june 2017.
307 however, and heavily based upon the evidence contained in the family report and the oral evidence of ms n, i find that it is not in the best interests of the children that the father’s demonstrated lack of parenting capacity be a factor tending against the making of orders for the children to spend time with their father. i have found that it is very much in the best interests of the children to spend time with their father and there is no evidence of a lack of parenting capacity on the part of the father, or a lack of capacity of the father to provide for the children’s needs outside of his actions and attitudes that stemmed from the parental conflict and his demand for self-vindication.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and of the children’s parents – section 60cc(3)(g)
308 the evidence on hearing does not indicate any particular matters relating to lifestyle, culture or traditions that should be taken into account in this matter.
309 x and y are both now of an age where their relationship with their father can be lost if circumstances continue where they are not spending time with and communicating with him on a regular basis. there is no indication that the views expressed by the children, in relation to their wish to spend time with their father and their enjoyment of that time, are improperly influenced or expressed by their mother than in accordance with their level of maturity at the time of the interviews on 2 september 2019.
310 i would note here that any belief, on the part of the father or his extended family, that the mother has waged a campaign of alienation of the children from their father is contradicted by the transcript of proceedings before judge henderson on 3 may 2018, by the comments and attitudes reported in the family report, by her voluntary resumption of time between the children and their father following the release of the family report until the events of 29 november 2019, and most particularly, by the views expressed by the children as reported in the family report. far from it being the mother’s fault, the father has been the architect of his own – and the children’s – difficulties.
the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the children’s parents – section 60cc(3)(i)
311 once again, on the whole of the evidence, i make no criticism of the mother in relation to her attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood. pursuant to the findings i have made in relation to the factual matters and the best interests of the children, i find that she has acted upon her firm belief that the approach she has taken, at each stage, through this matter since june 2013, has been taken with the best interests of the children as her main consideration.
312 once again, the same cannot be said of the father whose stubborn attitude in relation to appropriate arrangements for his time with the children was more a self-serving attitude seeking his personal vindication rather than being, in any manner, properly child-focussed, despite his insistence throughout that his approach has been based upon the wishes of the children.
313 the children have wished to see him and spend time with him, the duration was a secondary consideration. however, once again, i find that it is not a case where the father is failing in relation to his attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood should work against appropriate orders being, made for resumption of time between the father and the children.
any family violence involving the children or a member of the children’s family – section 60cc(3)(j)
314 i have made findings that family violence occurred, perpetrated by the father against the mother and by the father against the mother, children, and one or both of the maternal grandparents (this latter finding being in relation to the incidents of august 2017 and november 2019). i have dealt with the effect of the family violence on the best interest of the children when dealing with the primary considerations.
315 if a family violence order applies or has applied to the children or a member of the children’s family, any relevant inferences can be drawn from the order taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order and any other relevant matter.
316 there has been a chain of family violence orders in this matter – copies of which are contained in the evidence – the latest order being the order made on 17 august 2020 in the local court at suburb e, protecting the mother and each of the children from the father for a period of two years, until 16 august 2022. there was evidence that the father was seeking to have that order varied or vacated, but the result of any such application is not in the evidence. accordingly, i must treat that order as remaining on foot for the purposes of these reasons.
317 according to the order of 17 august 2020 the father must not:  assault or threaten, stalk, harass or intimidate, or intentionally or recklessly destroy or damage any property that belongs to or is in the possession of the mother and each of the children, (b) approach the mother or either of the children or contact them in any way unless the contact is through a lawyer, (c) approach the school or any other place the mother or either of the children might go to for study or any place they might go to for childcare or bb street, suburb dd, suburb dd primary school, and (d) go within 100 metres of any place where the mother or either of the children live or work, or bb street, suburb dd.   approach the mother or either of the children or contact them in any way unless the contact is through a lawyer, (c) approach the school or any other place the mother or either of the children might go to for study or any place they might go to for childcare or bb street, suburb dd, suburb dd primary school, and (d) go within 100 metres of any place where the mother or either of the children live or work, or bb street, suburb dd.   approach the school or any other place the mother or either of the children might go to for study or any place they might go to for childcare or bb street, suburb dd, suburb dd primary school, and (d) go within 100 metres of any place where the mother or either of the children live or work, or bb street, suburb dd.   go within 100 metres of any place where the mother or either of the children live or work, or bb street, suburb dd.
318 there is no exception set out in the orders for the father spending time with the children pursuant to court orders. the order continues until 16 august 2022. accordingly, any order for the father to spend time with the children would be inconsistent with the current advo. accordingly, section 68p of the act would apply. any order made in relation to the father spending time with or communicating with the children must specify that it is inconsistent with the advo order, must give a detailed explanation of how the father’s time and/or communication is to take place and must provide for an explanation to be given to both parents of the matters referred to in section 68p(2)(c) and (d). the section provides for that explanation to also be given to the children unless the court is satisfied that it is in the children’s best interests not to receive that explanation.
319 in the circumstances of this matter, i do find that i am satisfied that it is in the children’s best interests that they not receive those explanations. i am satisfied of this on the basis of the matters i have considered under section 60cc.
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children – section 60cc(3)(l)
320 i find, on the basis of all of the evidence in this matter and the findings i have made on consideration of the matters in section 60cc, that the making of an order that the children live with their mother and spend time with their father - to the extent that it is determined in these reasons to be in the best interests of the children - would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in the matter. this is somewhat contingent upon the father not again finding cause to give way to his emotionally dysregulated conduct, such as he did in august 2017 and november 2019, and proceeding to act out in a manner that must throw doubt upon such orders being in the best interests of the children on an ongoing basis.
parental responsibility
321 the presumption set out in section 61da of the act, that it is in the children’s best interest for their parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for them, does not apply because i have found that the father has engaged in family violence.[88]
322 the mother seeks an order that she have sole parental responsibility for the children, whilst the father seeks an order that the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children.
323 the mother has, for all practical intents and purposes, been exercising sole parental responsibility for the children since the parties began living in different residences in 2012 in queensland.
324 more immediately, she has taken the necessary steps to have y’s mental health and behavioural issues addressed, resulting in the diagnoses received by y from the paediatrician and put in issue by the father.
325 ms n suggests in paragraph 148 of the family report that:
it may be that there is a benefit to the children in the areas of their health and education if [the mother] has sole parental responsibility for them. this is because this would enable her to make the most appropriate decisions for the children, and her, as the children’s primary carer. however, [the mother] having sole parental responsibility is complicated by [the father’s] dispute about [y]’s reported additional needs (adhd) and his subsequent treatment.
and at paragraph 149:
the dilemma before the court appears to be what is considered to be the greater risk to the children. if the parents have equal shared parental responsibility, there are strong indications that [the father] and [the mother] are unlikely to be able to resolve the issue of [y]’s health needs. this would likely expose the children to future parental conflict. this is not considered to be in the best interest of the children. the risk for [x] and [y], in [the mother] having sole parental responsibility for them, is that [the father] may be excluded from important assessments and decisions about [y] and [x].
further, at paragraph 150:
the most appropriate orders for parental responsibility for [x] and [y] are considered to be orders which meet and ensure the overall needs for safety and wellbeing.
326 ms n noted that she was ultimately unable to make a recommendation in relation to parental responsibility for the children. nevertheless, i find great sense in the comments made by ms n in the family report in paragraphs 148 to 150.
327 there is almost certain to be ongoing parental conflict around y’s health matters, and most probably any other health matters affecting either of the children in the future, if an order is made for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the children. i make this observation on close consideration of the father’s evidence in relation to his attitude to the diagnoses made in relation to y’s health difficulties and his requirement that there be a second and third opinion obtained, and that any valid diagnoses cannot possibly stand unless he is involved, apparently as far as i understand his evidence, on the basis of hereditary factors.
328 there is also the possibility that serious difficulties may be encountered in relation to y’s ongoing treatment if necessary consents from the father are withheld.
329 in relation to y’s health matters, the court puts its faith in the health professionals – the paediatrician and other health professionals who have diagnosed and are treating y – over and above the father’s personal opinions as he states in his evidence without providing any expert evidentiary basis for those opinions.
330 accordingly, i find that it is in the best interests of the children that an order be made that their mother have sole parental responsibility for all matters relating to the children’s health and education, and that otherwise the parents have shared parental responsibility. i make this finding on the basis that once sole parental responsibility is allocated to a parent (or other person) for any particular aspects of parental responsibility, then it is not proper to make an equal shared parental responsibility order covering the rest of parental responsibility, but that such order should be for shared parental responsibility.[89]
order for time between the father and the children with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration
331 as i have found that it is not in the children’s best interests to make an order that their parents have equal shared parental responsibility for them, i need not follow the legislative pathway set out in section 65daa of the act. instead i must determine, with the children’s best interests as the paramount consideration, what order is proper to be made in relation to the time they should spend with and how they should communicate with their father.
332 there has been a very long break in the regular time between the children and the father, since june 2017, with just a couple of occasions between mid-october and the end of november 2019.
333 i take very much into consideration the recommendations of ms n in the family report and in her oral evidence, the views expressed by x in relation to some lead-in period of daytime only time with the father before overnight commences, and the long period of time that has elapsed since there was overnight time.
334 i find that it is appropriate to make orders that provide for the children to immediately begin spending time with their father on an unsupervised basis as follows:  that the first four occasions be daytime only, (b) that the next four occasions be single overnight, and (c) thereafter, the time be on alternate weekends from the end of school on friday until the start of school on monday during school term time if the father is able to deliver the children to school on time for the start of school on mondays, or until 6pm on sunday if the father is not in a position to deliver the children to school on time for the start of school on monday.   that the next four occasions be single overnight, and (c) thereafter, the time be on alternate weekends from the end of school on friday until the start of school on monday during school term time if the father is able to deliver the children to school on time for the start of school on mondays, or until 6pm on sunday if the father is not in a position to deliver the children to school on time for the start of school on monday.   thereafter, the time be on alternate weekends from the end of school on friday until the start of school on monday during school term time if the father is able to deliver the children to school on time for the start of school on mondays, or until 6pm on sunday if the father is not in a position to deliver the children to school on time for the start of school on monday.
335 i find that from the school holidays at the end of term 2 in 2022, it is in the children’s best interest to begin spending some school holiday time with their father, once again limited to less than half of that school holiday period for that second term school holiday, but thereafter, being for half of the school holidays, making allowance for the special occasions of christmas, father’s day and mother’s day.
336 i find that it is not in the best interests of the children for there to be specific orders dealing with time between the children and their father on occasions of the children’s birthdays or the father’s birthday (and similarly for the mother’s birthday with the mother) and easter, as this can involve too many more non-school-to-school changeovers, with the attendant potential for displays of conflict between the parents. those special occasions will have to be enjoyed between the father and the children either when they occur if occurring during the time provided in the orders, or on the next available occasion of such time under the orders.
337 of course, it is open to these parents, as is always the case in parenting matters, to make their own arrangements outside of the orders by mutual agreement, but absent that mutual agreement, the orders of the court will apply. similarly, the orders apply if a request is made to vary and the other parent refuses.
338 i am very much aware that the amended response of the father filed 23 october 2020 and referred to at the commencement of the hearing as his moving application sought orders that he spend time with the children during school term time from 3pm friday until 5pm sunday and deleted previous orders sought in relation to him providing a spare uniform for the children and doing whatever is required to drop them off at school on monday, being an amendment of his original response that sought that the time be 3pm friday until 9am monday. however, it was stated clearly by mr strik at the very start of his submissions at the end of the hearing that the father was seeking the orders set out in his original response filed 13 april 2018. mr strik confirmed that position even after i questioned as to whether he was deliberately referring to the response of 13 april 2018 or accidentally overlooking the amended response of 23 october 2020. mr strik clarified that the october 2020 amended response was in consequence of the mother and children moving away to reside at suburb dd, but in consequence of the children having returned to suburb c primary school and, by implication, the mother having returned to that general area from suburb dd, the father reverted to the orders sought by him in the original response.
consideration of the balance of the orders sought by the parties
339 the mother sought an order that all prior parenting orders in relation to the children be discharged, but all parenting orders were interim orders and, as a matter of law interim orders do not survive the making of final orders in a proceeding.[90] this is now found in rule 5.01 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth): 01] on the making of final orders in a proceeding, any interlocutory order made in the proceeding, pending further order, is automatically discharged and ceases to have continuing effect.
340 there is no dispute that an order will be made that the children live with their mother.
341 i have found that it is not in the children’s best interest in this matter to make the orders sought by the mother that the father undertake a mental health assessment and comply with any treatment recommendations made in any such assessment. inherent in that, of course, is that no such order affecting the father will be made as a precondition to commencement of his time with the children.
342 i have determined what orders are properly be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration in relation to the time to be spent, on a graduating basis in relation to both term time and school holiday time, and time in relation to special occasions, between the children and the father.
343 the mother proposes an order that any changeover (being a changeover relating to the limited spend time orders she sought, which were confined to 9am to 1pm on sundays) take place at suburb c park, located at the corner of dd street and bb street. in line with the finding i have made in relation to any changeovers not will not occur at the children’s school, i consider it is probably in the children’s best interest to make the orders sought by the mother to cover such other occasions.
344 i find, on the basis of the whole of the evidence, that there is no basis to make the orders sought by the mother restraining the father from consuming any alcohol or taking any illicit drugs within 24 hours of the time he is to spend with the children or whilst the children are in his care, and the same applies to the orders sought by the father that each parent refrain from consuming any alcohol or taking any illicit drugs within 12 hours of the time he or she is to spend with the children or while the children are in his or her care.
345 the father definitely had a problem with misuse of alcohol up to at least 2012, and the father asserts that the mother had a problem with alcohol, but there is nothing in the evidence to show that either parent has a problem with alcohol, or is a user of illicit drugs, in the recent past or at the time of the hearing.
346 i do not intend to make either order.
347 it is appropriate to make an order providing for the children to be in the mother’s care for mother’s day and provide for the mother’s time with the children at christmas given that school holidays, by december 2022, will be shared between the parties.
348 i find it is in the children’s best interest that the parents keep each other informed in relation to their telephone contact details and an email address for communication, and that the father keep the mother informed of his residential address at all times, but not that the mother keep the father informed of her residential address.
349 i find that it is appropriate, given that i will make an order that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children in relation to matters going to their health and education, that she keep the father informed of any health matters affecting either child and in relation to the details of their schooling and education, including as to their reports and any individual school issues affecting either child, such as behavioural issues.
350 the mother seeks an order restraining the father from using abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating words about the mother and from discussing the proceedings or any documents filed or intended for use in the proceedings with the children and the father seeks an order in similar terms but binding on both parents. i find that it is in the best interests of the children for an order, in the common term sought by the parties, to be made in relation to both parents.
351 there was no evidence presented on the hearing in relation to an intent by either parent to take or send the children outside the commonwealth of australia or to go on an overseas holiday with the children and i find that it is not in the best interests of the children to make an order enabling either or both parents to take or send the children outside the commonwealth of australia for purposes of a holiday, or for any other purpose, at the present time.
352 in the event that either party seeks to travel overseas with the children, then they shall comply with the requirements of section 65y of the act and regulation 13 of the family law regulations 1984 (cth) in relation to the consent of the other parent, and the applicable legislation in relation to issue of a passport for each of the children, and in the absence of consent in relation to any of those matters, bring proceedings before the court. in the event that any such proceedings are rendered necessary by the withholding of a consent, then of course, costs may be a live issue for consideration by the court.
353 the mother seeks an order that:
the father be injuncted and restrained from attending any of the children’s extracurricular activities.
354 given the state of the relationship between the parents and the attitudes expressed by the father in his evidence, i consider it is in the best interests of the children that the parents not come together at the same place at the same time in the children’s presence any more than is absolutely necessary, pursuant to orders. accordingly, i consider it is in the best interests of the children to make an order of the nature sought by the mother but that such order be confined to extracurricular activities engaged in by the children whilst in the mother’s care, as opposed to any such activities they may engage in while spending time with the father.
355 in relation to the balance of the orders sought by the father not already addressed in relation to those sought by the mother, the father seeks an order the parties notify each other in writing if they intend to take the children interstate at least 72 hours prior to the intended travel and for the travelling party to provide to the non-travelling party the suburb and telephone numbers where the children will be staying.
356 i do not consider such an order is in the best interests of these children, and unless there are some exceptional circumstances in the matter, i do not see that such an order is commonly necessary in any proceedings as where a parent travels with children whilst the children are in their care, pursuant to orders (or mutual agreement), it is a matter for that parent. further, the mere crossing of state or territory borders is something that can happen in a day’s drive from sydney to canberra and back, and there is nothing in the evidence in these proceedings to justify such an order.
357 i will not make that order.
358 similarly, in relation to the orders sought by the father that 48 hours’ notice be provided to the other parent in the event that either parent intends to take their children intrastate for a period in excess of 48 hours. i find no justification in this matter for such an order.
359 the father seeks an order that he must do all things necessary to facilitate the children attending at their scheduled extracurricular activities during time they spend with him, provided he has been notified of the extracurricular activities no less than 14 days before the date they are scheduled to occur. i find it is in the children’s best interests to make such an order, particularly as it will probably relate to weekend sporting activities.
conclusion
360 on the evidence, the father and the mother do not like each other. they both love their children very much. each of the children love their father very much and love their mother very much.
361 the children’s relationship with their father has been disrupted for a number of years, and to a large extent, based on my findings in these reasons, the father is to blame.
362 the orders that i will make give the children the opportunity to resume their relationship with their father and to grow and develop that relationship as they work towards their teenage years and young adulthood. any continuation of the conduct that has marred these children’s lives, any “walking away” out of some feeling of personal slight, dishonestly justified as representing the children’s best interests, will hurt these children deeply in many ways - ways that may last throughout their lives.
363 when parents actually and honestly consider the best interests of their children as the paramount consideration, the way forward is plain. please follow it.
associate: dated: 4 april 2022
dated: 4 april 2022
[1] john fogarty am, ‘unacceptable risk: a return to basics’ (2006) 20 australian journal of family law 249.[2] mother’s affidavit at paragraph 42.[3] family report at paragraph 33.[4] family report at paragraph 33.[5] mother’s affidavit at paragraph 20[b].[6] a copy of the final advo is found in annexure “aa” to the wife’s affidavit. it is also referred to in paragraph 96 of the wife’s affidavit. [7] father’s affidavit at paragraph 63.[8] exhibit a1.[9] father’s affidavit at paragraphs 58 and 59. [10] father’s affidavit at paragraphs 55 and 56.[11] father’s affidavit at paragraph 57. [12] father’s affidavit at paragraph 45.[13] family report at paragraph 36.[14] family report at paragraph 38.[15] family report at paragraph 40.[16] family report at paragraph 43.[17] family report at paragraph 52.[18] family report at paragraph 57.[19] family report at paragraph 57.[20] family report at paragraph 85.[21] family report at paragraph 92.[22] family report at paragraph 94.[23] family report at paragraph 95,[24] family report at paragraph 95.[25] family report at paragraph 96.[26] family report at paragraph 96.[27] family report at paragraph 100.[28] family report at paragraph 101.[29] family report at paragraph 102.[30] family report at paragraphs 105 and 106.[31] family report at paragraph 107.[32] family report at paragraph 109.[33] family report at paragraph 110.[34] family report at paragraph 111.[35] family report at paragraph 113.[36] family report at paragraph 116.[37] family report at paragraph 123.[38] family report at paragraph 127.[39] family report at paragraph 129.[40] family report at paragraph 130.[41] family report at paragraph 132.[42] family report at paragraph 134.[43] family report at paragraph 136.[44] family report at paragraph 138.[45] family report at paragraph 139.[46] family report at paragraph 140.[47] family report at paragraphs 141 and 142.[48] family report at paragraph 144.[49] family report at paragraph 146.[50] original emphasis. [51] l & t [1999] famca 1699.[52] litchfield & beck [2010] fmcafam 969.[53] see especially, family law act 1975 (cth) s4ab. [54] family law act 1975 (cth) s60b.[55] family law act 1975 (cth) s65d(1). [56] family law act 1975 (cth) s65d(2).[57] family law act 1975 (cth) s60cc.[58] family law act 1975 (cth) s61da.[59] family law act 1975 (cth) s60b.[60] family law act 1975 (cth) s65daa(1)(a).[61] family law act 1975 (cth) s65daa(1)(b).[62] family law act 1975 (cth) s65daa(1)(c).[63] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21, 18.[64] m & m [1988] famca 11; (1988) flc 91-973.[65] a & a & the child representative [1998] famca 25; (1998) 22 famlr 756, 3.23 to 3.25.[66] napier & hepburn [2006] famca 1316; (2006) flc 93-303.[67] johnson & page [2007] famca 1235; (2007) flc 93-344.[68] deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82, 61.[69] eaby & speelman [2015] famcafc 104 (thackray, ryan, and forrest jj).[70] l& t [1999] famca 1699.[71]ams & aif (1999) flc 92-852.[72] l & t [1999] famca 1699, 57.[73] l & t [1999] famca 1699, 60[74] litchfield v beck [2010] fmcafam 969.[75]litchfield v beck [2010] fmcafam 969, 31.[76] litchfield v beck [2010] fmcafam 969, order (5). [77] jacks & samson [2008] famcafc 173.[78] jacks & samson [2008] famcafc 173, 9.[79] jacks & samson [2008] famcafc 173, 212.[80] bemert & swallow [2009] famca 5.[81] bemert & swallow [2009] famca 5, 82.[82] oberlin & infeld [2021] famcafc 66.[83] oberlin & infeld [2021] famcafc 66, 45.[84] family report at paragraph 129.[85] family report at paragraphs 127 and 123. [86] family report at paragraph 107.[87] family report at paragraph 116.[88] family law act 1975 (cth) s61da(2)(b).[89] pavli & beffa [2013] famca 144.[90] sadasivam & seshan [2019] famcafc 76; keskin & keskin [2019] famcafc 236.