last updated: 7 april 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ferman & lapham [2022] fedcfamc2f 415
orders
the court orders that:
1. by way of property adjustment, no later than 5 july 2022, mr lapham (‘the de facto husband’) shall pay to mr lapham (‘the de facto wife’) the sum of four hundred and eleven thousand, six hundred dollars ($411,400) by way of joplin lawyers trust account bsb ..., ...87.
2. in the event the de facto husband does not make the payment to the de facto wife in accordance with order 1, the following will apply: (a) the de facto wife is appointed as the sole trustee in relation to the sale of the properties at d street, suburb e (title reference ...), f street, town g (title reference ...) and h street, suburb j (title reference ... ) all in the state of new south wales (‘the properties’). (b) the de facto wife shall take all steps and execute all necessary documents to cause the properties to be listed with a real estate agent and sold by private treaty. (c) the properties shall be sold for a price agreed between the de facto wife and the agent. (d) the proceeds from the sale of the properties shall be distributed in the following manner and priority: (i) payment of agents’ commission, fees and expenses (if any) due on the sale, (ii) payment of any legal costs and other usual conveyancing adjustments of the sale, (iii) payment of the mortgage and other encumbrances affecting the property, (iv) payment as to the balance then remaining –  the de facto wife is appointed as the sole trustee in relation to the sale of the properties at d street, suburb e (title reference ...), f street, town g (title reference ...) and h street, suburb j (title reference ... ) all in the state of new south wales (‘the properties’). (b) the de facto wife shall take all steps and execute all necessary documents to cause the properties to be listed with a real estate agent and sold by private treaty. (c) the properties shall be sold for a price agreed between the de facto wife and the agent. (d) the proceeds from the sale of the properties shall be distributed in the following manner and priority: (i) payment of agents’ commission, fees and expenses (if any) due on the sale, (ii) payment of any legal costs and other usual conveyancing adjustments of the sale, (iii) payment of the mortgage and other encumbrances affecting the property, (iv) payment as to the balance then remaining –  payment of agents’ commission, fees and expenses (if any) due on the sale, (ii) payment of any legal costs and other usual conveyancing adjustments of the sale, (iii) payment of the mortgage and other encumbrances affecting the property, (iv) payment as to the balance then remaining –
1. to the de facto wife an amount representing 15% of the property pool (including superannuation) by way of joplin lawyers trust account bsb ... account ...87 plus any interest calculated from ninety (90) days from the date of the orders until payment is received in accordance with rule 10.17 of the federal circuit and family court rules 2021 (cth),
2. to the de facto husband the remainder of the balance,
noting that to calculate each party’s entitlement identified at order 2(d)(iv) above, the property pool (including superannuation) consists of:-
3. the de facto husband is restrained and an injunction shall issue prohibiting him from further encumbering the mortgages on the properties at d street, suburb e, f street, town g and h street, suburb j all in the state of new south wales until order 1 or order 2 is complied with .
4. by way of spousal maintenance, no later than 12 april 2022, the de facto wife receive the sum of forty seven thousand dollars ($47,000.00) from the joint monies held with joplin lawyers trust account (reference ...).
5. immediately upon compliance with order 4 above, the parties shall do all acts and things to authorise joplin lawyers to disburse to the de facto husband the remaining balance of the joint monies held with joplin lawyers trust account (reference ...) and this order shall serve as an irrevocable authority for that purpose.
6. except as otherwise set out in these orders, the de facto wife shall be solely entitled, to the exclusion of the de facto husband to all other property both real and personal in her ownership, possession and/or control.
7. except as otherwise set out in these orders, the de facto husband shall be solely entitled, to the exclusion of the de facto wife, to all other property both real and personal in his ownership, possession and/or control including but not limited to: (a) k street, town l in the state of new south wales, (b) the lapham family trust, (c) lapham industry pty limited, (d) lapham holdings pty limited, (e) his share portfolio, (f) in the event that order 1 is complied, with the following: (i) d street, suburb e (title reference ...), (ii) f street, town g (title reference ...), and (iii) h street, suburb j (title reference ...)  k street, town l in the state of new south wales, (b) the lapham family trust, (c) lapham industry pty limited, (d) lapham holdings pty limited, (e) his share portfolio, (f) in the event that order 1 is complied, with the following: (i) d street, suburb e (title reference ...), (ii) f street, town g (title reference ...), and (iii) h street, suburb j (title reference ...)  d street, suburb e (title reference ...), (ii) f street, town g (title reference ...), and (iii) h street, suburb j (title reference ...)
8. unless otherwise specified in these orders and except for the purposes of enforcing the payment of any money under these or subsequent orders: (a) each party hereby forgoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save as provided for in these orders, (b) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.  each party hereby forgoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save as provided for in these orders, (b) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.
9. save for any application for costs, all outstanding applications are withdrawn and dismissed.
the court further orders that:
10. the proceedings are adjourned to friday 13 may 2022 at 10.00am for an interlocutory hearing of any costs applications inclusive of any application pursuant to the federal proceedings (costs) act 1981 (cth).
11. insofar as it may be applicable, the notation made at order 3 on 18 february 2022 is discharged.
12. in support of the costs hearing, no later than friday 22 april 2022, the de facto wife is to file and serve:- (a) an application in a proceeding particularising the relief sought, (b) an updated single consolidated affidavit, and (c) other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely.  an application in a proceeding particularising the relief sought, (b) an updated single consolidated affidavit, and (c) other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely.
13. in support of the costs hearing, no later than friday 29 april 2022, the de facto husband is to file and serve:- (a) an application in a proceeding particularising the relief sought, (b) an updated single consolidated affidavit, and (c) other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely.
14. no later than friday 6 may 2022 the de facto wife is to file and serve any affidavit(s) in reply addressing only the evidence presented in the de facto husband’s affidavit(s).
15. no later than wednesday 11 may 2022, all parties are to file and serve a case outline document which shall include: (a) a list of the material relied upon, (b) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (c) a summary of contentions including as to s 117 factors relied upon to satisfy the court to make the orders sought, and (d) the findings of fact each party invites the court to make.  a list of the material relied upon, (b) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (c) a summary of contentions including as to s 117 factors relied upon to satisfy the court to make the orders sought, and (d) the findings of fact each party invites the court to make.
16. no later than wednesday 11 may 2022 each party shall file and serve a list of authorities which they intend to cite to the court during the presentation of any argument, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended that reference shall be made.
17. no later than wednesday 11 may 2022 each party is to file and serve a costs notice setting out the information specified at r 12.06(2) and/or 12.06 (3)(b) (as may be applicable).
18. each party will be permitted to only rely on one consolidated affidavit and one affidavit in reply (if applicable). reliance on earlier or additional affidavits will not be permitted.
19. on the basis of s 102na(1)(a), (b) & (c)(i) of the family law act 1975 (cth) the court is satisfied that the parties should have the protection that is provided by s102na(2) so that if either party is unrepresented they not be permitted to personally cross-examine the other party.
it is noted that:
reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction
1 these proceedings invoke part viiiab of the family law act 1975 (cth) (‘the act’) and to a lesser degree s117[1] of the act. the parties to the proceedings are:- (a) ms ferman (‘the de facto wife’), and (b) mr lapham (‘the de facto husband’).  ms ferman (‘the de facto wife’), and (b) mr lapham (‘the de facto husband’).
2 at the outset of this trial i handed down to the parties a list of all the court events in which they had participated over the course of these proceedings. i observed then, and now, that the parties’ procedural history is concerning and reminds me of the infamous fictional case of jarndyce v jarndyce which formed the background to charles dickens’ novel, “bleak house” which at times is a satirical commentary about how the court of exchequer operated in 19th century england. for the reasons that will follow, this decision is unlikely to be the end of the parties’ litigation journey, but it is my intent to give them “closure” over their substantive property adjustment and spousal maintenance dispute, inasmuch as my standing as the trial judge can.
3 the de facto relationship between the parties ceased after 1 march 2009 so as to superficially attract the jurisdiction of the act.[2] however up until 22 november 2019, the length of the relationship remained in contest, meaning that an interlocutory application for spousal maintenance filed by the de facto wife in december 2019 was held in abeyance because this jurisdictional aspect of the dispute only came to light after the hearing itself had concluded. this is but one aspect of the litigation pathway which reminds me of jarndyce.
4 the genesis for the proceedings was the final separation of the parties on 25 june 2016 and the subsequent desire on (at least) the part of the de facto wife, to secure her financial future in circumstances where she held no legal interest in any significant assets.
5 both parties asked the court to make property adjustment orders which necessarily involves the court considering whether the parties’ respective contributions warrant an adjustment (if any) of their existing property and superannuation interests (‘the property pool’) and, if so, how that adjustment should be achieved.
6 in addition, the de facto wife asked the court to make a lump sum spousal maintenance order (in lieu of her original application for regularised instalments) and there were consequential orders sought by the de facto husband pertaining to a reimbursement to him for part of the single expert costs paid by him along the litigation pathway.
7 further, it was evident from the procedural history of the proceedings, the parties’ relief and the evidentiary concessions made by at least the de facto wife, that a costs hearing was going to be required once i made orders regarding the substantive issues.
8 these reasons will also make comment about the overarching purpose[3].
9 for the reasons that i follow i propose to make orders that:- (a) adjust the parties’ property interests so that the de facto husband shall (overall) receive 85% of the property pool, with the de facto wife to receive 15% of the property pool, (b) award the de facto wife lump sum spousal maintenance payable by the de facto husband fixed in the sum of $47,000.  adjust the parties’ property interests so that the de facto husband shall (overall) receive 85% of the property pool, with the de facto wife to receive 15% of the property pool, (b) award the de facto wife lump sum spousal maintenance payable by the de facto husband fixed in the sum of $47,000.
10 in addition, i will list for hearing, the parties’ costs applications (including any claim related to single expert fees and/or the federal proceedings (costs) act 1981 (cth)). directions will also be made with which i expect both parties to comply, failing which, it is likely that any non‑compliance will be treated by the court as a party being in default with the consequential effects that arise from such a finding (see rr 10.26 and 10.27 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)[4]).
11 if a party is in default (either with the procedural orders to support the costs hearing and/or they fail to appear), then any application/submission made seeking relief other than contained within r 10.27 must be supported by an affidavit.
12 even if a defaulting party appears at the costs hearing, then it shall remain open to the court for the costs hearing to proceed on an undefended basis without further notice or the taking of submissions from the defaulting party.
the evidence
13 the de facto wife relied on/read the following documents: (a) affidavit of ms ferman filed 14 january 2022[5] (‘her/the de facto wife’s trial affidavit’), (b) financial statement of ms ferman filed 14 january 2022 (‘her/the de facto wife’s financial statement’), (c) affidavit of mr m filed 24 september 2021, (d) affidavit of mr n filed 15 february 2022, (e) affidavit of mr o filed 15 february 2022, (f) affidavit of mr p filed 16 february 2022, (g) affidavit of mr q filed 15 february 2022. (h) amended case outline filed 18 february 2022 – marked exhibit “w1”, (i) various documents that were tendered into evidence.[6]  affidavit of ms ferman filed 14 january 2022[5] (‘her/the de facto wife’s trial affidavit’), (b) financial statement of ms ferman filed 14 january 2022 (‘her/the de facto wife’s financial statement’), (c) affidavit of mr m filed 24 september 2021, (d) affidavit of mr n filed 15 february 2022, (e) affidavit of mr o filed 15 february 2022, (f) affidavit of mr p filed 16 february 2022, (g) affidavit of mr q filed 15 february 2022. (h) amended case outline filed 18 february 2022 – marked exhibit “w1”, (i) various documents that were tendered into evidence.[6]
14 before the de facto wife gave evidence, i heard and determined various objections to her written evidence and i do not intend to repeat them here.
15 the de facto husband relied on/read the following documents: (a) affidavit of mr lapham filed 2 february 2022[7] (‘his/the de facto husband’s trial affidavit’), (b) amended financial statement of mr lapham filed 18 february 2022 (‘his/the de facto husband’s latest financial statement’), (c) affidavit of ms r filed 2 february 2022, (d) affidavit of mr s filed 2 february 2022, (e) affidavit of ms t filed 31 january 2022, (f) amended case outline filed 18 february 2022 – marked exhibit “h1”, (g) a number of documents were tendered into evidence.[8]  affidavit of mr lapham filed 2 february 2022[7] (‘his/the de facto husband’s trial affidavit’), (b) amended financial statement of mr lapham filed 18 february 2022 (‘his/the de facto husband’s latest financial statement’), (c) affidavit of ms r filed 2 february 2022, (d) affidavit of mr s filed 2 february 2022, (e) affidavit of ms t filed 31 january 2022, (f) amended case outline filed 18 february 2022 – marked exhibit “h1”, (g) a number of documents were tendered into evidence.[8]
16 as alluded to above, each party sought the tender of various documents, most of which were drawn from the documents contained within their bundles of documents marked respectively as “mfi-1” (the de facto wife’s tender bundle) and “mfi-2” (the de facto husband’s tender bundle). this occurred before closing submissions. in accepting exhibit “h3”, i heard argument from counsel for the de facto wife that not all of the content within the 100+ pages contained within exhibits h3.12 to h3.44 were put to the de facto wife. junior counsel for the de facto husband accepted that was the case.
17 with the goal of ensuring the trial concluded within the allocated four (4) days, a discussion followed between bar and bench. the upshot was that i acknowledged that i would only read the content within exhibits h3.12 to h3.44 (being pages 200 to 307) that had been put to the de facto wife. on behalf of his client, junior counsel for the husband undertook not to make an appeal point out of my failure to read any other content within those same pages.
18 the de facto wife objected to the late filing of the de facto husband’s latest financial statement. having heard the argument, i gave leave for the de facto husband to read his latest financial statement. in doing so, i indicated that it would remain open to me as to what weight to give the document, in circumstances where exhibit “m1” expressed significant scepticism about the veracity of its contents.
19 counsel for the de facto wife accepted that his objections to the de facto husband’s trial affidavit were sent over the weekend, but of course, this timing could not have been assisted by the de facto husband’s failure to comply with the trial directions of the court. queen’s counsel for the de facto husband submitted that those objections were still being considered. queen’s counsel submitted that given the order of witnesses, it would not be prejudicial if he was given more time to consider those objections, particularly in light of his junior counsel taking the lead insofar as cross-examination of the de facto wife. again, given the time lost already in housekeeping matters, and without objection from counsel for the de facto wife, i acceded to queen’s counsel’s request.
20 at the commencement of the trial, the court heard that neither mr u nor mr v, whose affidavits were sought to be relied upon by the de facto husband, were single experts. this was of surprise to the court because the cover page to mr u’s affidavit read “affidavit of single expert witness”, as did the cover page to mr v’s affidavit.
21 concerningly, nowhere in the de facto husband’s amended case outline (‘exhibit h1’) is there a reference to a rule being relied upon to support the admission of the expert evidence of messrs mr u and mr v, nor any application or affidavit in support of the requisite leave application. to be absolutely clear about this i set out below the relevant entries drawn from the document referred to above –
husband’s documents 4. the de facto husband relies upon the following documents, noting of course that at this stage the de facto husband does not have leave to rely upon any documents pursuant to order 4(b) of the orders of 1 february 2022: ... affidavit of mr u filed 2 february 2022, ... affidavit of single expert valuer, mr v filed 31 january 2022. 7. in addition, the de facto husband will rely upon the affidavit annexing the valuation by mr v from w valuations. mr v valued the town l property on 17 january 2018 at $1.35million. 8. the wife also seeks to rely upon mr v’s valuation. mr v’s valuation forms exhibit f6 of the wife’s trial affidavit. ... 10. it is submitted that the affidavit of mr u gives a good overview of the contract between the de facto husband and the company, company x. company x is otherwise known as company y. 11. mr u is a commercial barrister. 12. mr u provides a review and analysis of the contract. 13. mr u gives evidence that the contract, inter alia: is a personal contract between husband and company x, does not attach to the land, provides company x significantly discretionary power to not only terminate the contract but also to formally suspend or take action against the de facto husband which would make the de facto husband liable to company x for significant sums, is therefore not saleable or transferable, has no equity in it, there is no equity in the contract, has a significant amount of compliance requirement for the de facto husband. ... 23. the valuation of the town l property by mr n as at december 2021 provides two valuations for the property. 24. one valuation “in use” is $1.9 million. 25. the second valuation “as is” is $1.45 million. 26. mr v does not value the property using “in use” or “as is” method.
22 in exhibit “h1” no order is sought for leave to rely upon the affidavits of messrs u and v and self-evidently there was no identification that leave was required.
23 it was common ground that mr n was the single expert real estate valuer, with correspondence sent by the de facto wife’s solicitor to mr n on 3 december 2021 seeking an “updated valuation” of the identified property. a circular copy of the letter was sent to the de facto husband’s solicitor. although i did not read mr v’s affidavit, it is apparent from the above excerpt from exhibit “h1” that there was some controversy about the methodology used by the two different real estate valuation experts.
24 although mr v may have produced a valuation on 17 january 2018 as a single expert, it was clear from the correspondence referred to above, that mr n had been tasked by the parties with producing a fresh valuation. in those circumstances, and noting r 7.08, i do not understand why exhibit “h1” did not explain more fulsomely that mr v was now being relied upon by the de facto husband, not as a “single expert valuer” but rather as an expert seeking to give evidence on the same issue as addressed by the more recent appointee.
25 all in all, i found this aspect of exhibit “h1” somewhat disingenuous, having the potential to waste the court’s time. this was because had the de facto husband pursued his claim for the admission of messrs u and v’s evidence, i may well have been asked to read what seemed to be written submissions about the admission of the material in circumstances where it was not overtly clear what was the legislative/evidentiary basis for the admission of their evidence. in this regard, i note that:- (a) in the case of mr u, it seemed that he was to give expert evidence about the effect of a commercial contract between the de facto husband and company x which (based on exhibit “h1”) appeared to have some relevance to the value to be attributed to the property upon which the commercial livestock enterprise operated and/or the likelihood of any transferable value associated with it, and (b) in the case of mr v, he was to give expert evidence about the same issue as mr n (the single expert witness) regarding the methodology adopted by mr n, this conclusion being drawn from what was said within exhibit “h1”.  in the case of mr u, it seemed that he was to give expert evidence about the effect of a commercial contract between the de facto husband and company x which (based on exhibit “h1”) appeared to have some relevance to the value to be attributed to the property upon which the commercial livestock enterprise operated and/or the likelihood of any transferable value associated with it, and (b) in the case of mr v, he was to give expert evidence about the same issue as mr n (the single expert witness) regarding the methodology adopted by mr n, this conclusion being drawn from what was said within exhibit “h1”.
26 in other words and drawn from exhibit “h1”, as best i could understand the roles of the two experts, mr u was being relied on as the de facto husband’s expert pursuant to r 7.10 and mr v was being relied on as an alternative or adversarial expert pursuant to r 7.08. if i have that wrong, then i can only say that i am taking my lead from exhibit “h1” but the point is, if there had been a contest about the admission, more time would have been lost while the de facto husband’s bases for leave was properly articulated.
27 in any event, before the problems with exhibit “h1” became apparent to me, i asked and heard nothing which satisfied me that the de facto husband had attempted to resolve any dispute he may have had with the existing single expert evidence through the use of the various mechanisms set out within division 7.1.6 of the family law rules.
28 i expressed my concern about the failure by the de facto husband to do so, because that division addresses ways in which a party can resolve disputes regarding the contents of a single expert’s evidence - including the provision of specific questions and conferencing with the single expert – without the need for court time being spent on the exercise. the court also reflected on the process by which a party can seek leave of the court to rely on an alternate or “adversarial” witness who, if appointed, can confer with the single expert with a view to reducing the issues in dispute and/or nullifying them completely.
29 the explanatory statement to the family law rules specifically says that when the court is considering an application for leave to permit an alternate expert, the court should have regard to the overarching purpose (r 1.04) as well as the purpose of the expert evidence.[9] the considerations and obligations of the various users of the court in relation to the overarching purpose are set out at ss190 and 191 of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 (cth) (‘the fcfcoa act’).
30 time was lost at the start of the trial, while counsel for the de facto wife summarised the objections to the proposed experts. time is a precious and expensive commodity for parties and the court. the court reiterated its concern to queen’s counsel for the de facto husband about why it should entertain an oral application to seek leave to rely on the two proposed experts, in the absence of any evidence of attempts being made to comply with the relevant rules and/or to otherwise resolve the dispute? over and above the obvious failings to comply with the family law rules, i was also concerned that the introduction of two more witnesses would have the potential of derailing the trial, leaving it part heard. it was agreed that the issue be put to one side, to be returned to if the de facto husband intended to press his application.
31 there was no agreement about a balance sheet and rather than lose more time, and having heard submissions from the parties, i determined to press on with the de facto wife’s evidence, anticipating that the parties could resolve this issue in a short time. no one opposed that course.
32 a joint balance sheet was tendered and marked exhibit “a”.
33 at times both parties were evasive or argumentative during cross-examination causing me to reflect on whether they were witnesses of credit. their behaviour could have been a by-product of their personality traits, the (unsurprisingly) emotional and financial toll that this protracted litigation has had on them, a pre-emptive reaction to the question itself, reflective of a more sinister motivation or a combination of all or some of the above.
34 it was uncontroversial that the de facto wife continued to receive centrelink benefits during the relationship without notifying centrelink of her changed financial circumstances, namely her entering into a domestic relationship with a man earning over $100,000 in each of the four relevant financial years.
35 in his trial affidavit, the de facto husband denies that he coerced the de facto wife into staying on centrelink benefits and says instead that he objected to her doing so and this caused fights between them.[10] the de facto wife says that the de facto husband told her to keep claiming the single parent’s benefit because she could then pay rent, allowing her to make a contribution towards the running costs of the h street, suburb j home and also increase the income stream received by the de facto husband.[11] she says that she has now approached centrelink to make it right.[12] she was cross-examined about this issue and i accept that she has engaged with centrelink and for this reason i do not intend to refer the matter for investigation.
36 on 5 february 2015, the de facto husband emailed his personal mortgage adviser, mr z saying that the de facto wife had been renting f street, town g (‘the f street, town g property’) for four years[13], something that was clearly misleading given that nowhere in the evidence is it suggested that the de facto wife lived in that property.
37 having considered the evidence, i am not satisfied that it supports a finding about the de facto husband financially coercing the de facto wife. i am satisfied that both parties are capable of financial dishonesty which (at times) informed the weight that i gave to their evidence.
38 in addition to the above circumstances, another example of why i have some difficulties with the de facto wife’s credibility was because i found her to be unnecessarily argumentative when asked questions about her son’s aa bank account and her control over the account despite it not being in her name. time was wasted on a line of questioning that was (in my view) going to lead to the inevitable conclusion that the de facto wife had control of that account which contained funds directly attributable to the parties’ de facto relationship and this was ultimately conceded by the inclusion of the account in the joint balance sheet.
39 the presentation of the de facto husband’s case also raised issues about whether he was a witness of credit. this was particularly so given the backdrop to the preparation of his written evidence - he engaged his current solicitor in october 2021 and had additional time to finalise his trial material because of his failure to comply with not one, but two sets of court orders regarding trial preparation. despite this, the de facto husband’s latest financial statement filed on the friday before the hearing was incomplete (on his oral evidence), with the potential to mislead. a more fulsome explanation of this aspect will be provided further on.
40 in addition, despite the de facto wife not being cross-examined at all about the authenticity of the voluminous text message and email communications that she said were exchanged between the parties, when taken to the documents, the de facto husband would repeatedly respond by saying words to the effect of “they are just words on a piece of paper”, “i would need to see the phone to prove it”.
41 furthermore, a clearly significant issue in the case was when the de facto relationship commenced. i say that because the outcome of the wife’s spousal maintenance was held up (in part) over a jurisdictional argument about the relationship not having endured for two years. at the latest, by 13 september 2021, the de facto husband would have known about this issue because it was the subject of the short-listing of a procedural hearing on that date to consider that aspect, and ultimately, in light of the impending trial in october 2021, the parties agreed to have the spousal maintenance issue determined then.
42 despite all of this background, during cross-examination he had a very vague recollection of significant dates or events that would either support or discount when the relationship commenced and at one point said words to the effect of - “i have written on a calendar anytime we did anything – because i didn’t want to get it wrong”. the calendar was never produced and from his trial affidavit (see paragraphs 119 to 124 and paragraph 5 versus 231) and in his oral evidence, i remained unclear about whether he was sure about when the de facto relationship commenced, let alone other significant events like the occurrence of overseas holidays (which would have lent support [or otherwise] for example, to the level of commitment the parties had) or when the de facto wife left the farm in 2015, etc.
background
43 the de facto husband was born in 1969 and is aged 52 years.
44 the de facto wife was born in 1980 and is aged 42 years.
45 there are twins born of the relationship between the de facto husband and his former partner ms bb (‘ms bb’).
46 in january 2006 the de facto husband separated from ms bb.
47 in 2007, cc was born, who is the de facto wife’s son to her relationship with mr dd (‘mr dd’). cc is 14 years old.
48 in 2008, ee (‘ee’) was born, and her parents are the de facto wife and mr dd. ee is 13 years old.
49 in 2011, the parties met on-line and struck up a relationship.
50 in july 2012, the de facto wife and her children moved into h street, suburb j (‘the h street, suburb j home’). the de facto husband returned to the h street, suburb j home on weekends when he was not working and rooms within the home were tenanted to other persons. in closing submissions it became an agreed fact that from this point, the de facto relationship commenced.
51 in 2013, following the breakdown of his earlier relationship, the de facto husband says that a property settlement was achieved which left him with five parcels of real estate and superannuation interests. in exchange, the de facto husband paid ms bb $553,000.
52 at some point in 2014, the de facto husband resigned from his position at employer ff.
53 the same year, lapham holdings (‘lh’) as trustee for the lapham family trust (‘the family trust’) purchased k street, town l (‘the farm’) for $1,350,000. after that, lh as trustee, entered into a deed of assignment with the vendors and company x pty limited (‘y). the deed related to the assignment of the existing “growing contract” which facilitated the raising of livestock that were delivered to the farm by y and after a certain period, the collection of the livestock for processing (‘the commercial livestock enterprise’).
54 by late 2014, the parties commenced living together at the farm.
55 in mid-2015, the de facto wife took her children and left the farm, staying with her parents.
56 on 20 july 2015, a new contract was executed between the relevant parties that was reflective of the operational commercial livestock enterprise being conducted on the farm.[14]
57 in october 2015, the parties reconcile with the de facto wife and the children returning to live at the farm.
58 in april 2016, the family trust purchased a small business at town l village.
59 on 25 june 2016, the parties separated.
60 on 28 june 2016, the de facto husband was charged with various offences and became the defendant to a preliminary apprehended domestic violence order (‘advo’) protecting the de facto wife and the children.
61 the de facto husband has been convicted of assaulting the de facto wife and cc as well as one charge of stalk/intimidate related to his domestic relationship.[15] he has also been convicted of breach advo. during this same period a final advo issues to protect the de facto wife and her children against the de facto husband. the term of the final advo was two (2) years.
62 in june 2017, the de facto husband commenced a relationship with ms r (‘ms r’) who has two children, gg and hh.
63 on 14 june 2017, the de facto wife commenced these proceedings.
64 on 12 september 2017, the court ordered the de facto husband to file and serve his responding material and make disclosure pursuant to the family law rules. the proceedings were adjourned for about two months.
65 on 22 november 2017, the proceedings were adjourned for four months with provision made for the court to finalise the proceedings in chambers in the event that satisfactory consent orders were received. in addition, interlocutory consent orders were made for the transfer of the motor vehicle 1 and the town l business to the de facto wife. by way of procedural orders, the parties agreed to appoint a single expert witness to value the farm including a specified mechanism to facilitate the appointment.
66 on 29 march 2018, the proceedings were adjourned for another four months.
67 on 27 july 2018, the parties were ordered to attend a conciliation conference in just over two months’ time. various orders were made to support the conciliation conference process and interlocutory consent orders were made for the parties to make mutual disclosure of various business records and to try and identify and (if possible) narrow the outstanding valuation issues.
68 on 24 october 2018, the parties attended a conciliation conference and with no resolution achieved, the proceedings were adjourned for about three weeks. there were various notations recorded which in summary identified that: the de facto husband had not transferred the business name for the town l business as previously ordered, the de facto husband had not provided real estate valuations for various properties despite an order by consent, but instead had provided market appraisals, the de facto wife asserted that the de facto husband had not made full disclosure despite requests to do so, the parties had obtained a valuation for the farm but not of various aspects related to the operation of the farm’s commercial livestock enterprise, a joint balance sheet could not be settled.
in addition, the registrar recorded that –
notwithstanding the above, the applicant indicated that she was prepared to engage in negotiations at the conciliation conference. the respondent indicated that he was not prepared to engage in negotiations at the conciliation conference.
69 on 12 november 2018, the proceedings were adjourned for three months with each parties’ costs reserved.
70 on 14 february 2019, the de facto wife was granted leave to file an application in a case and the court subsequently ordered the de facto husband to pay costs of $2,984 with the de facto wife’s costs reserved for this event and on 12 november 2018. a further order was made for the parties to exchange a list of what they said remained outstanding insofar as disclosure was concerned. finally, the proceedings were adjourned for four months.
71 on 30 july 2019 the proceedings were adjourned to a callover with each party’s costs reserved. in exhibit “h1”, and relative to this event i note that in late may 2019, the parties had apparently reached a final settlement of the proceedings but at this court event, the court declined to make the orders sought.[16] it was apparent from the de facto husband’s trial affidavit that at some point he paid $100,000 into the trust account of the de facto wife’s then solicitors, firm b (‘the trust account money’).
72 on 12 september 2019, the trial was set down and various orders were made in support of that event. in addition, interlocutory orders were made by consent appointing mr jj (‘mr jj’) as a single expert real estate valuer to value the h street, suburb j home and two other properties owned by the de facto husband. the de facto husband was ordered to pay mr jj’s costs.
73 on 2 december 2019, both parties had counsel appear following an interlocutory application filed by the de facto husband regarding the trust account money. an injunction issued prohibiting the de facto wife and her solicitor from dealing with the trust account money. each parties’ costs were reserved and the proceedings adjourned for a short period. a notation was made about the potential relevance of the court and the parties inspecting three transcripts.
74 on 12 december 2019, the de facto wife filed an amended initiating application which (relevant to the trial) sought leave for the de facto wife to be granted leave pursuant to s 44(6) to bring a spousal maintenance application and if leave was granted, for the de facto husband to pay the de facto wife $500 per week by way of interim spousal maintenance.
75 on 12 december 2019, the parties’ costs were reserved and the proceedings adjourned for interim hearing in three months’ time with notations made identifying the issues to be determined at the hearing.
76 on 20 march 2020 the interim applications were adjourned for a short period.
77 on 26 march 2020 the court reserved its decision, with the parties permitted to re-list on short notice once a copy of the complaint made about the wife’s solicitor had been obtained.
78 on 4 may 2020 the court dismissed the de facto husband’s application to restrain the de facto wife’s solicitor from continuing to represent her and the proceedings were adjourned for a short period for procedural hearing with a notation to the effect that the trial may need to be vacated. the court left open submissions being made by the parties regarding costs.
79 on 6 may 2020, all outstanding interlocutory applications were listed for hearing and the trial vacated with the proceedings listed for callover on a priority basis. each party’s costs of and incidental to the most recent interim application and this court event were reserved.
80 on 7 may 2020, the de facto husband filed a notice of address for service which reflected that he had changed legal representatives.
81 on 8 may 2020, the de facto wife filed a notice of address for service which reflected that she had changed legal representatives.
82 on 28 may 2020 the court granted leave for the de facto wife to apply for spousal maintenance with the outstanding interlocutory applications adjourned for hearing and all parties’ costs reserved.
83 on 1 june 2020 the interlocutory hearing was adjourned for priority hearing with procedural orders made to support the new hearing date and all parties’ costs reserved.
84 on 9 and 10 july 2020 the de facto wife’s interlocutory application for spousal maintenance was heard, with the hearing noted as part-heard and all parties’ costs reserved.
85 on 21 july 2020 the proceedings were adjourned to two separate dates, the first being related to issues regarding subpoenae and the de facto husband’s compliance with a notice to produce, and the second date appeared to be related to the part-heard spousal maintenance hearing. the parties’ costs were reserved.
86 on 14 august 2020 the court recorded that the parties had reached consent regarding the objection to subpoena and otherwise confirmed the further interlocutory hearing date.
87 on 17 august 2020 a chambers order was made addressing the subpoena notice of objection to the effect that the de facto wife was restrained from viewing or disseminating documents produced relating to the commercial livestock enterprise. in addition, the restraint as to dissemination included the solicitor for the de facto wife, with leave given to both parties’ legal representatives to copy.
88 on 22 september 2020, at the callover, the proceedings were allocated a four-day trial in just over a year’s time with various procedural orders made to support that event.
89 on 5 may 2021, consent orders were made relative to restraints on access for inspection and copying of material produced under subpoenae in a similar manner to the previous restraints made by consent on 17 august 2020. in addition, a mechanism was put in place to ensure that a single expert valuer was appointed. each parties’ costs were reserved.
90 on 25 june 2021 an interlocutory hearing took place with the court reserving its decision.
91 on 30 august 2021, and with the consent of the parties, the timeframe for filing each party’s trial documents was extended, with the court confirming the trial in october 2021.
92 on 7 september 2021, the de facto wife’s interim spousal maintenance application was adjourned for possible directions as to the re-opening of the case. although not apparent from the orders, it seems from the submissions of the de facto wife, that at about this time, it had become apparent that there may be a jurisdictional issue (related to the duration of the de facto relationship not being two years) which needed to be addressed before the court could make a decision.
93 on 13 september 2021 a consent order was made for the de facto wife’s interim spousal maintenance application to be determined at the final hearing.
94 on 8 october 2021, the trial was confirmed with orders made to support the parties’ personal attendance, access to a subpoena packet by the parties’ legal representatives only and the parties’ costs being reserved.
95 at the start of the trial on 11 october 2021, the de facto husband’s lawyers were granted leave to withdraw due to not having instructions. the trial was vacated and a determination of the de facto wife’s costs was adjourned for hearing later that same week. the effect being that the de facto wife’s spousal maintenance application remained outstanding.
96 on 14 october 2021, the de facto wife’s costs application was adjourned. on the adjourned date, the de facto husband was to inform the court whether he intended to pursue his claim about the de facto wife’s former solicitor. other orders were made including for the de facto husband to pay costs of $16,500 to the de facto wife’s former solicitor for her costs thrown away because the trial did not proceed. those costs were to be deducted from the trust account money. in addition, new trial dates were set together with trial directions.
97 on 22 october 2021, the de facto husband filed a notice of address for service indicating he had instructed a new legal representative.
98 on 22 november 2021, orders were made by consent for the de facto husband to pay the costs of the de facto wife for the aborted trial, fixed in the sum of $28,750. the costs were to be deducted from the trust account moneys. the former solicitor for the de facto wife was removed as a party. a notation was made that –
the de facto husband now accepts that the period, or the total of the periods, of the de facto relationship is at least 2 years.
99 on 18 january 2022 a chambers order was made by consent relative to the preparation of a tender bundle.
100 on 1 february 2022, various orders were made including that: (a) the de facto husband’s application to have the court issue various subpoenae was dismissed, (b) the de facto husband was permitted to issue a late subpoena, (c) the de facto husband was permitted to request the de facto wife’s father, mr m (‘mr m’) produce his diary notes, failing which the de facto husband had leave to issue a subpoena for the production of same, (d) the de facto husband was given leave to file and serve his trial material the following day with a determination on the admissibility of such material to be an issue at trial.  the de facto husband’s application to have the court issue various subpoenae was dismissed, (b) the de facto husband was permitted to issue a late subpoena, (c) the de facto husband was permitted to request the de facto wife’s father, mr m (‘mr m’) produce his diary notes, failing which the de facto husband had leave to issue a subpoena for the production of same, (d) the de facto husband was given leave to file and serve his trial material the following day with a determination on the admissibility of such material to be an issue at trial.
101 on 18 february 2022, following an application by the de facto husband, the trial judge recused himself and the trial was listed before me. the outstanding reserved judgement in the interim spousal maintenance application was vacated noting that the court will consider in chambers any relevant application that may arise pursuant to the federal proceedings (costs) act 1981 (cth).
102 on 21 february 2022, the trial proceeded and i reserved my decision at the conclusion of the fourth day.
parties’ proposals
103 the de facto wife sought relief which in summary proposed that:- (a) the de facto husband pay her $711,238 by way of property adjustment, failing which to secure her entitlement, the de facto wife be appointed sole trustee to sell three properties located at d street, suburb e and f street, town g as well as the h street, suburb j home with the sale proceeds to be disbursed to pay the usual sale expenses and property liabilities that may exist at the time, after which, she would receive her entitlement (plus default interest) and the de facto husband would receive the balance. (b) pending receipt of her entitlement, the de facto husband be restrained from further encumbering the three properties mentioned above. (c) the de facto husband pay $47,555.15 to the de facto wife by way of lump sum spousal maintenance which, in effect, would see the trust account money being disbursed entirely to the de facto wife. (d) declarations pursuant to s 90sl for each party to retain their existing interests in the property they have power, possession or control over. (e) a superannuation splitting order of $173,450.50 in favour of the de facto wife.  the de facto husband pay her $711,238 by way of property adjustment, failing which to secure her entitlement, the de facto wife be appointed sole trustee to sell three properties located at d street, suburb e and f street, town g as well as the h street, suburb j home with the sale proceeds to be disbursed to pay the usual sale expenses and property liabilities that may exist at the time, after which, she would receive her entitlement (plus default interest) and the de facto husband would receive the balance. (b) pending receipt of her entitlement, the de facto husband be restrained from further encumbering the three properties mentioned above. (c) the de facto husband pay $47,555.15 to the de facto wife by way of lump sum spousal maintenance which, in effect, would see the trust account money being disbursed entirely to the de facto wife. (d) declarations pursuant to s 90sl for each party to retain their existing interests in the property they have power, possession or control over. (e) a superannuation splitting order of $173,450.50 in favour of the de facto wife.
104 the de facto husband sought relief which in summary proposed that:- (a) the de facto husband pay $300,000 to the de facto wife by way of property adjustment. (b) the dismissal of the de facto wife’s spousal maintenance application. (c) declarations pursuant to s 90sl for each party to retain their existing interests in the property they have power, possession or control over.  the de facto husband pay $300,000 to the de facto wife by way of property adjustment. (b) the dismissal of the de facto wife’s spousal maintenance application. (c) declarations pursuant to s 90sl for each party to retain their existing interests in the property they have power, possession or control over.
the de facto relationship
105 it was uncontroversial that the parties were in a de facto relationship for a period of or the total of the periods amounting to two (2) years, ending 25 june 2016.[17]
106 at the commencement of the trial, there was a dispute about when the de facto relationship commenced which meant that either the de facto relationship endured for about four (4) years (the de facto wife’s case) or for about two years (the de facto husband’s case).
107 the de facto wife asserted that the de facto relationship commenced not later than july 2012 when she and the children moved into the h street, suburb j home. at paragraph 118 of his trial affidavit, the de facto husband agreed that this was when the de facto wife moved in.
108 from his trial affidavit and exhibit “h1” it was unclear when the de facto husband said the relationship commenced. at paragraph 126 of his trial affidavit, the de facto husband says that the parties did not live together full-time until i stopped working at employer ff and moved out of my f street, town g house and into the h street, suburb j house a few months before we moved to the farm in october 2014.
109 by the conclusion of the trial, and in light of the oral evidence given by the de facto husband, the dispute had resolved and i heard from queen’s counsel for the de facto husband that his client accepted that the parties were in a de facto relationship of about four (4) years from july 2012 to june 2016. in my view, the de facto husband’s concession was entirely consistent with the evidence.
110 the evidence easily established the parties’ commitment to the relationship, their commitment to a shared life and the public recognition of their domestic union. i am satisfied that on the balance of probabilities, the parties were in a de facto relationship for about four (4) years from july 2012 to june 2016.
111 in making this finding i accept that between july and october 2015, the parties were physically separated. although there appeared to be some contest about exactly when the parties considered their de facto relationship resumed (from an emotional and/or psychological perspective) - there was consensus that by late 2015, the de facto wife and the children had moved back to the farm to live with the de facto husband. in my view, this factual dispute is not significant, particularly given the final submissions made by both parties’ counsel that the relationship endured for about four years.
property adjustment – sections 90sm(4) and 90sf(3)
112 as identified within the high court’s decision in stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52, there is a legislative pathway that i should follow and in doing so, i am obliged not to assume the parties’ rights to or interests in property should be different from those that now exist or that a party has the right to have the parties’ property divided in accordance with the statutory considerations.
113 although stanford related to a married couple, the principles apply equally to applications brought by de facto couples pursuant to part viiiab of the act.[18]
114 the court may rely on the factors set out within s 90sm(4) of the act to inform its inquiry about the justice and equity of making property adjustment orders pursuant to s 90sm(3) of the act (see bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116 at [83] – [89], [163], [169], [171[-[172]).
115 i am required to make a holistic value judgement when exercising my discretion pursuant to the act and in doing so, i should not engage in an accounting exercise. in fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57, bryant cj and ainslie-wallace j said at [168]:
...the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial, and the analysis requires the court to weigh all of the contributions of all types prescribed by section 79(4) (s90sm (4) for my purpose) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.
116 in support of my observations about the court’s approach to a property adjustment decision, i set out the comments of the full court in grier & malphas [2016] famcafc 84 at [129], where murphy and kent jj said:
as the chief justice points out, with those principles in mind, the trial judge adopted a broad-brush approach to the parties’ respective expenditure. nowhere error is established by reason alone of that approach, authority eschews “overly pernickety analysis” and section 79 demands neither an audit nor an exercise in accounting. however, when significant sums of money are said by one party or the other to have been “wasted” or to amount to a unilateral “premature distribution of property” and the evidence is suggestive of either or both, an analysis of the relevant sums and their use is needed.
117 i heard submissions to the effect that the de facto wife pressed for the court to adopt a global approach to a consideration of the parties’ contributions towards the property pool whereas the de facto husband submitted that an asset-by-asset approach be adopted.
118 i have had regard to the high court decision in norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513 which held that both approaches (global or asset-by-asset) were legitimate and that the court could exercise its discretion based on which approach was more convenient, dependant on the circumstances of each case.
119 the de facto wife submitted that a global approach be adopted with a consequential adjustment of the non-superannuation property pool in her favour of 25% and an equalisation of the parties’ respective superannuation interests to reflect the different contributions made pursuant to s90sm(4) (a) – (c) and the matters raised by 90sf(3).
120 within exhibit “h1” the de facto husband submitted that a “two pool” approach be taken and that the payment of $300,000 to the de facto wife would reflect about a 10% adjustment of the property pool.
121 in exhibit “h1”, in support of the “two pools” approach it was urged that the three real properties at d street, suburb e, (‘the d street, suburb e property’), the f street, town g property and the h street, suburb j home be dealt with differently. the de facto husband submitted that this was because of his overwhelming contributions towards those assets because he held them at the commencement of the de facto relationship and the de facto wife made no contributions towards the conservation or improvement of the three properties during the de facto relationship or after separation.
122 during the course of cross-examination, and noting the limitations i have found as to the de facto husband’s credibility, i am satisfied that whilst the de facto wife made no significant direct financial contributions to the three properties, she did make other contributions towards the properties. for example, i accept that: (a) she paid weekly ‘rent’ of at least between $100 and $200[19] with those funds deposited into a variety of accounts over time including an account associated with the management of the f street, town g property and at least one other account in the name of the de facto husband. the significance of this arrangement is self-evident when the de facto husband had to engage with the anz bank about the farm debt because he expressly relied on the rental income being paid by the de facto wife to support the business plan.[20] i am able to make this finding because despite the de facto wife exhibiting email communications between the de facto husband and a personal mortgage adviser at the anz bank, she was not challenged about this. conversely, when the de facto wife’s contention was put to the de facto husband, he denied it, saying he had never seen the email communications before and that he definitely did not write it. (b) she took on various administrative roles to support the ongoing tenancies of the thee properties including organising wifi for tenants, drafting and placing advertisements for the rental of rooms, attending to maintenance checks of the f street, town g property and monitoring cc’s account to make sure rent was paid,[21] (c) she carried out works to improve the h street, suburb j home including painting, with the de facto husband saying by text, u r a good wifey. will need to do a min. of 2 coats. she also records other actions including varnishing floors, creating a gumtree advertisement to rent out rooms and the removal and replacement of the kitchen floor.[22] (d) she carried out maintenance at the d street, suburb e property including painting the bathroom ceiling, applying sugar soap to the walls, sanding and re-painting the walls (after the de facto husband had to repair holes in them caused by a former tenant).[23] exhibit “f25” shows photographs of the work she says she assisted with and/or carried out. (e) she attended the f street, town g property on at least one occasion to clean up after a tenant had vacated the property - vacuuming the third bedroom and washing down the walls and on other occasions she would assist the de facto husband in general cleaning and maintenance chores at that property.[24] (f) she continued to assist with the rental management of the three properties after moving to the farm including the use of an account in cc’s name to collect rent from the various tenants, with an expectation from the de facto husband that she would check the account to make sure the rent was being paid.[25]   she paid weekly ‘rent’ of at least between $100 and $200[19] with those funds deposited into a variety of accounts over time including an account associated with the management of the f street, town g property and at least one other account in the name of the de facto husband. the significance of this arrangement is self-evident when the de facto husband had to engage with the anz bank about the farm debt because he expressly relied on the rental income being paid by the de facto wife to support the business plan.[20] i am able to make this finding because despite the de facto wife exhibiting email communications between the de facto husband and a personal mortgage adviser at the anz bank, she was not challenged about this. conversely, when the de facto wife’s contention was put to the de facto husband, he denied it, saying he had never seen the email communications before and that he definitely did not write it. (b) she took on various administrative roles to support the ongoing tenancies of the thee properties including organising wifi for tenants, drafting and placing advertisements for the rental of rooms, attending to maintenance checks of the f street, town g property and monitoring cc’s account to make sure rent was paid,[21] (c) she carried out works to improve the h street, suburb j home including painting, with the de facto husband saying by text, u r a good wifey. will need to do a min. of 2 coats. she also records other actions including varnishing floors, creating a gumtree advertisement to rent out rooms and the removal and replacement of the kitchen floor.[22] (d) she carried out maintenance at the d street, suburb e property including painting the bathroom ceiling, applying sugar soap to the walls, sanding and re-painting the walls (after the de facto husband had to repair holes in them caused by a former tenant).[23] exhibit “f25” shows photographs of the work she says she assisted with and/or carried out. (e) she attended the f street, town g property on at least one occasion to clean up after a tenant had vacated the property - vacuuming the third bedroom and washing down the walls and on other occasions she would assist the de facto husband in general cleaning and maintenance chores at that property.[24] (f) she continued to assist with the rental management of the three properties after moving to the farm including the use of an account in cc’s name to collect rent from the various tenants, with an expectation from the de facto husband that she would check the account to make sure the rent was being paid.[25]
123 given the above findings about the de facto wife’s payment of “rent” and her non-financial contributions to the three properties sought by the de facto husband to be treated differently, i am satisfied that it is more convenient for me to adopt a global approach when considering the parties’ myriad of contributions towards the property pool.
124 the court has power to grant injunctions pursuant to s 114 if satisfied that such orders are proper for the protection of property, inclusive of positive and prohibitive restraints to maximise the equity available to parties arising from the sale of real estate assets included within the property pool.[26]
the parties’ existing property interests
125 by consent, the parties tendered a joint balance sheet (exhibit “a”).
126 taken from the joint balance sheet, the de facto wife’s property interests currently comprise:
description
value ($)
total ($)
assets
westpac account #...48 (item 9, joint balance sheet)
3,391
westpac account #...15 (item 10, joint balance sheet)
2,152
aa bank account #...18 in the name of cc (item 13, joint balance sheet)
7,964
westpac account #...29 – related to town l business (item 14, joint balance sheet)
10
westpac account #...10 – related to town l business (item 15, joint balance sheet)
123
motor vehicle 2 (item 17, joint balance sheet)
20,000
sub-total
33,640
liabilities
ato help debt (item 27, joint balance sheet) 443)
kk bank car loan #...44 (item 29, joint balance sheet) ,273) ,716)
nett assets 076)
superannuation
suncorp (item 30, joint balance sheet)
12,823
ato super held (item 31, joint balance sheet)
16
12,839
nett property
10,763
127 taken from the joint balance sheet, the de facto husband’s property interests currently comprise:
h street, suburb j (item 1, joint balance sheet)
900,000
d street, suburb e, (item 2, joint balance sheet)
840,000
f street, town g (item 3, joint balance sheet)
280,000
lapham holdings, lapham industry, the lapham family trust (item 4, joint balance sheet)
1,051,576
shares – company ll (item 5, joint balance sheet)
3,056
shares – company mm (item 6, joint balance sheet)
5,628
anz bank account #...72 (item 11, joint balance sheet)
*702
3,080,962
anz mortgage #...92 (d street, suburb e) (item 22, joint balance sheet) 3,534)
nn bank mortgage #...58 (h street, suburb j) (item 23, joint balance sheet) 5,952)
anz mortgage #...28 (f street, town g) (item 24, joint balance sheet) ,168)
anz credit card/loan #...72 (item 25, joint balance sheet) 5) 9,779)
2,441,183
super fund oo (item 32, joint balance sheet)
362,186
2,803,369
* in the absence of specific submissions and noting that the only documentary evidence i have is the de facto husband’s latest financial statement specifying a balance of $702, i have relied on that evidence.
128 relying on the information set out in the above tables, the property pool consists of:- nett combined non-superannuation property $ 2,439,107 superannuation in the de facto husband’s name $ 362,186 superannuation in the de facto wife’s name $ 12,839 total property pool $ 2,814,132
section 90sm(3)
129 the de facto relationship endured for about four years, between july 2012 and june 2016. there was a period of about three months in the second half of 2015 when the parties were physically separated. during this period, it is common ground that the de facto husband sold the land adjacent to the h street, suburb j home[27] and entered into a contract with y regarding the commercial livestock enterprise. i also note that during this time, ee had surgery and the de facto wife was primarily responsible for caring for her during her recovery which, at least at the start, occurred at the home of mr m and his wife.[28]
130 in my mind, not much turns on this period of separation as it is evident from the communications between the parties that during this time, the de facto husband relied on the de facto wife to assist him with the ongoing financial management of the farm and the commercial livestock enterprise.
131 the principle assets are real property and commercial interests held in the de facto husband’s name or in entities he solely controls. in addition, the de facto husband holds a significant interest in superannuation. it is undisputed that the de facto husband made the overwhelming initial financial contributions and without his property interests, the farm would not have been acquired.
132 the parties did not hold or acquire property in joint names. however, during the course of the relationship, their finances were intermingled insofar as, for example, they used the de facto husband’s rental income (deposited into cc’s account and otherwise called “the holiday account”) to pay for their travel. cc’s account is listed on the joint balance sheet and it was common ground that the account continues to hold the remainder of the rental income.
133 both parties seek that a property adjustment order be made.
134 the de facto wife asserts that a 25% adjustment should be made in her favour out of the parties’ non-superannuation property and that there be an equalisation of the parties’ superannuation interests. the de facto husband proposes that he pay the de facto wife a lump sum of $300,000 in addition to the other property interests she has now.
135 i am satisfied that arising out of the de facto relationship between the parties, each of them has acquired legal and equitable interests in property that are now held separately by them.
136 although there is a dispute about how their respective property interests should be adjusted, i am assisted by the agreement of the parties that their respective property interests and rights require alteration.
137 on the basis of the above, i am satisfied that it is just and equitable to consider each party’s respective property interests and rights to determine an alteration of their various interests pursuant to s 90sm and possibly s 90xt.
section 90sm(4) and 90sf(3)
138 at the commencement of the relationship the de facto husband was employed as a contract tradesman at employer pp. there is no evidence about the value of the de facto husband’s initial contributions as at july 2012.
139 it is apparent from paragraph 73 of his trial affidavit and some of the business records at exhibit “w2.13” that in 2013, the de facto husband borrowed $500,000 on the suburb qq property to pay to his former wife.
140 in addition, the single expert report from mr o (‘the business valuation’) identified that as at 30 june 2013, lapham pty limited (‘li’) operated a construction business and opined the net value of li to be $57,637. it is common ground that the de facto husband is the sole director and shareholder of li.
141 doing the best i can - relying on the 2011 retrospective valuations exhibited by the de facto wife at exhibit “f9”, the business valuation and the de facto husband’s trial affidavit at paragraph 71 – as at july 2012, i have drawn the following information about what the de facto husband may have held an interest in or a right to (and its value where ascertainable):- (a) super fund oo superannuation $95,000 (b) cash at bank 23,500 (c) rr street, suburb qq* nk (d) less mortgage debt ($92,500) nk (e) d street, suburb e e$380,000 (f) less mortgage debt ($ 92,500) 287,500 (g) f street, town g $ 230,000 (h) less mortgage debt ($110,000) $120,000 (i) h street, suburb j $375,000 (j) h street, suburb j** nk (k) less mortgage debt secured over one or   super fund oo superannuation $95,000 (b) cash at bank 23,500 (c) rr street, suburb qq* nk (d) less mortgage debt ($92,500) nk (e) d street, suburb e e$380,000 (f) less mortgage debt ($ 92,500) 287,500 (g) f street, town g $ 230,000 (h) less mortgage debt ($110,000) $120,000 (i) h street, suburb j $375,000 (j) h street, suburb j** nk (k) less mortgage debt secured over one or
both (?) h street, suburb j properties 110,000 e$265,000  li e57,000
* ‘the rr street, suburb qq property’ ** ‘the h street, suburb j land’
142 in 2013, the de facto husband said that he changed sites to work at employer ff and traded through lapham pty ltd (‘li’), being a one man business.[29] there is evidence that li also operated some sort of construction business[30] but this did not appear to be a significant issue in the case.
143 on 2 april 2014, l was incorporated and acts solely as the trustee for the family trust. it is common ground that the de facto husband is the sole director and shareholder of lh. the de facto husband is the appointor of the family trust.[31]
144 on 19 september 2014, lh entered into a contract to buy the farm. the purchase price was $1,350,000 using a deposit of $135,000.[32] in cross-examination, the de facto husband was challenged about paragraph 80 of his trial affidavit where he asserted the “actual cost” was $1,428,000. having heard the de facto husband’s evidence, and reflecting on exhibit “w2.13” (being a diary note from staff at the anz who were being asked to finance the purchase), i am satisfied that irrespective of whether $5,000 was spent purchasing or repairing heaters on the farm, the de facto husband paid for and/or was responsible for securing finance for the capital cost of the purchase including incidentals such as legal fees and stamp duty. it is apparent from the above exhibit, that the anz was considering the finance of the farm based on the sale of the rr street, suburb qq property and the h street, suburb j land.
145 it was conceded by the de facto wife that without the de facto husband’s financial circumstances, the farm would not have been acquired.
146 as noted earlier, on 3 october 2014, the deed of assignment was entered into.[33]
147 arising from a scheduled financial review conducted between the de facto husband and the anz bank, the de facto husband sold the rr street, suburb qq property for $941,000 and the h street, suburb j land for $370,000. the de facto husband says that in january 2015 (after the sale of the rr street, suburb qq property) sale proceeds of $400,000 were deposited to the farm mortgage.[34] in october 2015, the de facto husband says he sold the h street, suburb j land for $370,000 and says that $300,000 was used to reduce the loan on the farm and at the same time the mortgage over the h street, suburb j home was re-financed to cover a capital gains tax liability of $47,812.90 which arose from the sale of the h street, suburb j land.[35]
148 in his affidavit, mr s (‘mr s’) identifies that he has been the accountant for the de facto husband since 2006. mr s says that in december 2014, he recorded a $400,000 loan from the de facto husband to the family trust arising from the sale of the rr street, suburb qq property. about a year later in october 2015, mr s says that $300,000 from the sale of the h street, suburb j land was paid into the anz loan held by the family trust and again this amount was recorded as a loan from the de facto husband to the family trust.
149 as at 30 june 2016, the business valuation assessed the value of the de facto husband’s interests as follows:- (a) family trust $nil (b) li $124,000 (c) lh $nil (d) related party loans $675,352  family trust $nil (b) li $124,000 (c) lh $nil (d) related party loans $675,352
150 in addition, it was uncontroversial that sometime between 2018 and 2020 the de facto husband caused a new shed (‘shed 3’) to be built on the farm and the upgrade of the existing two sheds so that he could run a “free range” operation. at paragraphs 103 and 104 of his trial affidavit, it appears that it cost either $440,000 to build a third shed and upgrade the other two, or $440,000 to build shed 3 and another $80,000 to upgrade the other two sheds. from the evidence, it is unclear to me whether funds were borrowed to construct shed 3 although the de facto wife says she thought he may have.[36] in any event this lacuna is a moot point in circumstances where there was no evidence of a lump sum amount being contributed by the de facto husband at the relevant time, the parties adopted a nett value for the various entities held by the de facto husband (which included the farm upon which shed 3 is located) and there was single expert evidence about the farm which included alternate current values for shed 3.
151 taking up that latter point, mr n in his single expert report (‘the real estate valuation’), records shed 3 has having been built circa 2019. the real estate valuation applied a summation valuation approach on an ‘in use’ basis subject to a commercial livestock contract to record that shed 3 as adding value (including fixed plant and equipment) of $411,470. in the same report, adopting the same summation valuation approach but on a ‘vacant possession’ basis excluding a commercial livestock contract, shed 3 is recorded as adding value (including fixed plant and equipment) of $241,515.
152 i did not hear or read any specific submissions about these competing values but either way, there is no doubt that shed 3 has improved the overall value of the farm, albeit that impact may have been ameliorated if there was an increase in debt to fund construction. nonetheless, to the extent that the evidence allows me to, i have had regard to this post-separation contribution made by the de facto husband post-separation.
153 it was uncontroversial that the de facto husband has worked long hours on the farm[37] and continues to operate the commercial livestock enterprise on his own, albeit it would appear that at times, such as when the livestock babies first arrive, other people help out. it is also uncontroversial that the de facto husband has had the benefit of exclusive occupation of the farm since the parties separated and there was no evidence to suggest that he has done anything to diminish its value or has otherwise failed to maintain the farm.
154 it was apparent to me that the farm has become his passion, in which he has invested significant amounts of capital, time and energy - so much so, that in cross-examination i observed his face to physically redden with emotional distress when questions were asked about whether (and at what price) he would consider selling the farm.
155 i was invited to look at the parties’ (and in particular) the de facto husband’s direct financial contributions through the income he earned and the increase in his superannuation. i have had regard to the evidence but also note that property adjustment proceedings should not become an “accounting exercise.”[38]
156 for the reasons above, i am satisfied that initially, during and after the de facto relationship ended, the de facto husband has made very significant financial and non-financial direct and indirect contributions towards the operation of the commercial livestock enterprise and to the acquisition, conservation and improvement of the property pool.
157 at the commencement of the relationship the de facto wife was in receipt of centrelink benefits and although entitled to child support, rarely received any payments. it was common ground that when she moved into the h street, suburb j home, she operated a mobile business and also worked as an entertainer.
158 the de facto wife was cross-examined about the income she earned during the relationship. although i acknowledge that, at times, the de facto wife’s evidence about her employment was argumentative and/or evasive (at one point she described her activities as “i wouldn’t call it a business...it’s a hobby...it’s not a registered business”), in the absence of any business records showing substantial and consistent sums received by her or purchases made by her, i am satisfied that her income was insignificant as compared to that of the de facto husband.
159 her evidence was largely consistent with her written evidence and the dearth of business records that would ordinarily be produced if a profit or income-earning enterprise existed. at no relevant time has the de facto wife earned any significant income, and it was uncontentious that if she made a profit from her work, it was (respectfully) insignificant to the income of the de facto husband.
160 the de facto wife says at paragraph 147 of her trial affidavit that in 2012, her nett non‑superannuation property was worth about $12,000 and her superannuation worth about $9,000. she did not contribute any property during or after the de facto relationship ended. the de facto wife said that at separation she had personal savings of $22,000.[39]
161 it was common ground that post-separation and as a result of consent orders made on 22 november 2017, the de facto wife was entitled to the business at town l (‘the town l business’) and a motor vehicle 1 (which she subsequently traded in for the motor vehicle 2 she currently owns).
162 it was uncontentious that the town l business was purchased by the family trust just before the parties’ final separation with start-up costs of under $10,000. the de facto wife says (and i accept) that she was the driving force behind this acquisition which post-separation has ultimately closed down. there may be some remaining stock and/or equipment held by the de facto wife (just as the de facto husband may have had the benefit of cash taken from a bank account associated with the town l business), but in the absence of any compelling submissions, i make no finding about the parties’ contribution towards the town l business.
163 i note my earlier findings about the de facto wife’s contributions towards the d street, suburb e property, the f street, town g property and the h street, suburb j home. in addition, given the issues of credit arising from the de facto husband’s oral evidence, i accept that the de facto wife also created the gumtree advertisement for the sale of the rr street, suburb qq property and that she helped paint its exterior.[40] against her own interests, she also acknowledged the work that the de facto husband did on the property, which only lends weight to her evidence.
164 the de facto husband was challenged about the assistance the de facto wife gave the de facto husband in the operation of li when he was a contractor. various exhibited communications were put to the de facto husband including for example, an email from the de facto wife to “ms ss” dated 17 may 2013. in summary, the de facto husband challenged the authenticity of the emails and said that his bookkeeper (ms t) handled that work and/or that he did not produce invoices but rather he got paid by filling out time sheets.
165 within ms t’s affidavit she says that she carried out all bookkeeping activities for the business including data input and reconciliation of entries to his (the de facto husband’s) business myob file...i was also responsible for the preparation and lodgement of the quarterly bas statement for the business. the affidavit was filed after the de facto wife filed her trial affidavit and in my view the lack of specificity in ms t’s evidence as to the tasks she undertook, combined with the argumentative manner in which the de facto husband responded towards the tendered emails and more generally this issue during cross examination, causes me to infer that the evidence of the de facto wife should be preferred over the de facto husband because her evidence is not inconsistent with ms t’s.
166 the de facto wife asserted that she had made non-financial contributions towards the acquisition of the farm. in support of this contention, the de facto husband was challenged about exhibit “w2.13” and he agreed that he was aware that the de facto wife had experience working on a farm. the de facto wife’s evidence of farming experience at paragraphs 221 and 223 of her trial affidavit, lends support to her involvement in the acquisition process, because even before the farm was purchased the preferred financier, the anz bank was being informed about the experience that the de facto wife and her father would bring to the future operation of the farm.[41] in response to a question in cross-examination, about whether his evidence remained that the de facto wife had no involvement in the purchase of the farm, the de facto husband said, “we were in a relationship, she was around all the time.” in my view, his response was particularly evasive when it didn’t need to be. given the documentary evidence i am satisfied that the de facto wife did assist in the acquisition process, albeit i wish to be clear to say, that without the de facto husband’s financial resources, the parties’ dream to have in effect a “tree change” would never have come to fruition.
167 in addition to the above finding, i also prefer the de facto wife’s evidence about her contributions towards the conservation and improvement of the farm (and the associated commercial livestock enterprise). my preference for the de facto wife’s evidence was informed by the absence of cross-examination about most of the work she alleged she did (see for example paragraph 229 of her trial affidavit). her evidence under cross examination persuaded me that she was involved in the “clean-out” process too, as well as a large portion of the record‑keeping, particularly related to information sought by y.[42] in my view, my finding that the de facto wife did make contributions towards the farm is supported by what the de facto husband said in response to a question about the anz diary note dated 11 november 2015,[43] being -“yes she did help”.
168 although the two diary notes referred to above and found at exhibit “w2.13” were not written by either party, the source of information must have come from the de facto husband (based on his evidence as to his sole involvement with the bank) and indicates to me that the anz had an expectation that before and after the farm was purchased, there was an expectation that the de facto wife was and did help work this livestock farm.[44]
169 in addition, during the short period in the latter part of 2015 when the parties separated, the pleas within the text messages from the de facto husband to the de facto wife (exhibited at “f28”) are compelling, for example –
09.07.2015 at 7.52:14...would u be able to come show me how to do some of the stuff u do in the business. i am lost without u. i don’t even know how to do the weekly report or work out total mort%. i just need u to answer some questions about business. 16.07.2015 at 12.23:38pm r u going to do the weekly scan.
170 as referred to earlier, the authenticity of the communications put to the de facto husband were not the subject of challenge in cross-examination of the de facto wife and despite the de facto husband’s disbelief that he would have written those messages, i accept the communications (including those above) as being an accurate record of the parties’ communications with each other.
171 the communications are also consistent when read in tandem with the de facto husband’s own evidence about the work he does on the farm. in his trial affidavit, under the heading my routine at the farm nowhere does the de facto husband describe any form of record keeping or bookwork. in light of the de facto husband’s communications with the de facto wife, i find the de facto husband’s statement at paragraph 96 of his trial affidavit somewhat disingenuous, particularly given paragraphs 230 and 229 at (e), (g), (h), (o) and (p) of the de facto wife’s trial affidavit.
172 in light of the above, i find that the de facto wife did make a myriad of contributions to the farm and the commercial livestock enterprise.
173 in light of the de facto husband’s evidence about the 10-12 hour days he worked on the farm and the de facto wife’s evidence about her role as homemaker and parent i am satisfied that (without any criticism of the de facto husband’s documented work ethic), the de facto wife made significant contributions to the welfare of the family.
174 it was uncontentious that since final separation, the de facto wife has made no contributions towards the significant items of value recorded within the joint balance sheet. i have already recorded my findings insofar as the de facto husband’s contributions are concerned.
175 it was submitted and i accept that the de facto husband’s contributions should be accorded appropriate weight (see pierce v pierce [1998] famca 74 at [23] – [30], [40]) particularly given that it was uncontroversial that without the de facto husband’s superior holdings, the farm would not have been purchased. in addition, shortly thereafter, two of the de facto husband’s real properties were sold (and the proceeds put towards debt reduction) as part of a financial review conducted by the anz bank.
176 in other words, without the de facto husband’s superior real estate holdings there would have been no “springboard” upon which the farm could have been purchased and there would be significantly more debt attributed to the farm, had the rr street, suburb qq property and the h street, suburb j land not been sold.
177 although each matrix of facts coming before the court is different, it is relevant to note the full court decision in jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78 which involved a 27-year relationship where an issue as to contributions including the de facto husband's superior initial financial contribution were at the crux of the appeal but also where there was a form of ‘windfall’ during the relationship not evident here.
178 in jabour, the court set out an historical consideration of the relevant authorities in respect of this vexed issue of the weight to be afforded parties where there are unequal initial contributions. significantly, from jabour and as emphasised by me already, the court’s consideration is holistic in respect of the myriad of contributions that are brought to a relationship and the trial judge should not extract and consider any particular contribution in isolation. the crucial ingredients of any such consideration involve factors such as the duration of the relationship, the quantum of the property pool and the context, effect and relativity of the parties’ various contributions (both financial and non-financial).
179 for example:- (a) the duration of the relationship will usually be indicative of there being numerous and varying contributions, (b) the nature of a contribution may still be evident in the ongoing existence of a particular asset or later purchased assets or being used as a 'springboard' for current wealth, (c) alternatively, there may have been a contribution of an asset of rapidly depreciating type (such as ordinary household furniture) and hence of little current relevance to the parties’ current financial circumstances.  the duration of the relationship will usually be indicative of there being numerous and varying contributions, (b) the nature of a contribution may still be evident in the ongoing existence of a particular asset or later purchased assets or being used as a 'springboard' for current wealth, (c) alternatively, there may have been a contribution of an asset of rapidly depreciating type (such as ordinary household furniture) and hence of little current relevance to the parties’ current financial circumstances.
180 in assessing each party’s contributions, the length of the relationship is important, particularly when it is evident that capital contributions made early are a dominant feature of the assessment: see wallis & manning [2017] famcafc 14 at [117].
181 in pierce, the full court said:
28. in our opinion it is not so much a matter of erosion of contribution but a question of what weight is to be attached, in all the circumstances, to the initial contributions. it is necessary to weigh the initial contributions by a party with all other relevant contributions of both the de facto husband and the wife. in considering the weight to be attached to the initial contribution, in this case of the de facto husband, regard must be had to the use made by the parties of that contribution.
182 however, the contributions made by parties are not assessed according to whether they in fact produced a gain (see jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78 at [61] and dickons & dickons (2012) famcafc 154 at [14]).
183 the court must treat the de facto husband’s superior initial contributions as one of those myriad of contributions to this relationship rather than weighing the myriad of contributions during the relationship against his initial contributions reflected primarily in him being able to acquire the farm and maintain significant real estate and superannuation interests.
184 to support the differential in contributions, during his closing submissions, queen’s counsel for the de facto husband reminded me of how long the de facto husband had owned each of the five real properties he contributed at the commencement of the de facto relationship.
185 i have had regard to those submissions and to how the de facto husband’s labour, income and property interests have led to the acquisition of the farm, the retention of three other real properties and the ongoing maintenance/improvement of all his superannuation and non‑superannuation interests. through their respective relief, both parties accepted that there was a differential in his favour.
186 using a broad brush approach, from the de facto wife’s perspective, she asked the court to reflect on any differential of property adjustment to the de facto husband through a consideration of the s 90sf(3) factors and her contributions being made more arduous as a result of the family violence she endured. the de facto husband submitted that the de facto wife’s work history and employment status were unclear on the evidence and further that consideration should be given to the de facto husband’s contribution to the non-biological children of the relationship.
187 i have had regard to the de facto husband’s contributions towards the non-biological children forming part of the relationship. given the de facto wife’s evidence about her role in caring for the children of the de facto husband, i have also had regard to her contributions, albeit these were quite limited in circumstances where those children did not live full-time in the household and sensibly in my view, perhaps that is why a tactical decision was not made to strongly pursue this issue in cross-examination.
188 turning back then to the de facto husband’s contention, his contribution in assisting in the care of cc and ee as his non-biological children and in providing financial support for them must be assessed in a meaningful way pursuant to s90sf(3)(r) (see zaruba & zaruba [2017] famcafc 19 at [53] and in the marriage of robb and robb [2994] famca 136). in that regard i note that it is uncontroversial that the children lived primarily with the de facto wife and she received little to no child support from the children’s father during the de facto relationship, but that post-separation she did receive a significant lump sum.
189 however, circumstances which weigh against the de facto husband’s contribution are the short duration of the relationship and his large absences from the h street, suburb j home in the first half of the de facto relationship (due to his work commitments in the region ddd). for these reasons, i am not satisfied that a robb & robb contribution favours the de facto husband.
190 the de facto husband was cross-examined about his income and the differences recorded in the two financial statements he filed 16 days apart in february 2022. from his evidence, it was apparent to me that he is an unsophisticated party which (of itself) lends weight to the veracity of what the de facto wife says about how she was largely in control of the administrative side of the commercial livestock enterprise.
191 however, whilst acknowledging the de facto husband’s oral evidence that in preparing his financial statements he relied heavily on his accountant and (to a lesser degree) his lawyer, the plain reality is that he is the person making the declaration to the court about being aware of his obligation to make full and frank disclosure and that, in particular he has –
...no income, property or financial resources other than as set out in this document or any affidavit filed ... under rule 6.06(6).[45]
192 a reading of the business valuation shows that mr o identified that the family trust myob general ledger account for drawings for the year ended 30 june 2021 disclosed a net debit for the year of $18,876.[46] in the same paragraph he assumes this amount is attributable to the de facto husband and includes legal expenses and amounts which appear to be private in nature.
193 exhibit “w2.25” is a tabulation of payments from the lh anz account #...33, made to the de facto husband’s family law service providers between 5 july 2021 and 14 february 2022. it shows an eye-watering $212,924 was withdrawn, including $60,000 paid to the de facto husband’s current solicitors in the 10 days between 4 and 14 february 2022. the de facto husband’s latest financial statement makes no disclosure of any drawings from the family trust. the de facto husband agreed with that proposition in cross-examination.
194 instead, at part d of his latest financial statement, the de facto husband says he earns $3,455 arising from:- (a) $ 100 total salary or wages before tax (b) $ 10 being the combined dividends from his shareholdings with company mm and company ll, (c) $1,145 being rental income (d) $2,000 being a dividend from li (e) $ 200 being sale of cattle sold by the family trust  $ 100 total salary or wages before tax (b) $ 10 being the combined dividends from his shareholdings with company mm and company ll, (c) $1,145 being rental income (d) $2,000 being a dividend from li (e) $ 200 being sale of cattle sold by the family trust
195 even if the $2,000 described in his latest financial statement as a dividend from li is one and the same as the drawings taken out of the trustee’s bank account, an extrapolation of that figure does not add up. for example, over a short period - from 18 january 2022 to 18 february 2022 there was $120,000 withdrawn equally $30,000 per week. in another example, in the medium term - from say 1 july 2021 when over $210,000 was withdrawn in about seven months or roughly 28 weeks - the weekly amount is about $7,500. the transactions were put to the de facto husband and he did not deny them. in reply, the topic was not explored so no explanation was offered.
196 in his report, mr o also observes that the family trust owes the de facto husband over $700,000[47] and a similar sum is recorded at item 43 of the de facto husband’s latest financial statement, which would superficially suggest at least that the cash transactions identified at exhibit “w2.25” are not loan repayments. i say superficially because his latest financial statement doesn’t identify the payments at all.
197 parties have an obligation to make full and substantive disclosure of their financial affairs.[48] the fact that the failure to disclose may be inadvertent may not be material, as the duty is an absolute one.[49] if satisfied that there is clear evidence of non-disclosure by a party, weir holds that i should not be unduly cautious in making findings in favour of the other party.[50]
198 on the available evidence i am satisfied that the de facto husband has not made full disclosure about his access to cash (whether as income or repayment of a debt or something else). however you look at his documents, he has a significant income/financial resource.
199 in closing submissions counsel for the de facto wife drew my attention to the net profit of the family trust for fy21 which was recorded as being over $230,000[51] (or over $4,400 per week). i observe from his latest financial statement that the profit from rent appears to be over $1,100 per week. relying upon weir, i find that the de facto husband may have a gross income earning capacity / access to financial resources in excess of $5,000 per week.
200 a finding about his high income earning capacity is supported by paragraph 87 of his trial affidavit where he tabulates his taxable income over 11 years, culminating in his taxable income for fy2020 being $171,941.
201 noting that both parties advocated that the de facto wife receive a cash adjustment, as part of the discussions during closing submissions, the court’s focus turned towards a default provision in the event that the de facto husband could not pay the cash adjustment ordered by the court. i was informed that the de facto husband’s preference would be for the three real properties held in his name be sold to meet the default. i accept that if this were to occur, the de facto husband’s income could be impacted although no strong submissions were made on that aspect.
202 turning then to other ancillary issues, in my view, the evidence was largely uncontroversial.
203 the de facto wife continues to have primary care for her two children, she has never earned an income commensurate to the de facto husband and despite what the de facto husband may have contended, she is unlikely to earn anything other than a modest income (if any) from her qualifications within the entertainment/hospitality industries. i once again record the lack of any documented evidence of income earned, expenses paid or assets acquired from her income earning endeavours. with respect to the de facto wife, even her receipt and management of the town l business post-separation supported her contention that her income earning capacity was limited. i will return to that particular issue later in the judgment.
204 in addition, in the absence of cross-examination, it was uncontroversial that ee is a vulnerable child with a complex medical history[52] including:- (a) medical condition 1, (b) medical condition 2, (c) medical condition 3.  medical condition 1, (b) medical condition 2, (c) medical condition 3.
205 the de facto wife’s uncontested evidence was that her daughter needs to have her ankle strapped daily and she wears ankle braces. in addition, ee is prone to fatigue and headaches, loss of balance and reduced mobility in her left leg and foot. a recent mri identified that her medical condition persists meaning the de facto wife has to monitor ee for loss of function in her fine motor skills, hands (grip/strength) and bowel/bladder dysfunction. compounding this last aspect, ee already wears incontinence underwear to ensure that her existing urinary incontinence is appropriately managed.
206 given the state of the evidence about cc’s needs (which will explored further in this judgment insofar as family violence is concerned), in the absence of more fulsome evidence i am unwilling to make any finding pursuant to s90sf(3)(d)(ii) or (r).
207 both parties gave evidence and made submissions about a variety of non-financial contributions they each made. on balance, save for the issues regarding family violence, nothing much turns on their respective non-financial contributions. they both had roles on the farm and before that in the homes that they lived in at the start of the relationship with overall, the de facto wife having more of an administrative role and/or supporting role and the de facto husband a more practical one.
208 the de facto wife contended that her contributions were made more onerous by reason of the de facto husband’s persistent family violence, relying upon decisions such as kennon & kennon [1997] famca 27, (1997) flc 92-757 and keating & keating [2019] famcafc 46. the decision in keating emphasised that the imposition of family violence upon a party may lead to contributions being significantly more arduous and causing a discernible impact on the parties’ contributions.[53]
209 but as contended by counsel for the de facto wife (and accepted by me), the assessment of such an impact should not be undertaken in a “compartmentalised manner”.[54] as the full court said in benson & drury [2020] famcafc 303 at [35]:
the central question raised by this appeal is how a judge takes into account the contributions of one party, found to have been made significantly more arduous by the conduct of the other, when assessing contributions under ss79(4)(a)-(c) or ss 90sm(4)(a)-(c) of the act. the answer is the primary judge must take a holistic approach. the contributions which have been made significantly more arduous have to be weighed along with all other contributions by each of the parties, whether financial or non-financial, direct or indirect to the acquisition, conservation and improvement of property and in the role of homemaker and parent. all contributions must be weighed collectively and so it is an error to segment or compartmentalise the various contributions and weigh one against the remainder (citations omitted).
210 i cannot address this issue more eruditely than gill j in koch & kest, so i adopt his reasoning as set out below:
27. it is necessary, in support of the contention that the contributions were rendered more arduous, to establish the incidence and effect of family violence and, as was said in keating at [39], “an evidentiary nexus between the conduct complained of and the capacity (and or effort expended) to make the relevant contributions”. 28. as to the nexus, in benson & drury the full court said at [49]: [i]t should now be clear that the required nexus between proven family violence and the significant adverse effect upon the contributions of the victim is capable of being inferred from the lay evidence of the parties... 29. the court is then required to examine the matters set out at s 90sf(3) as to whether those matters point to an adjustment of the property. 30. finally, the court is again to examine whether the result arrived at constitutes a just and equitable settlement of the property.
211 the de facto wife contended that through the prism of her contributions having been made more arduous in light of family violence, the contributions of the parties needed to be assessed such that she receive 15% of the nett non-superannuation pool.
212 the wife’s allegations as to her exposure to family violence are both specific and generalised.
213 at paragraph 274 of her trial affidavit, the de facto wife alleged that after she left the de facto husband in 2016 she told a member of the nsw police that the de facto husband had assaulted her by: (a) jamming her finger in a door whilst the parties were arguing on or about 14 july 2015, (b) hitting her head with a saucepan on 20 april 2015, (c) punching a hole in the wall next her head in 2013.  jamming her finger in a door whilst the parties were arguing on or about 14 july 2015, (b) hitting her head with a saucepan on 20 april 2015, (c) punching a hole in the wall next her head in 2013.
214 the de facto husband denied these allegations in cross-examination.
215 at paragraph 277 of her trial affidavit, the de facto wife set out a series of phrases she recalls the de facto husband said to her often and which are repeated below:
you are a dumb cunt you are a know-it-all know nothing you are a fucking cunt you are a useless piece of shit you’ve got no fucking idea what’s going on in the world what the fuck have you been doing all day you’re an absolute fucking dumb cunt you can’t cook for shit you’ve never done a day’s work in your life
216 when asked in cross-examination whether he said any or all of these things to the de facto wife, the de facto husband said, “that’s possible yes” and when asked if it was possible he said any of them more than once, he said “yes”.
217 when the de facto wife returned to the farm in late 2015, it is common ground that she proceeded to surreptitiously record some of the de facto husband’s behaviour. she says that she did this because when she first went to the police in 2015, she was told “to make a note of it and call the police”. on 24 august 2015, the nsw police made a cops entry which records that despite the de facto wife’s complaints about the de facto husband sending her threatening text messages and of the de facto husband being violent, after viewing the messages and her written notebook entries, the nsw police record telling her ...that there was no evidence to support her claims and more to the fact that she did not report previous matters due to not wanting to get lapham in trouble.
218 having determined in favour of the de facto wife that these recordings should be admitted, they were played in open court. after the audio files[55] were played back, i recorded that at various times the de facto wife and mr m were observed by me to have their head in their hand/s at various times and throughout the entire playback, that was the position adopted by the de facto husband. there could be no doubt that the behaviour of the de facto husband was frightening, abusive and aggressive.
219 at one point on 22 june 2016[56], after threatening to smash something, it was apparent that the de facto husband entered cc’s room and then the de facto wife says he smashed the child’s radio. when asked about the events of that evening, the de facto husband does not deny that he is the one speaking but says he cannot recall if he smashed the radio because he was too intoxicated to remember. the audio recording demonstrates the de facto husband describing:- (a) cc (then aged nine years) as being “...just a rude little fuck just like he is with his school teacher”, (b) the de facto wife as “stupid, just like your mother”, and   cc (then aged nine years) as being “...just a rude little fuck just like he is with his school teacher”, (b) the de facto wife as “stupid, just like your mother”, and
then says about cc - “listen to him, he’s still in there doing it now, he’s a defiant mother fucker, listen to him”. here is then a long pause before this is said by the de facto husband - that little fuck, righto, now i don’t give a fuck mate, whether your mother leaves me or not, i’m coming in now, i’m gunna fucking smash your fucking legs into your fucking bones mate, move! one more move being a hero. i don’t give a fuck anymore right? this is my house. this is how it is. test me, smart arse, hero. come on, take me on hero. you getting that big aren’t ya? ya gunna take me on soon, aren’t ya?
220 the de facto wife alleges that during the same incident, the de facto husband pulled her hair. the de facto husband denied this. given the de facto husband’s evidence about his memory being affected by his intoxicated state, i prefer the de facto wife’s evidence in regard to the de facto husband smashing cc’s radio and pulling her hair.
221 in another exhibited recording, the de facto husband says that he will kill the de facto wife and shoot himself in the head.[57]
222 at paragraph 329 of her trial affidavit the de facto wife makes various allegations including but not limited to the de facto husband hitting her on various parts of her body with a closed fist or open hand with such force as to leave bruises, the de facto husband poking her so hard that finger marks were left on the skin over her ribs, arms and other places, the de facto husband picking her up and throwing her on the couch after she placed herself between him and cc to allow cc time to run and hide in his room, the de facto husband causing the de facto wife to have a black eye and swollen lip after pushing his fist into her face and injuring her wrist in june 2016.
223 allegations about financial coercion were also made by the de facto wife and denied by the de facto husband. on that issue, on balance, i am not able to make such a finding because i am satisfied that the de facto wife was able to maintain a significant level of financial control, for example - she was able to retain bank accounts in her own, and her children’s names, she was able to find and persuade the de facto husband to buy the town l business and she was able to walk away from the relationship with over $20,000 in savings.
224 in response to an allegation that the de facto husband had killed a pet dog intentionally, he said that on a farm he kills lots of things intentionally and that he couldn’t recall the circumstances but he had killed a few because they get sick or injured and it will cost a lot to take them to the vet. i am not prepared to make an adverse finding given his evidence which i found to give a frank and pragmatic (if harsh) picture of life on the farm.
225 in cross-examination the de facto husband was asked to read paragraphs 333 to 339 of the de facto wife’s affidavit to himself. in summary the paragraphs set out circumstances where the de facto wife alleged being subjected to various forms of sexual assault. the de facto husband categorically denied the events described therein. in my view, the evidence is not sufficient to make findings.
226 it is common ground that the de facto wife surreptitiously made a recording of the de facto husband admitting to an incident relating to cc. the de facto wife subsequently took the recording to the nsw police who interviewed cc and subsequently after a defended hearing, the de facto husband was convicted of assaulting cc.[58]
227 it is common ground that on 17 june 2016, the de facto wife surreptitiously recorded an incident which resulted in a criminal conviction of common assault.[59] exhibit “h3.5” records that the de facto husband was also convicted of an act of stalk/intimidate with intent to cause fear of harm over an event on 20 june 2016. a final advo protecting the de facto wife and the children was made on 19 july 2016 for a period of two (2) years. exhibit “h3.5” also records that the de facto husband was subsequently convicted of breaching the advo.[60]
228 despite his convictions, in his trial affidavit, the de facto husband denied any suggestion that i was violent to ms ferman sexually, physically, financially and emotionally.[61]
229 in summary, the de facto husband says that he has not hit cc or touched cc and that he raised his voice at cc because he was totally trashing the house. he saw cc’s behaviour as a temper tantrum and tried to stop him from further damaging the house. he queries the motivation of the de facto wife as to why she kept recording and did not stop him, if that was the appropriate thing to do.
230 the de facto husband denies assaulting cc or the de facto wife despite understanding that he has been convicted of certain acts.[62]
231 on the basis of the de facto husband’s instructions about motivation, the de facto wife was cross-examined about certain events, and at one stage it was put to her as follows –
“now, i’m suggesting that what you were doing was you were plying mr lapham with alcohol and then geeing him up knowing you were going to record him in an attempt to use the evidence against him.”
232 i read out this question to junior counsel for the de facto husband the following morning as a refresher about where his line of questioning had ended the previous afternoon. he continued to pursue that proposition. it was only in closing submissions that queen’s counsel for the de facto husband withdrew the first part of the proposition which suggested that to some extent the de facto husband was prepared to take some responsibility for his behaviour, at least insofar as to his intake of alcohol at the relevant times.
233 as to the impacts on her contributions, by way of background, there is a complete denial from the de facto husband:- (a) as to him being a family violence perpetrator, (b) that the de facto wife did any particularly significant work in running the farm, and (c) that he has had a harmful and destructive relationship with alcohol.  as to him being a family violence perpetrator, (b) that the de facto wife did any particularly significant work in running the farm, and (c) that he has had a harmful and destructive relationship with alcohol.
234 with that background in mind, insofar as the impacts of the family violence upon her contributions (or the efforts expended by her), the de facto wife gives a plethora of evidence about this including: (a) attending to or finishing uncompleted farm tasks due to the de facto husband’s intoxication,[63] and (b) attending to farm duties without assistance from the de facto husband but having him present drunk and ranting at her causing her to cry and experiencing fear and exhaustion.[64]  attending to or finishing uncompleted farm tasks due to the de facto husband’s intoxication,[63] and (b) attending to farm duties without assistance from the de facto husband but having him present drunk and ranting at her causing her to cry and experiencing fear and exhaustion.[64]
235 i have already recorded the de facto husband’s denials of being a perpetrator of family violence despite him having been criminally convicted of assault. insofar as his views about excessive alcohol use, one particular exchange in cross-examination was particularly telling. the de facto husband was taken to an email dated 12 july 2015 at 3.44pm, which the de facto wife says she received from the de facto husband.[65] the de facto husband initially rejected the assertion he had written it saying, “it’s a piece of paper”. he then said he couldn’t say either way (whether he wrote it) and then acknowledged that it was possible he could have. for reasons already set out much earlier in this judgment, i find that the de facto husband did write this email in which he records: (a) he had lost the plot lately... really wanting to stop...(caused by) the pressure of the farm...i will see the doctor next week to get a referral to see someone about my problems. (b) most of the bad shit that has gone down was dew (sic) to the drinking & some times you were drinking as well. i know also that i am to (sic) hard on the kids at times. i stop you from doing all the things you want, i hassle you about smoking. i talk to you crudely like as if you were my mate & you think i don’t respect you. i am hard on you about your memory & stuff. this & more, i am going to fix. i always had full intension (sic) to do this, so now you have shocked me into gear. i want to fix this stuff as well ms ferman, i just needed a kick in the ass...  he had lost the plot lately... really wanting to stop...(caused by) the pressure of the farm...i will see the doctor next week to get a referral to see someone about my problems. (b) most of the bad shit that has gone down was dew (sic) to the drinking & some times you were drinking as well. i know also that i am to (sic) hard on the kids at times. i stop you from doing all the things you want, i hassle you about smoking. i talk to you crudely like as if you were my mate & you think i don’t respect you. i am hard on you about your memory & stuff. this & more, i am going to fix. i always had full intension (sic) to do this, so now you have shocked me into gear. i want to fix this stuff as well ms ferman, i just needed a kick in the ass...
236 there is no doubt that the de facto husband has engaged in serious family violence, including but not necessarily limited to, engaging in physical violence upon her and cc (for which he has been convicted), behaving in a threatening manner towards her, repeatedly making offensive, abusive and derogatory comments about her and cc, damaging property in the presence of her and cc and breaching (on more than one occasion) an existing advo.
237 relying on the evidence before me which includes some medical reporting, the parties’ oral evidence and the de facto wife’s own layman’s account, i am satisfied that i am able to comfortably draw an inference that the perpetration of family violence by the de facto husband upon the de facto wife has had a significant adverse effect upon her contributions.
238 in this regard i am satisfied that my finding is corroborated by the de facto husband’s own admissions[66] and that subjectively, the de facto wife’s contributions have been made significantly more arduous in a qualitative sense by his conduct. under his own hand, the de facto husband says that he had lost the plot and had been too hard on the children. if nothing else, in the context of the exhibited recordings (at least one of which occurs inside the home), the de facto wife’s evidence of having to do household chores and parent the children when also having to monitor the de facto husband’s intoxicated behaviour is compelling. she can be heard following him around and into cc’s room, where he broke cc’s radio.
239 i conclude that the de facto wife’s many and varied contributions to the family and the property pool (particularly when they lived on the farm) took place in a context of fear and suffering caused by the de facto husband’s conduct. a qualitative assessment of those contributions leads inevitably to a conclusion that they were rendered significantly more arduous by circumstances of the de facto husband’s making and meaning that her contributions were adversely affected by her having to bear the burden. put another way, the de facto husband’s behaviour (at least in part) caused the making of a rod for her back, not one of her own making (as the de facto husband’s cross-examination sought to suggest).
240 the de facto wife sought to attribute to the de facto husband responsibility for the mental health and behavioural issues now being experienced by cc, citing his access to counselling support from victim services as being but one example of the nexus between the violence and cc’s presentation. however, in my view, and despite the findings i have made about cc’s exposure to the de facto husband’s violence, there was insufficient evidence upon which i could definitely make that causal link in the absence of expert evidence.[67]
241 it was uncontroversial that the de facto wife has health issues however on her own evidence, she describes these needs as variable.[68]
242 the nature and effect of the harm (both physical, psychological and coercive) that the de facto wife says she suffered through the family violence perpetrated upon her by the de facto husband was controversial.
243 at exhibit “h3.12” dated 21 october 2009, the de facto wife is prescribed sertraline hydrochloride. at exhibit “h3.14” dated 2 november 2009, the general physician records that the de facto wife fell off a horse and onto her head at 10 years of age and has had neck pain since. at exhibit “h3.18” dated 10 march 2011, the general physician discusses with the de facto wife, the results of neck and hip x-rays which identify ongoing issues. by may 2011, the neck pain appears to have increased with the de facto wife reporting difficulty in turning her neck.[69] by august 2011, the de facto wife’s prescription for pristiq had been increased. she had attended upon dr uu (a pain specialist) and whilst there had completed a dass (depression anxiety stress scales) with the results reported as severe for depression and moderate for anxiety and stress and having chronic neck pain, depression, dyspareunia amongst other issues.[70] in cross-examination, the de facto wife said that she had seen the pain specialist once.
244 just after the de facto wife moved into the h street, suburb j home, she attended upon dr vv who summarised a two-page document that the de facto wife had prepared about how she felt, as demonstrating that the de facto wife had poor self-esteem, poor organisational skills, poor memory and depression.[71]
245 almost three years into the relationship, on 30 april 2015, dr ww records that the de facto wife was getting on fairly well with the de facto husband, although she feels he is more work orientated, with the de facto wife identifying that she is running a two shed livestock farm with him. it appears that by this time, the de facto wife was not on any prescribed medication to treat her mood but as a result of the consultation, she re-commenced taking pristiq.[72]
246 exhibit “h3.31” records that on 10 august 2015, the de facto wife reported to dr ww that on 8 june her right index and middle finger were crushed in a door during an assault. the medical note specified that –
fingers got bruised and swollen for 2 weeks. still has tenderness and slight swelling to middle finger pip joint. unable to fully flex finger. no fractures seen on right hand x ray 14th july. agreed monitor now, should gradually improve.
the medical note than lists a raft of injuries/incidents of varying historical age.
247 at paragraph 372 of her trial affidavit, the de facto wife says she currently experiences: (a) nightmares and panic attacks, (b) difficulty sleeping, (c) emotional dysregulation leading to ‘meltdowns’, (d) flashbacks triggering emotional responses such as crying, fear or self-loathing, (e) hypervigilance and hypersensitivity to hearing yelling and being in the presence of a person/s in an intoxicated state, (f) symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder.  nightmares and panic attacks, (b) difficulty sleeping, (c) emotional dysregulation leading to ‘meltdowns’, (d) flashbacks triggering emotional responses such as crying, fear or self-loathing, (e) hypervigilance and hypersensitivity to hearing yelling and being in the presence of a person/s in an intoxicated state, (f) symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder.
248 the de facto wife attributes these symptoms to her exposure to family violence. in addition, she says that the injuries to her right hand and fingers referred to above, continue to cause pain and impact upon her capacity to work as an allied health worker.[73] the de facto wife described getting “run down easily” which causes a multitude of adverse symptoms as well as experiencing “continuing neck pain”.[74] at paragraph 417 of her trial affidavit she says –
417. my current and biggest concern if (sic) the ongoing aching that is now becoming intolerable, caused by these prior injuries (mostly inflicted by mr lapham) which is unlikely to improve without medical intervention such as medication or potential surgery to repair ligament damage.
249 there was no expert medical evidence to support the de facto wife’s contentions about the prior injuries being mostly caused by the de facto husband, nor of her prognosis.
250 the de facto wife was cross-examined about the historical nature of some her current physiological complaints (which she says have been exacerbated by the alleged family violence).
251 having carefully considered all the evidence, the de facto wife’s medical and psychological history demonstrates that some of her current complaints were present at the commencement of the relationship.
252 my view about the de facto wife’s current state of health and her capacity to earn income is informed not only by her accounts of family violence (and its impacts) but also to the historical medical evidence that pre-dates the commencement of the relationship.
253 on any reading of the material, and despite her cross-examination, i am satisfied that the de facto wife’s state of health has historically impacted upon her income earning capacity and having regard to her employment history and qualifications, is likely to continue to do so into the future.
254 as referred to earlier, the de facto wife says that as a result of two physical assaults (when she says her right hand/fingers were jammed by the de facto husband’s slamming/pushing the bedroom door into them and her left wrist being injured in june 2016) her physical capacity for work has been effected.[75] she says that she continues to experience “significant pain and stiffness” to her right hand and “pain” to her wrist and fingers.[76]
255 as a result of these injuries she says that she can only work six hours per day as an allied health worker.[77] she says that her psychological injuries have also diminished her capacity to engage in what she describes as “higher intensity” work.[78]
256 having been cross-examined about her physical injuries (particularly to her right hand and left wrist), including various videos taken of her engaging in karate practice,[79] i am satisfied that the de facto wife does have a resilience (at times) to effectively manage any ongoing symptoms (at least for short sustained periods). however, absent any expert evidence from an occupational therapist (for example), i am not prepared to draw an inference, that the de facto wife’s capacity to break a piece of wood (even if this occurs on multiple occasions on the same day) leads to the conclusion that her capacity to work as an allied health worker is greater than what she says (remembering she also says that she needs to care for the children before and after school) or that her income earning capacity is otherwise under-utilised.
257 insofar as her psychological symptoms during the relationship, i have had regard to various reports from the de facto wife’s treating clinical psychologist, dr xx.[80] in his first report of 24 july 2014, various symptoms and personality traits are recorded on a background of a relationship history being damaged by successive partners with the challenges continuing into her current relationship with the de facto husband reportedly being increasingly abusive, and at times unable to control his consumption of alcohol.[81]
258 on 21 january 2015, dr xx wrote to the de facto wife’s treating general physician[82] summarising the seven sessions she had with him between early 2014 and late september 2014. by september 2014 (before the parties had actually moved to the farm[83]), it was reported that many of her past stressors had abated particularly around her relationship with her partner that had seemingly improved.
259 on 13 october 2016, dr xx provided another report addressed, to whom it may concern regarding his engagement with her.[84] in that document, he expanded upon the symptoms reported to him by the de facto wife and her experience of the relationship with the de facto husband as including being increasingly abused...often feeling vulnerable to verbal and physical abuse by him at times during his verbal tirades often in the presence of alcohol intoxication and related judgement impairment.
260 in addition, the de facto wife says that cc has been adversely impacted as well and describes her son as worrying a lot, being anti-social, having low self-esteem and poor concentration and outbursts of anger.[85] at exhibit “w2.6”, cc is reported to have had a long-term incontinence problem but as at 23 january 2015, he was reported to be progressing well at school. in cross‑examination it was put to the de facto wife that her son was (essentially) always a difficult child, something which she rejected. in closing submissions, i was not taken back to this evidence so i am unsure whether the point of the cross-examination was to suggest that the de facto husband had an excuse for his behaviour or something else.
discussion
261 each party sought an adjustment of the property pool involving the de facto wife receiving property, albeit on differing terms. both parties contended the de facto wife should receive a cash adjustment and in addition, the de facto wife sought a superannuation splitting order pursuant to s 90xt. i am satisfied that, i can make orders that are just and equitable by reference to an adjustment of the non-superannuation property between the parties.
262 in relation to the non-superannuation property, the de facto wife sought a 15% adjustment for her contributions (inclusive of her contentions about the impact of family violence) and a 10% adjustment for s 90sf(3) factors. the de facto wife also sought an equalisation of the parties’ superannuation.
263 the de facto husband sought an overall adjustment of about 10%, rounded up to a payment of $300,000 (with no superannuation splitting order sought).
264 the property pool equates to $2,814,132 including nett non-superannuation property of $2,439,107. also included in the property pool is the de facto husband’s superannuation of $362,186, with the de facto wife holding $12,839 in superannuation.
265 initially, the de facto husband brought in $95,000 in superannuation and over $800,000 made up of cash, his interest in li and three real properties that have not been sold. during the relationship two other properties were sold but it is unclear what (if any) mortgage debt was paid out when the h street, suburb j land was sold. the best i can do from the evidence is to find that a combined sum of $700,000 in sale proceeds from the two properties was used to assist in a financial re-structure of farm debt. post-separation the de facto husband has constructed shed 3 and has had the benefit of occupation of the farm.
266 the de facto wife had little in the way of initial contributions and i accept she had $12,000 in non-superannuation property and $9,000 in superannuation.
267 the contributions made by each of the parties during the relationship is assessed as favouring the de facto husband 90% and to the de facto wife 10% which reflects a consideration of the de facto husband’s vastly superior financial contributions along with his other contributions as well as the impact of his conduct upon the myriad of contributions made by the de facto wife as set out above.
268 insofar as s 90sf(3) is concerned, the de facto husband is currently in receipt of significant income (albeit the evidence fell far short of me being able to quantify an exact sum). on this basis i have decided not to be unduly cautious in the findings i make about his income and his income earning capacity into the future. in hobson & hobson [2020] famcafc 251, the full court in reflecting upon the decision in mallet v mallet (1984) 156 clr 605 at 638, said that the purpose of a s 75(2) adjustment (read as ss90sm(3)(e) & 90sf(3)) –
is not to achieve equality in the financial strengths of the parties, nonetheless the overarching obligation is to achieve a just and equitable division of the property.[86]
269 in hobson the court noted that under the orders made by the primary judge, the husband was left with two-thirds of the parties’ property but retained an earning capacity (gross $23,955 per week) which dwarfed that of the wife by a magnitude of at least ten times. whilst the full court focused much their criticism on the primary judge’s interpretation of one aspect of jabour and the consideration of s 75(2)(k) factor, the court also identified the imperative for the court (when considering factors pursuant to s 90sf(3)) to reflect on what the proposed adjustment means in dollar terms and put that in perspective to the income earning capacity of the parties.
270 here, i have already made a finding that the de facto husband may have an income earning capacity in excess of $5,000 per week although i need to reflect that this may reduce by about $1,100 per week, in the event that the rental properties need to be sold to give effect to my orders. the de facto wife has no income at the moment and at best i have found her capacity to do so, as “modest”.
271 in assessing any adjustment pursuant to s90sm(3)(e) and the relevant s90sf(3) considerations i have had regard to the decision in hobson and note that other than as recorded above, there were no other relevant circumstances pursuant to s 90sm (4) (d), (e) & (f).
272 in my view, the de facto husband has an income earning capacity significantly higher than disclosed to the court and will retain over 80% of the parties’ property. he is the appointor of the family trust and primary beneficiary and clearly has access to cash reserves from the family trust. having made that finding i reflect that i have found that at best the de facto wife has a modest income earning capacity and at least for the duration of the relationship and since, i have no evidence of her earning any income of significance. the disparity of income between the parties is stark but i also need to consider the other s90sf(3) factors including whether that income earning capacity has been impacted by the duration of the relationship which was only for four (4) years – much shorter than the 10-year relationship hobson.
273 the de facto wife is in receipt of various centrelink benefits and has the ongoing commitment of her two children, one of whom is particularly vulnerable. this commitment, in tandem with her health and the dearth of historical or current evidence about income - suggest that her income earning capacity is minimal. she also has her own health concerns, albeit i placed limited weight on this factor given the lack of medical evidence to support her prognosis and/or need for future medical treatments. i have also found that the de facto relationship has had an effect on her income earning capacity, albeit given the state of the evidence, the best i can do is to say that the de facto husband’s behaviour has at least in part exacerbated some of the de facto wife’s pre-existing conditions and symptoms.
274 for the reasons set out above, the s 90sf(3) factors warrant a further adjustment of 5% in the de facto wife’s favour.
275 stepping back from my conclusions, and looking holistically at whether the proposed adjustment is just and equitable, 15% of the pool equates to $422,119. the de facto wife currently has superannuation and non‑superannuation interests valued at $10,763. to bring the adjustment to 15%, a cash payment of $411,400 (rounded up) is required. this amounts to about 18 months of the de facto husband’s income (assessed at $5,000 per week) or almost two (2) years of income at a rate of $230,000 per annum, if the three properties have to be sold.
276 i have also had regard to the discourse between myself and queen’s counsel for the de facto husband during final submissions when i prompted queen’s counsel to reflect on what default orders the court should make in the event that the de facto husband could not secure the lump sum payment to the de facto wife? i heard that selling the farm was an option of last resort and that the de facto husband would prefer to sell the other real properties.
277 in an attempt to understand the available equity in those three properties, the court was told that some (if not all) of the three properties were the subject of mortgages cross-collateralised against the farm. the identification of what equity would be available from the sale of the three real properties (if the farm was to remain unsold) could not be specified. self-evidently, the availability of equity in the three properties has been either a contribution towards the acquisition of the farm and/or its conservation or improvement.
278 the de facto husband’s superior real property holdings and superannuation have already been recorded. the de facto wife’s current nett non-superannuation interests are -$2,070. she has (at best) a modest income earning capacity and is presently unemployed.
279 i accept that the de facto wife seeks both a cash and superannuation adjustment, the de facto husband seeks only a cash payment be made by him. i have awarded the de facto wife 15% of the property pool. in my view, the de facto wife’s financial circumstances make it just and equitable for me to give effect to my award by way of a cash adjustment, rather than arbitrarily reflecting the award between cash and superannuation.
280 accordingly, the orders i make will require the de facto husband to make a payment of $411,400 to the de facto wife, failing which orders will be made for the sale of properties to give effect to my decision.
281 taking a global approach of the effects of such an adjustment, i am satisfied that it is a just and equitable resolution of the parties’ property interests, given the circumstances of their de facto relationship.
spousal maintenance
282 the de facto wife contends that she is unable to support herself and asks the de facto husband to pay lump sum spousal maintenance of $47,555.15. the de facto husband rejects that assertion and taking a broad brush approach, relies on the financial resource provided by mr m.
283 the context for the de facto wife’s application for a final spousal maintenance order is unusual and, arising from my earlier recording of the procedural history of these proceedings, can be summarised as follows: (a) on 12 december 2019, the de facto wife filed an amended initiating application which sought that the de facto husband pay her $500 per week by way of interim spousal maintenance, (b) on 28 may 2020, following an interlocutory hearing, the de facto wife was granted leave to proceed with her interim spousal maintenance application out of time, (c) on 9 and 10 july 2020, the interim spousal maintenance hearing was heard and then adjourned part-heard, (d) on 25 june 2021 the interim spousal maintenance hearing was concluded and the court reserved its decision, (e) on 7 september 2021, the de facto wife’s interim spousal maintenance application was adjourned for possible directions as to the re-opening of the case, (f) on 13 september 2021 and by consent, the de facto wife’s interim spousal maintenance application was to be determined at the trial, (g) on 11 october 2021, the trial was vacated, (h) at the final hearing, the de facto wife sought lump sum spousal maintenance of $47,555.15 as opposed to her interim relief which had been for spousal maintenance fixed at $500 per week.  on 12 december 2019, the de facto wife filed an amended initiating application which sought that the de facto husband pay her $500 per week by way of interim spousal maintenance, (b) on 28 may 2020, following an interlocutory hearing, the de facto wife was granted leave to proceed with her interim spousal maintenance application out of time, (c) on 9 and 10 july 2020, the interim spousal maintenance hearing was heard and then adjourned part-heard, (d) on 25 june 2021 the interim spousal maintenance hearing was concluded and the court reserved its decision, (e) on 7 september 2021, the de facto wife’s interim spousal maintenance application was adjourned for possible directions as to the re-opening of the case, (f) on 13 september 2021 and by consent, the de facto wife’s interim spousal maintenance application was to be determined at the trial, (g) on 11 october 2021, the trial was vacated, (h) at the final hearing, the de facto wife sought lump sum spousal maintenance of $47,555.15 as opposed to her interim relief which had been for spousal maintenance fixed at $500 per week.
284 as part of closing submissions, counsel for the de facto wife said this about the above history:- (a) the de facto wife had been the subject of cross-examination about her need for support, (b) rather than be cross-examined about his capacity to pay $500 per week, the de facto husband made that concession in submissions, (c) other than a consideration as to the de facto wife’s “need”, the barrier to a determination of the interim spousal maintenance had been the controversy about whether the court had jurisdiction given the de facto husband disputed that the de facto relationship had endured for two (2) years. this jurisdictional point had arisen only after the court had reserved its decision and was the subject of a re-listing to determine whether the parties’ respective cases should be re-opened, (d) on 22 november 2021 (almost two years after bringing her spousal maintenance application), the de facto husband informed the court that he no longer pressed the jurisdictional point.  the de facto wife had been the subject of cross-examination about her need for support, (b) rather than be cross-examined about his capacity to pay $500 per week, the de facto husband made that concession in submissions, (c) other than a consideration as to the de facto wife’s “need”, the barrier to a determination of the interim spousal maintenance had been the controversy about whether the court had jurisdiction given the de facto husband disputed that the de facto relationship had endured for two (2) years. this jurisdictional point had arisen only after the court had reserved its decision and was the subject of a re-listing to determine whether the parties’ respective cases should be re-opened, (d) on 22 november 2021 (almost two years after bringing her spousal maintenance application), the de facto husband informed the court that he no longer pressed the jurisdictional point.
285 in order to make a spousal maintenance order, i must be satisfied that it is “proper” (s 90se) and in exercising such jurisdiction, i must apply the principle that a party to a de facto relationship must maintain the other party only to the extent that the first party is reasonably able to do so and secondly that the other party is unable to support them self adequately, whether because they have the care and control of a child of the de facto relationship who is under 18 years of age or because of their age/physical/mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment or for any other adequate reason (see s 90sf).
286 the high court in hall v hall [2016] hca 23 at [3] described the “gateway” requirement for consideration of a spousal maintenance application to be s 74 (which relevantly for my purposes, i read as s 90sf).
287 in coming to a concluded view, “reasonableness” in the circumstances is the guiding principle (see in the marriage of bevan[87])
288 the full court in in the marriage of bevan summarised the pathway for a consideration of a spousal maintenance order to be: (a) a threshold finding under section 72, (b) consideration of sections 74 and 75(2), (c) no fettering principle that pre-separation standard of living must automatically be awarded where the respondent’s means permit, and (d) discretion exercised in accordance with the provisions of section 74, with “reasonableness in the circumstances” as the guiding principle.[88]  a threshold finding under section 72, (b) consideration of sections 74 and 75(2), (c) no fettering principle that pre-separation standard of living must automatically be awarded where the respondent’s means permit, and (d) discretion exercised in accordance with the provisions of section 74, with “reasonableness in the circumstances” as the guiding principle.[88]
does the de facto wife have a need?
289 the above pathway invites a consideration of three questions, with the first one being does the de facto wife have a need? in other words, what is her income (accounting for s 90sf(4))[89] and what are her reasonably necessary and unavoidable living expenses?[90]
290 the de facto wife’s application was challenged by the de facto husband, particularly in relation to whether she had undisclosed income and/or a financial resource that she can rely upon to support her. as i understand it, there was probably a subsidiary argument about whether all the expenses asserted by her were “reasonably necessary”.
291 the de facto wife is in receipt of a three types of centrelink payments which are described on her financial statement as follows – (a) carer payment and allowance $ 68 (b) family tax benefit carer payment and allowance $231 (c) pension carer payment and allowance $484  carer payment and allowance $ 68 (b) family tax benefit carer payment and allowance $231 (c) pension carer payment and allowance $484
292 other than issues to do with the de facto wife’s credit (which i have referred to earlier), i heard no submissions about the impact of the de facto wife’s receipt of the above benefits. in the absence of any submissions, i take judicial notice that all of these benefits are means tested and as such, s 90sf(4) precludes me from including them when assessing the de facto wife’s financial circumstances.
293 the de facto wife is not in receipt of any income or wage arising from paid employment and in this regard i accept the consistent evidence of the de facto wife and her father about the informal and unpaid work she does for her father’s business.
294 the de facto wife’s only other declared income source is child support from mr dd, at a required rate of $156 of which she only receives approximately $50 per week with the qualification of sporadic payments received, calculation based off $760 receive in a three month period.
295 exhibit “h4” consisted of a table summarising monthly transactions made by the de facto wife and her parents (using their own specific cards) in relation to an american express membership held in mr ferman’s name (‘the amex account’). the table was supported by copies of the various transaction statements.
296 the de facto wife was robustly cross-examined about her use of the amex account. in summary her evidence was that at times she uses her card to buy items for her parents and at other times it is used solely for her benefit. she said that she feels obliged to repay the money she uses for herself. there was no particular quantification of what expenses are hers and what are her parents’, albeit i acknowledge that from the cross-examination, it was evident that the card has been used to pay for fuel for the de facto wife’s car.
297 mr m was cross-examined about the use of the amex card. in response to a question about there being “no limit” on his daughter drawing funds from the amex account, mr m agreed there was no limit on her use of it. when asked if there were any “conditions” on the withdrawals his daughter makes from the amex account, mr m said there were no conditions. mr m went on to say that he pays the amex account off each month and that his daughter will transfer money across “as necessary” in recognition of funds drawn by her. he said that there was “no arrangement...i leave it to her...she’ll put money back into the account.”
298 i heard from both witnesses that the use of the amex account causes an accumulation of the qantas frequent flyer points. i accept that from the presentation of her evidence, the de facto wife has been less than transparent about the specific source of support or benefits she has received from her father, but in my view, her evidence was not inconsistent with his. their oral testimony demonstrated that her intention has been and remains that any funds she uses is repaid and his is, that he will leave it up to his daughter to pay back what she wants.
299 as opined by the high court in hall [91] -
54. the reference to "financial resources" in the context of s75(2)(b) has long been correctly interpreted by the family court to refer to "a source of financial support which a party can reasonably expect will be available to him or her to supply a financial need or deficiency”. the requirement that the financial resource be that "of" a party no doubt implies that the source of financial support be one on which the party is capable of drawing. it must involve something more than an expectation of benevolence on the part of another. but it goes too far to suggest that the party must control the source of financial support. thus, it has long correctly been recognised that a nominated beneficiary of a discretionary trust, who has no control over the trustee but who has a reasonable expectation that the trustee's discretion will be exercised in his or her favour, has a financial resource to the extent of that expectation. 55. whether a potential source of financial support amounts to a financial resource of a party turns in most cases on a factual inquiry as to whether or not support from that source could reasonably be expected to be forthcoming were the party to call on it. (excluding footnotes)
300 the de facto wife’s written evidence on the “benevolence” of her father, is set out with limited specificity in her financial statement and more generally at paragraphs 403 and 418 of her trial affidavit. after a careful cross-examination of both the de facto wife and her father, it was apparent to me that part f of her financial statement and aspects of part g of that document may be inconsistent with what her father sees as her current financial obligations towards him.
301 as submitted by counsel for the de facto wife, the informal arrangement between father and daughter should be considered through the prism of the procedural history of her application. she had identified a need for support back in december 2019 and yet, over two years later (and despite the de facto husband accepting he had capacity to support her), no regularised financial support was available to the de facto wife, except from her family. part of the delay was attributed to a jurisdictional argument that fell away in november 2021. exhibit “h4” shows the de facto wife’s use of the amex account from 26 january 2020 onwards, that is after she had commenced spousal maintenance proceedings.
302 in cross-examination, the de facto wife was clear to say that she did not like having to rely on her parents and she felt obliged to repay them.
303 the de facto wife’s lack of full disclosure before the trial (which ultimately required for a call of the amex card accounts), reflected poorly on her credit but having said that, i accept what her father says about the issue and her genuine desire to stand independently and not have to rely on her parents benevolence into the future. i accept that is her intention, irrespective of whether her father expects her to do so.
304 in those circumstances, why should this court make a decision in expectation that mr m’s benevolence will continue? in my view, to do so would be an inappropriate delegation to another person of the principle of support enshrined within s 90sf.
305 self-evidently, exhibit “h4” demonstrates that the de facto wife sought financial support only after she instituted the spousal maintenance proceedings and has been reliant (to a degree) on that support ever since. her evidence is that she has and intends to repay her father and mr m’s evidence is that he leaves it to her to pay back money, albeit there is no specific conditions around the arrangement.
306 in my view, exhibit “h4” reflects that chronologically, mr m stepped in because of the vacuum created by the stalemate in the interlocutory proceedings. there was insufficient evidence to satisfy me that into the future, mr m will continue to hold such a benevolent view and/or have the financial means to uphold any such view that he may currently hold. nor was it apparent to me that the de facto wife will ask for her father’s help once these proceedings are finalised. in my view, the evidence does not demonstrate that mr m could reasonably be expected to provide support were his daughter to ask for it, but even if i am wrong, given the above circumstances, it would not be proper for me to find in favour of the de facto husband’s contention that mr m is a financial resource available to the de facto wife.
307 pursuant to s 90sf(3)(k) i have also had regard to the short duration of the de facto relationship and its effect on the de facto wife’s income earning capacity. whilst i am unable to form a concluded view about the physiological effect upon the de facto wife, the de facto wife has been the victim of serious family violence and although somewhat dated, i have had regard to dr xx’s 2016 report which opined that she had a potential for poor judgment in relation to financial and occupational decisions at the time of increased abuse and subsequent to her failed relationship with the de facto husband. given the evidence from dr xx i am satisfied that the de facto wife’s income earning capacity has been at least in part exacerbated by the de facto relationship albeit, even though the relationship was quite short.
308 turning then to the de facto wife’s expenses, a consideration of these requires me to disregard those expenses that she says are exclusively for the needs of the children and accordingly i will also disregard her income as including any child support that she may be entitled to.[92]
309 in relation to her living expenses, i accept the de facto wife’s evidence that she lives rent-free with her parents and (in the absence of any significant cross-examination on her expenses) i accept that her reasonably necessary and unavoidable weekly living expenses (as drawn from her financial statement) can be summarised as follows: (a) car insurance and registration $ 23 (b) health insurance 33 (c) kk bank car loan (for her motor vehicle 2) 145 (d) food, household supplies etc. 529  car insurance and registration $ 23 (b) health insurance 33 (c) kk bank car loan (for her motor vehicle 2) 145 (d) food, household supplies etc. 529
total *$730 * by way of explanation – in her financial statement, the de facto wife ascribed $125 for weekly repayments of a school loan (see item 29), $140 for various business expenses (items 22 & 30) and $529 for her average weekly expenses (see part n). i have disregarded her contention about the payment of $125 for groceries being in lieu of rent[93] because mr m did not give that evidence himself. in addition, in cross-examination she agreed that the payment of rates and utilities fixed at $110 was out of date because the town l business was no longer operational and on that basis it seemed the payment of business insurance was also an unreasonable expense. on that basis, i have assessed the de facto wife’s total expenses at part g by omitting: (a) any expenses related to the business ($110 + $30), (b) the children’s school loan ($125), and (c) the groceries the de facto wife she says she pays in lieu of rent.
310 the de facto wife does have some capital assets that she could liquidate to provide for her support including cc’s account with a balance of just under $8,000 and accounts in her own name with a total of just over $5,500.
311 in cross-examination, it was evident that the de facto husband considered that the de facto wife was not utilising her full income-earning capacity. although s 90sf(3)(b) does not speak of “earning capacity”, in my view it is a matter that should be properly taken into account at s90sf(3)(r).
312 historically, the evidence suggested that the de facto wife’s past endeavours have produced only minimal profit or income. see for example, the contents of paragraph 182 of her trial affidavit which i accept demonstrate that for about six months in 2012/2013, a small business was operated out of h street, suburb j home, achieving a gross income of $1,415. there is no doubt that the de facto husband is an astute business operator and the decision to convert the room used by the business into another rental opportunity, in my view, is consistent with the de facto husband’s business acumen and the de facto wife’s evidence about the lack of income generated from her business.
313 i also accept that the de facto wife may not have been as proactive as she could have been in trying to secure paid employment post-separation, particularly given that i have accepted her father’s evidence that she has worked for him without pay.
314 however, the de facto wife did give evidence of her attempts firstly to keep the town l business operational and then the commencement of (it seems) an ongoing relationship with the company zz, particularly in regards to her employment. she also gave evidence of working in hospitality albeit the business closed in december 2021, causing the loss of her employment. i am also mindful of her commitments to her children. her unchallenged evidence at paragraph 404 of her trial affidavit, was that paid work could only occur during early mornings and school hours. the de facto wife clearly described the special needs that ee has and the unpredictability of when the de facto wife may be called upon to support her daughter physically (see for example paragraph 391 of her trial affidavit).
315 in this regard, despite robust cross-examination of her, i am satisfied that the de facto wife’s historical income was minimal.
316 given the above circumstances, irrespective of any finding about the de facto wife’s health issues, i accept her evidence that as an allied health worker (for which she has qualifications) she can only work for six hours per day.[94] on the basis of her evidence, i find that the de facto wife has engaged in paid employment to the extent of her current capacity.
317 for the reasons set out above, in circumstances where the de facto wife has no income, i am satisfied that the de facto wife has a weekly deficit of income over expenses in excess of $730, and that she is currently unable to support herself adequately.
does the de facto husband have an ability to pay?
318 even if i disregard my earlier findings about his capacity to earn income/access financial resources, even on his current questionable evidence, the de facto husband has disclosed to a current gross weekly income of $3,455.
319 part g of the de facto husband’s latest financial statement quantifies his weekly expenses at $3,239. just like the de facto wife (and in the absence of any strong cross-examination on the issue), i have considered whether these expenses are reasonably necessary and unavoidable.
320 like the de facto wife, the de facto husband does not have accommodation expenses for his home per se, because the farm is owned by the family trust. similarly, all expenses related to the car he uses are not borne by him.[95] i am unable to quantify the “benefit” he receives from these circumstances.
321 at item 20 of his financial statement, the de facto husband says he pays $500 per week for superannuation. in the context of his employment status as a director of the family trust and shareholder in li, such payments can only be in the form of a voluntary contributions. viewed through that prism, i am not satisfied that the payment of $500 is either reasonable or unavoidable.
322 the de facto husband lives with ms r who he says earns an average of $1,200 per week and in her trial affidavit, ms r says she is health worker. ms r says that she and the de facto husband have totally separate finances and she does not contribute any rent or other outgoings related to either the home or the farm more generally. ms r says that she and the de facto husband share grocery expenses, the quantification of which is not evident from the material before the court.
323 the de facto husband does have some capital assets that he could liquidate to provide support to the de facto wife including shareholdings in two publicly listed companies totalling over $8,000 and accounts totalling at least $6,000 (noting that there was some controversy about these which is not relevant to determine the current issue).
324 for the reasons above, i find that the de facto husband’s reasonable weekly expenses are $2,739, calculated by deducting $500 from $3,239 being the total at part g of his financial statement. although i am highly sceptical of his evidence and noting my earlier findings on this point, viewed through the prism of my task as regards his capacity to support the de facto wife, it is sufficient for me to say that the de facto husband’s income is at least $3,455 per week. i find that his reasonably necessary and unavoidable expenses are $2,739. in other words, the de facto husband has a surplus of income over expenses of over $716 and accordingly i am satisfied that he has an ability to provide to support to the de facto wife.
how much should the de facto husband pay to support the de facto wife?
325 the de facto husband is 52 years old and the de facto wife is 42 years old. the de facto husband is in good health and engages in appropriate gainful employment. there is evidence that the de facto wife experiences a range of mental health and physical issues outlined earlier in this judgment and in tandem with her parenting responsibilities, i have found that her capacity for appropriate gainful employment is limited. at present the de facto wife is unemployed but says she could work up to six hours per day in the allied health industry.
326 both parties, to varying degrees, have capital assets that could be liquidated and applied to their support. both of them have modest savings with the de facto husband having access to publicly-listed shares. in addition, there is the trust account money ($47,555.15), the source of which came from the de facto husband.
327 it is contended by the de facto husband that mr m is a financial resource. i have addressed this issue, insofar as even if i was satisfied that into the future, mr m had the capacity to continue supporting his daughter, why should she have to ask him in the first place?
328 i am satisfied, that a standard of living for the de facto wife that is in all the circumstances reasonable is reflected in her weekly expenditure as quantified earlier in the judgment. unfortunately, i cannot strictly compare the expenses listed by the de facto wife at part n with those of the de facto husband because he chose not to complete that section of the form. this oversight is unusual in circumstances where the form clearly identifies the need to specify expenses whenever specific types of relief are sought including orders for maintenance regarding either party. clearly, the de facto husband was alive to this issue given the orders of the court made 13 september 2021 and the de facto wife’s amended initiating application filed on 24 september 2021, some four months earlier than his financial statement.
329 the de facto wife seeks a one-off lump sum payment of spousal maintenance rather than ongoing periodic payments. the sum sought reflects the balance held in trust and would not require the de facto husband to borrow funds, sell capital assets or divert his income.
330 in the absence of any submissions to the contrary, i am satisfied that the de facto husband’s lifestyle would not decrease as a result of the relief sought by the de facto wife and conversely, it is inevitable that the de facto wife’s lifestyle would improve. given the parties’ history of overseas travel to places such as country aaa, country bbb and country ccc, and in the absence of any other evidence suggestive of a contrary finding, i am not satisfied that any lump sum spousal maintenance would improve the de facto wife’s standard of living to above that which she enjoyed in the de facto relationship.
331 there was no evidence upon which i could make a finding as to the extent (if any) that a payment of spousal maintenance would increase the de facto wife’s earning capacity by enabling her to undertake any course or training or to establish herself in a business or otherwise improve her employment outlook.
332 i rely on the previous findings made about the de facto wife’s contributions during the de facto relationship in regards to the de facto husband’s income.
333 the de facto relationship endured for about four (4) years. the de facto wife says that her income earning capacity has been impacted by the family violence visited upon her. i have made findings that these acts have (at the very least) exacerbated her pre-existing depression and deficits in her concentration, self-esteem and motivation. all acts of family violence are denied by the de facto husband despite convictions having been recorded.
334 i have already considered the robb & robb argument contended by the de facto husband and have given further consideration to that contention in assessing the spousal maintenance application.
335 i accept the de facto wife’s unchallenged evidence that she is unlikely to receive ongoing child support from the children’s father due to his recent unemployment.[96] it was evident from the de facto husband’s submissions as regards robb & robb that during the relationship, the family received little (if any) financial support from the children’s father and i accept that sadly, a substantial lump sum payment received by the de facto wife post-separation has now been spent (mainly if not all of it on legal fees for these proceedings).
336 i also need to consider the property adjustment order being made in these proceedings. it would appear that the de facto husband will need to increase his debt level to raise the cash payment to the de facto wife, however the lump sum spousal maintenance sought by the de facto wife comes from a pre-existing cash deposit. that sum has been there for some years and in the absence of the de facto husband having the benefit of it, he has still been able to continue to manage the farm, including the construction of shed 3, as well as his managing his other expenses.
337 given the level of his income and (for example) the voluntary nature of his contribution towards superannuation, i am satisfied that he is capable of providing lump sum spousal maintenance to the de facto wife.
338 i also acknowledge that the property adjustment order will permit the de facto wife the opportunity to house herself independently of her parents although her intentions as to future accommodation remain unclear, including whether she could afford to buy her own home. the de facto wife will be in receipt of property greater than currently held by her but she should not be expected to dip into those funds in order to support herself and the children.[97]
339 as mentioned earlier, the amended initiating application introducing spousal maintenance relief was filed on 12 december 2019. in the absence of any submission to the contrary, i am satisfied that at least by the court event on 28 may 2020, the de facto husband was aware of the relief being sought because orders were made granting leave for the de facto wife to apply out of time.
340 i have already referred to the unchallenged submission made by counsel for the de facto wife that at the hearing of the interim spousal maintenance application, the de facto husband conceded that he had the capacity to pay $500 to support the de facto wife. in submissions, that sum was extrapolated over 1 year and 42 weeks (being the time between date of filing of the amended initiating application and the final hearing) with the total coming to $47,000.
341 i note that in the calculation of her claim, the lump sum payment does not make up the entire shortfall identified by me. given the circumstances set out above, in my view, it is appropriate that the claim be less than the total shortfall to take account of possible future income that she may secure.
342 for the reasons above, i am satisfied that it is proper for the de facto husband to pay to the de facto wife lump sum spousal maintenance fixed in the sum of $47,000, with such payment facilitated by a transfer of part of the trust account money.
application for costs
343 self-evidently, one of the reasons why i have traversed the procedural history of the proceedings is because both parties have sought costs orders against the other.
344 the de facto husband sought that the de facto wife reimburse him one-half of the single expert fees that he paid in the first instance. the de facto husband’s claim was quantified at $18,204.50.
345 in her amended initiating application, the de facto wife sought that the de facto husband pay her costs incidental to these proceedings. when making concessions about objections to her evidence, counsel submitted that such evidence was not relevant to the substantive proceedings but may become relevant with respect to costs.
346 on 18 february 2022, the court observed that it would consider in chambers any application pursuant to the federal proceedings (costs) act 1981 (cth).
347 rather than deal with these competing claims in an ad hoc way, i have formed a view that i should take a holistic approach to the costs dispute which should result in a more efficient use of both the parties’ time and financial resources and the resources of the court.
348 for the reasons above, i have decided to fix a date for the hearing of all costs applications with directions to be made in support of that event occurring in a timely and efficient manner with a view to the early disposal of that aspect of the dispute.
overarching purpose – the law
349 finally, upon reflection, i consider that it is appropriate that i make some comments about the general conduct of the trial. these observations are made in a vacuum, devoid of the parties’ motivations (if relevant) but rather meant for the advancement of the court’s process, the practice of those who appear before it and may inform any costs applications that the parties agitate before me.
350 during proceedings and (from my perspective this trial), the court is invited to make decisions that relate to the civil practice and procedure of the court, whether it is the admittance of evidence that is late or requests for short adjournments so that parties and their lawyers can confer before proceeding further.
351 every time this occurs, the court is mandated to consider the overarching purpose, see s190 of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 (cth) (‘the fcfcoa act’) which is set out below:-
section 190 – overarching purpose of civil practice and procedure provisions (1) the overarching purpose of the civil practice and procedure provisions is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes: (a) according to law, and (b) as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible. note 1: see also paragraphs 5(a) and(b). note 2: the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) must give effect to principles in the family law act 1975 when exercising jurisdiction in relation to proceedings under that act. (2) without limiting subsection (1), the overarching purpose includes the following objectives: (a) the just determination of all proceedings before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), (b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court, (c) the efficient disposal of the court's overall caseload, (d) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute (3) the civil practice and procedure provisions must be interpreted and applied, and any power conferred or duty imposed by them (including the power to make rules of court) must be exercised or carried out, in the way that best promotes the overarching purpose. (4) the civil practice and procedure provisions are the following, so far as they apply in relation to civil proceedings: (a) the rules of court (b) any other provision made by or under this act or any other act with respect to the practice and procedure of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2).  the overarching purpose of the civil practice and procedure provisions is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes: (a) according to law, and (b) as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.  without limiting subsection (1), the overarching purpose includes the following objectives: (a) the just determination of all proceedings before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), (b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court, (c) the efficient disposal of the court's overall caseload, (d) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute (3) the civil practice and procedure provisions must be interpreted and applied, and any power conferred or duty imposed by them (including the power to make rules of court) must be exercised or carried out, in the way that best promotes the overarching purpose. (4) the civil practice and procedure provisions are the following, so far as they apply in relation to civil proceedings: (a) the rules of court (b) any other provision made by or under this act or any other act with respect to the practice and procedure of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2).
352 to emphasise the importance of the overarching purpose in the administration of justice, the commonwealth parliament chose to oblige parties and their lawyers to conduct the proceedings before the court in a manner that is consistent with the overarching purpose (see s 191 of the fcfcoa act). for ease of reference s 191 is replicated below:-
section 191 - parties to act consistently with the overarching purpose (1) the parties to a civil proceeding before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose. (2) a party's lawyer must, in the conduct of such a proceeding before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) (including negotiations for settlement) on the party's behalf: (a) take account of the duty imposed on the party by subsection (1), and (b) assist the party to comply with the duty. (3) the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge may, for the purpose of enabling a party to comply with the duty imposed by subsection (1), require the party's lawyer to give the party an estimate of: (a) the likely duration of the proceeding or part of the proceeding, and (b) the likely amount of costs that the party will have to pay in connection with the proceeding or part of the proceeding, including: (i) the costs that the lawyer will charge to the party, and (ii) any other costs that the party will have to pay in the event that the party is unsuccessful in the proceeding or part of the proceeding.  the parties to a civil proceeding before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose. (2) a party's lawyer must, in the conduct of such a proceeding before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) (including negotiations for settlement) on the party's behalf: (a) take account of the duty imposed on the party by subsection (1), and (b) assist the party to comply with the duty. (3) the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge may, for the purpose of enabling a party to comply with the duty imposed by subsection (1), require the party's lawyer to give the party an estimate of: (a) the likely duration of the proceeding or part of the proceeding, and (b) the likely amount of costs that the party will have to pay in connection with the proceeding or part of the proceeding, including: (i) the costs that the lawyer will charge to the party, and (ii) any other costs that the party will have to pay in the event that the party is unsuccessful in the proceeding or part of the proceeding.
note: paragraph (b)--in relation to a family law or child support proceeding, the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) may make an order as to costs under section 149 of the family law act 1975 if the court is of the opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so. (4) in exercising the discretion to award costs in a civil proceeding, the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge must take account of any failure to comply with the duty imposed by subsection (1) or (2). (5) without limiting the exercise of that discretion, the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge may order a party's lawyer to bear costs personally. (6) if the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge orders a lawyer to bear costs personally because of a failure to comply with the duty imposed by subsection (2), the lawyer must not recover the costs from the lawyer's client  in exercising the discretion to award costs in a civil proceeding, the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge must take account of any failure to comply with the duty imposed by subsection (1) or (2). (5) without limiting the exercise of that discretion, the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge may order a party's lawyer to bear costs personally. (6) if the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge orders a lawyer to bear costs personally because of a failure to comply with the duty imposed by subsection (2), the lawyer must not recover the costs from the lawyer's client
353 the court adopted the legislative mandate set out in ss 190 and 191 of the fcfcoa act by including the overarching purpose within its rules of the court and noting that the rules must be interpreted and applied in a manner that best promotes the overarching purpose: see r1.04 federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) (‘the flr 2021’).
354 the full court of the federal court of australia in crown resorts ltd v zantran pty ltd [2020] fcfca 1 said this about the court as a public resource:
the existence and enforcement of these obligations and of the overarching or overriding purpose are informed by, and a product of, the high public purpose and public policy that, to the extent possible, the exercise of judicial power by the courts should be available to the public to resolve their disputes in a timely and cost-effective way. such availability and access to the administration of justice can be seen to be an incident of the rule of law.[98]
355 the impact of the overarching purpose on the obligations of legal practitioners and parties is significant and applies irrespective of whether they have legal representation. in camm v linke nominees, the federal court observed at paragraph [54] that:
one element of the overarching purpose is “the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court”. another is the “efficient disposal of the court’s overall caseload”. conduct on the part of a litigant or a practitioner which impacts adversely on the pursuit of these purposes may be taken into account when costs are awarded.
356 to reinforce the significance of the obligations imposed by the overarching purpose, r 1.04 says this:
1.04 overarching purpose (1) the overarching purpose of these rules, as provided by section 67 of the federal circuit and family court act, is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes according to law and as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible. note 1: these rules must be interpreted and applied, and any power conferred or duty imposed by them must be exercised or carried out, in the way that best promotes the overarching purpose (see subsection 67(3) of the federal circuit and family court act). note 2: see sections 190 and 191 of the federal circuit and family court act in relation to the overarching purpose of the rules of the federal circuit and family court (division 2). see also the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) (family law) rules 2021 which applies these rules with modifications. (2) parties to family law proceedings must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose. note: see subsection 68(1) of the federal circuit and family court act. (3) a party’s lawyer must, in the conduct of a proceeding before the court (including negotiations for settlement) on the party’s behalf (a) take account of the duty imposed on the party referred to in subrule (2), and (b) assist the party to comply with the duty. note: see subsection 68(2) of the federal circuit and family court act.  the overarching purpose of these rules, as provided by section 67 of the federal circuit and family court act, is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes according to law and as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.  parties to family law proceedings must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose.  a party’s lawyer must, in the conduct of a proceeding before the court (including negotiations for settlement) on the party’s behalf (a) take account of the duty imposed on the party referred to in subrule (2), and (b) assist the party to comply with the duty.
357 in addition, r 12.08 demands that legal costs be fair, reasonable and proportionate.
overarching purpose – discussion
358 when this trial started, i observed that ms ferman and mr lapham had been parties to litigation longer than either of them thought they had been parties to a de facto relationship. i made reference to the fictitious case of jarndyce v jarndyce. my point in doing so was to try and focus both the parties and their legal teams on how much time had been lost along the litigation pathway and that it was imperative that the trial stay on track, on time and be finalised as quickly and efficiently as possible.
359 benjamin j in simic v norton [2017] famca 1007 made fairly frank assessments about the trial before him and although this case was not a “sydney matter”, there is the potential to find that the conduct of parties and/or their lawyers, has some synchronicity with what his honour observed below -  in the sydney registry of the family court i have observed what seems to be a culture of bitter, adversarial and highly aggressive family law litigation. whether this win at all costs, concede little or nothing, chase every rabbit down every hole and hang the consequences approach to family law litigation is a reflection of a sydney-based culture by some or many litigants or whether it is an approach by some legal practitioners or a combination of both, i do not know. [3] whichever is the cause, the consequences of obscenely high legal costs are destructive of the emotional, social and financial wellbeing of the parties and their children. it must stop.
360 i have not been asked to determine any costs applications at this stage so i cannot take issues of conduct any further, but given the recent introduction of the overarching purpose i thought it worthwhile to engage in the above exercise as it may be relevant to the upcoming costs hearing.
associate: dated: 5 april 2022
[1] unless otherwise stipulated, a legislative reference is a reference to a provision within the family law act 1975 (cth)[2] see ss90sb & 90sd of the act[3] section 190 federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 (cth)[4] unless otherwise stipulated, a subordinate legislative reference is a reference to a provision within the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)[5] for convenience, references to any content within the trial affidavit of ms ferman shall be prefaced by “ff” followed by the numbered paragraph enclosed within square brackets and any exhibits to the affidavit identified alpha-numerically. [6] exhibit “w2” consisted of an indexed and paginated tender bundle with the index identifying the documents contained therein bearing markings from “w2.1” to “w2.26”.[7] for convenience, references to any content within the trial affidavit of mr lapham shall be prefaced by “l” followed by the numbered paragraph enclosed within square brackets and any annexures to the affidavit identified alpha-numerically.[8] exhibit “h3” consisted of an indexed and paginated tender bundle with the index identifying the documents contained therein bearing markings from “h3.1” to “h3.54”. additional tenders were accepted from the de facto husband, and as may be relevant, shall be identified in the judgment.[9] see item “rule 7.10” federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (f2021l01197) explanatory statement (cth)[10] l [25][11] f [165][12] f [169][13] f [171] & exhibit “f10”[14] l [213][15] l [45] & [53] & exhibit “h3.5”[16] exhibit “h1” at page 10[17] see orders of the court made 22 november 2021[18] see for example, lotta & lotta [2017] famca 50 at [281] – [290][19] l [159][20] f [171] & exhibit “f10” being an email sent by the de facto husband to his mortgage adviser about the payment of rent by the de facto wife. [21] f [25] & [214][22] f [324] & exhibit “f26”[23] f [235] & [236][24] f [237][25] f [227] & [228][26] botsis & botsis [2016] famca 249 at [41] to [44][27] see for example, f[193][28] f [58][29] l [182][30] affidavit of mr s at [31] and affidavit of mr o at annexure d, appendix e, [e.2][31] affidavit of mr o at annexure d, appendix d, [d.1][32] exhibits “w2.14” & “w2.15”[33] exhibit “w2.11”[34] l [85][35] l [90] & [91][36] f [74][37] l [240] to [244].[38] see fields & smith and grier & malphas above[39] f [260][40] f [233] & exhibit “f24”[41] see diary note dated 15.07.2014 at exhibit “w2.13”[42] see f [231] & exhibit “f23”[43] see diary note dated 11.11.2015 at exhibit “w2.13”[44] see diary note dated 11.11.2015 at exhibit “w2.13”[45] paragraph (c) of the affidavit set out on page 1 of the de facto husband’s latest financial statement[46] affidavit of mr o , annexure d, notes to schedule 1, paragraph 12.[47] see n.46[48] in the marriage of black and kellner [1992] famca 2; (1992) 15 fam lr 343, in the marriage of weir (1992) 16 fam lr 153[49] in the marriage of kannis [2002] famca 1150; (2003) 30 fam lr 83[50] see also in the marriage of mezzacappa [1987] famca 20; (1987) 11 fam lr 957[51] affidavit of mr o, annexure d (at page 49)[52] f[386], [392], [395][53] keating at [35]-[36][54] see for example, koch & kest [2021] famca 408 at [26][55] see exhibits “w2.16” to “w2.20”[56] exhibit “w2.17”[57] exhibit “w2.19”[58] exhibit “w2.1”[59] see n.58[60] see also f [357], [361] & [364][61] l [13][62] l [43] – [57][63] f [300][64] f [301][65] exhibit “f28” at page 302[66] see for example exhibit “f28” at page 302[67] see koch & kest at [123] where gill j opined that expert evidence was required to make the causal nexus.[68] f[413][69] exhibit “h3.20”[70] exhibit “h3.24”[71] exhibit “h3.28” & “h3.34”[72] exhibit “h3.31”[73] f [411][74] f [415] & [416][75] f [411][76] see n.75 & f [412(b)][77] see n.75 [78] f [372 (g)][79] exhibit “h2”[80] exhibits “w2.7”, “w2.6” & “w2.5”[81] exhibit “w2.7”[82] exhibit “w2.6”[83] f [216][84] exhibit “w2.5”[85] f [380] [86] hobson & hobson [2020] famcafc 251 at [32][87] in the marriage of bevan (1993) 120 flr 283[88] bevan at [290][89] in the exercise of its jurisdiction to make a spousal maintenance order, a court shall disregard any entitlement of a party to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit[90] see in the marriage of mee & ferguson [1986] famca 3; in the marriage of gyselman [1991] famca 93.[91] hall & hall [2016] hca 23 at [54][92] for a similar approach, see bernard & welsby [2020] fcca 1721 at [193][93] f[403][94] f[411][95] financial statement of mr lapham at items 21, 27 and 35[96] f[418][97] in the marriage of bevan at page 288[98] crown resorts ltd v zantran pty ltd [2020] fcfca 1 at [3]