last updated: 28 july 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bei & foong [2022] fedcfamc2f 655
orders
on a final basis, the court orders by consent that:  commencing from the date of these orders until 29 september 2022, every alternate saturday for a period of 2 hours as supervised by c supervision service at times as nominated by c supervision service, (b) for the 6 months following order 3a, every saturday from 10:00am to 6:00pm each alternate weekend within the australian capital territory, (c) for the 6 months following order 3b, commencing on the second and fourth saturday in every month from 10:00am saturday to 6:00pm the following sunday within the australian capital territory, (d) following order 3c, from 10:00am each alternate saturday until 6:00pm sunday (commencing at 10:00am friday in the event the friday is a public holiday within the act and concluding at 6:00pm in the event the monday is a public holiday with act), with each alternate weekend period occurring within the australian capital territory,   for the 6 months following order 3a, every saturday from 10:00am to 6:00pm each alternate weekend within the australian capital territory, (c) for the 6 months following order 3b, commencing on the second and fourth saturday in every month from 10:00am saturday to 6:00pm the following sunday within the australian capital territory, (d) following order 3c, from 10:00am each alternate saturday until 6:00pm sunday (commencing at 10:00am friday in the event the friday is a public holiday within the act and concluding at 6:00pm in the event the monday is a public holiday with act), with each alternate weekend period occurring within the australian capital territory,   for the 6 months following order 3b, commencing on the second and fourth saturday in every month from 10:00am saturday to 6:00pm the following sunday within the australian capital territory, (d) following order 3c, from 10:00am each alternate saturday until 6:00pm sunday (commencing at 10:00am friday in the event the friday is a public holiday within the act and concluding at 6:00pm in the event the monday is a public holiday with act), with each alternate weekend period occurring within the australian capital territory,   following order 3c, from 10:00am each alternate saturday until 6:00pm sunday (commencing at 10:00am friday in the event the friday is a public holiday within the act and concluding at 6:00pm in the event the monday is a public holiday with act), with each alternate weekend period occurring within the australian capital territory,   during the term 1, 2 and 3 gazetted school holiday periods for the state / territory in which the child resides: (i) in years ending in even numbers or zero, the second half commencing at 10:00am on the middle saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the day prior to the commencement of the following school term, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, the first half commencing at 10:00am on the first saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the middle saturday of the school holiday period. (b) on a week about basis during the term 4 gazetted school holiday period for the state / territory in which the child resides: (i) commencing at 10:00am on the second saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the following saturday and each alternate seven-day period thereafter during years ending in an even number or zero, (ii) commencing at 10:00am on the first saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the following saturday and each alternate seven-day period thereafter during years ending in an odd number.   in years ending in even numbers or zero, the second half commencing at 10:00am on the middle saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the day prior to the commencement of the following school term, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, the first half commencing at 10:00am on the first saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the middle saturday of the school holiday period.  ) in years ending in odd numbers, the first half commencing at 10:00am on the first saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the middle saturday of the school holiday period.   on a week about basis during the term 4 gazetted school holiday period for the state / territory in which the child resides: (i) commencing at 10:00am on the second saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the following saturday and each alternate seven-day period thereafter during years ending in an even number or zero, (ii) commencing at 10:00am on the first saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the following saturday and each alternate seven-day period thereafter during years ending in an odd number.   commencing at 10:00am on the second saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the following saturday and each alternate seven-day period thereafter during years ending in an even number or zero, (ii) commencing at 10:00am on the first saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the following saturday and each alternate seven-day period thereafter during years ending in an odd number.  ) commencing at 10:00am on the first saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 6:00pm on the following saturday and each alternate seven-day period thereafter during years ending in an odd number.
communication
changeover
health/medical
schooling  sporting functions, activities, and competitions. (b) extracurricular activities that allow for parental attendance, and (c) any other function involving the child’s schooling, social or significant event.   extracurricular activities that allow for parental attendance, and (c) any other function involving the child’s schooling, social or significant event.   any other function involving the child’s schooling, social or significant event.
travel/passport
other orders  the mother may request, in writing, a test once in every 3-month period, (b) the father will undertake the test within 14 days of the request and provide the results within 7 days of receipt, (c) the father will pay for the costs of testing for the first 3 year period following the making of these orders. (d) the mother will pay for the costs of testing thereafter.   the father will undertake the test within 14 days of the request and provide the results within 7 days of receipt, (c) the father will pay for the costs of testing for the first 3 year period following the making of these orders. (d) the mother will pay for the costs of testing thereafter.   the father will pay for the costs of testing for the first 3 year period following the making of these orders. (d) the mother will pay for the costs of testing thereafter.   the mother will pay for the costs of testing thereafter.
and the court further orders that:
note: the form of the order is subject to the entry in the court’s records. note: this copy of the court’s reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 10.14(b) federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13 federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth). section 121 of the family law act 1975 (cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to publish proceedings that identify persons, associated persons, or witnesses involved in family law proceedings.
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
in the next few years x will commence school in australia. she is currently known as x on her birth certificate. i do not wish her to be confused or embarrassed by having a different surname from me and seek an order that her surname be changed on her birth certificate to mine. i do not need a passport for x currently as i can’t afford overseas travel. at some time in the future i hope to be able to afford overseas travel for her and do not wish to be required to obtain mr bei’s permission for a passport to issue for her.
outline of principle
in deciding the issue in each case there is no onus of proof. it is for the court to balance in its discretion the factors for and against change. the guiding principle is that the welfare of the child is the paramount consideration. it must stand above the wishes or proprietary interests of the parents.
a parent who is granted the sole custody of a child is vested with power to make decisions over a great many matters, affecting the child’s health, welfare and education, his or her physical, emotional, intellectual and social development... ... the desires of the parents are, however, of secondary importance when put alongside the welfare and wishes of the child in question. because a change in a child’s surname may cause him or her confusion and because the issue usually arises between the parents the court will exercise a supervisory role in the matter when called upon to do so.   the welfare of the child is the paramount consideration, (b) the short and long term effects of any change in the child’s surname, (c) any embarrassment likely to be experienced by the child if its name is different to that of the parent with custody, care or control, (d) any confusion of identity which may arise for the child if his or her name is changed or is not changed, (e) the effect which any change in surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bore during the marriage, and[3] (f) the effect of frequent or random changes of name.   the short and long term effects of any change in the child’s surname, (c) any embarrassment likely to be experienced by the child if its name is different to that of the parent with custody, care or control, (d) any confusion of identity which may arise for the child if his or her name is changed or is not changed, (e) the effect which any change in surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bore during the marriage, and[3] (f) the effect of frequent or random changes of name.   any embarrassment likely to be experienced by the child if its name is different to that of the parent with custody, care or control, (d) any confusion of identity which may arise for the child if his or her name is changed or is not changed, (e) the effect which any change in surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bore during the marriage, and[3] (f) the effect of frequent or random changes of name.   any confusion of identity which may arise for the child if his or her name is changed or is not changed, (e) the effect which any change in surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bore during the marriage, and[3] (f) the effect of frequent or random changes of name.   the effect which any change in surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bore during the marriage, and[3] (f) the effect of frequent or random changes of name.   the effect of frequent or random changes of name.   the advantages both in the short- and long-term which will accrue to the child if their name remains as it is now, (b) the contact that the father has had and is likely to have in the future with the child, (c) the degree of identification the child now has with the father, (d) the degree of identification the child has now with the mother (or any step parent), and (e) the desire of the father that the original name be restored.   the contact that the father has had and is likely to have in the future with the child, (c) the degree of identification the child now has with the father, (d) the degree of identification the child has now with the mother (or any step parent), and (e) the desire of the father that the original name be restored.   the degree of identification the child now has with the father, (d) the degree of identification the child has now with the mother (or any step parent), and (e) the desire of the father that the original name be restored.   the degree of identification the child has now with the mother (or any step parent), and (e) the desire of the father that the original name be restored.   the desire of the father that the original name be restored.
consideration and disposition  the mother’s sole care of x since birth, (b) the almost complete absence of the father from x’s life until quite recently, (c) the abjectly abysmal if not essentially non-existent co-parenting relationship between the parties, (d) the father’s desire or “wish” for x to retain his name is, according to authority, a secondary matter compared to the primacy of x’s best interests and her identification and relationship with her primary and sole carer, her mother, and (e) the very recent, very limited and very gradual introduction of the father into x’s life.   the almost complete absence of the father from x’s life until quite recently, (c) the abjectly abysmal if not essentially non-existent co-parenting relationship between the parties, (d) the father’s desire or “wish” for x to retain his name is, according to authority, a secondary matter compared to the primacy of x’s best interests and her identification and relationship with her primary and sole carer, her mother, and (e) the very recent, very limited and very gradual introduction of the father into x’s life.   the abjectly abysmal if not essentially non-existent co-parenting relationship between the parties, (d) the father’s desire or “wish” for x to retain his name is, according to authority, a secondary matter compared to the primacy of x’s best interests and her identification and relationship with her primary and sole carer, her mother, and (e) the very recent, very limited and very gradual introduction of the father into x’s life.   the father’s desire or “wish” for x to retain his name is, according to authority, a secondary matter compared to the primacy of x’s best interests and her identification and relationship with her primary and sole carer, her mother, and (e) the very recent, very limited and very gradual introduction of the father into x’s life.   the very recent, very limited and very gradual introduction of the father into x’s life.
associate: dated: 24 may 2022
dated: 24 may 2022
[1] chapman & palmer [1978] famca 86; (1978) 34 flr 405; 4 fam lr 462 especially at 468, 469 and 471 respectively. [2] 4 fam lr at 471.[3] see generally, beach & stemmler (1979) flc 90-692; fooks v mccarthy [1993] famca 117; (1994) flc 92-450; darley & darley [2016] famcafc 10.[4] chapman v palmer (1978) 4 fam lr at 466.