last updated: 7 july 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
dashwood & mallinder (no 3) [2022] fedcfamc2f 523
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
living arrangements   from the date of these orders until the child turns two years of age, on mondays and wednesdays from 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm and the first three weekends of each month from saturday 9 am to 2 pm and from sunday 9 am to 2 pm, (b) from when the child turns two years of age until january 2023, on mondays and wednesdays from 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm and alternate weekends of from saturday 9 am to 5 pm and from sunday 9 am to 5 pm, (c) from january 2023 until the child turns three years of age, on mondays and wednesdays from 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm and alternate weekends of from saturday 12 pm to sunday 5 pm, (d) from when the child turns three years of age, on mondays and wednesdays from 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm and alternate weekends of from friday 5 pm to sunday 5pm, (e) from when the child turns four years of age, on mondays from 1:30 pm to 4:30pm and wednesday 1:30 pm to thursday 8:30 a.m. and alternate weekends from friday 5 pm to sunday 5 pm.   from when the child turns two years of age until january 2023, on mondays and wednesdays from 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm and alternate weekends of from saturday 9 am to 5 pm and from sunday 9 am to 5 pm, (c) from january 2023 until the child turns three years of age, on mondays and wednesdays from 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm and alternate weekends of from saturday 12 pm to sunday 5 pm, (d) from when the child turns three years of age, on mondays and wednesdays from 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm and alternate weekends of from friday 5 pm to sunday 5pm, (e) from when the child turns four years of age, on mondays from 1:30 pm to 4:30pm and wednesday 1:30 pm to thursday 8:30 a.m. and alternate weekends from friday 5 pm to sunday 5 pm.   from january 2023 until the child turns three years of age, on mondays and wednesdays from 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm and alternate weekends of from saturday 12 pm to sunday 5 pm, (d) from when the child turns three years of age, on mondays and wednesdays from 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm and alternate weekends of from friday 5 pm to sunday 5pm, (e) from when the child turns four years of age, on mondays from 1:30 pm to 4:30pm and wednesday 1:30 pm to thursday 8:30 a.m. and alternate weekends from friday 5 pm to sunday 5 pm.   from when the child turns three years of age, on mondays and wednesdays from 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm and alternate weekends of from friday 5 pm to sunday 5pm, (e) from when the child turns four years of age, on mondays from 1:30 pm to 4:30pm and wednesday 1:30 pm to thursday 8:30 a.m. and alternate weekends from friday 5 pm to sunday 5 pm.   from when the child turns four years of age, on mondays from 1:30 pm to 4:30pm and wednesday 1:30 pm to thursday 8:30 a.m. and alternate weekends from friday 5 pm to sunday 5 pm.   the father’s birthday, (b) father’s day, and (c) easter friday.   father’s day, and (c) easter friday.   easter friday.
travel  at times as agreed between the parties in writing, (b) on no more than four occasions per year, (c) for a period of no more than 10 days, and (d) at the sole expense of the mother.   on no more than four occasions per year, (c) for a period of no more than 10 days, and (d) at the sole expense of the mother.   for a period of no more than 10 days, and (d) at the sole expense of the mother.   at the sole expense of the mother.
relocation  within 200km of town d, including melbourne, the child shall spend time with the father from after school friday or 3:00 pm if not a school day to 9:00 am monday or 9:00 am tuesday if not a school day or a public holiday, on alternate weekends, or (b) the town d area, the child shall in addition to the time specified in (a), spend time with the father from after school thursday to before school friday in the alternate week.   the town d area, the child shall in addition to the time specified in (a), spend time with the father from after school thursday to before school friday in the alternate week.
family dispute resolution  either attend counselling or mediation with an organisation recognised under the family law act 1975 (as amended) or by the commonwealth attorney- general, or (b) participate in family dispute resolution with a family relationship centre or a person authorised under s.10g of the family law act 1975 (as amended).   participate in family dispute resolution with a family relationship centre or a person authorised under s.10g of the family law act 1975 (as amended).
parenting orders programme
non-denigration
other orders
reasons for judgment
judge young
background
applications during the trial
mental health 31. mental health is considered a potential rather a substantive risk factor. ms dashwood reported she was diagnosed with post natal depression, anxiety and depression in january 2021 and is medicated with 50mg sertraline daily. ms dashwood reported symptomology consistent with anxiety largely related to this litigation.
the evidence in the trial
the legislative pathway
ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child,...   children have the right to know and be cared for by both of their parents ..., and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development ..., and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children ...   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development ..., and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children ...   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children ...
... if a parenting order provides (or is to provide) the child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, the court must: a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interest of the child, and b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (including a provision in the order) the child spend equal time with each of the parents.
a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interest of the child, and b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (including a provision in the order) the child spend equal time with each of the parents.
b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (including a provision in the order) the child spend equal time with each of the parents.
c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (including a provision in the order) the child spend equal time with each of the parents.
... if a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) the child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and b) the court does not make an order (included provision in the order) for the child spend equal time with each of the parents, the court must: a) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interest of the child, and b) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (including a provision in the order) the child spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.
a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) the child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and b) the court does not make an order (included provision in the order) for the child spend equal time with each of the parents,
b) the court does not make an order (included provision in the order) for the child spend equal time with each of the parents,
a) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interest of the child, and b) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (including a provision in the order) the child spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.
b) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (including a provision in the order) the child spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.
c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (including a provision in the order) the child spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child: and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child: and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child: and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child: and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.
consideration
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interest of the child is the paramount consideration.   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
a) ... the legislation requires that there be a primary consideration given to the benefit of the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents but it does not purport to prescribe how that meaningful relationship is best promoted in the circumstances of any one case... b) even if the move results in diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
b) even if the move results in diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure that the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994.) (emphasis in original).
the first and very important observation we would make ... is that the expression “meaningful relationship” is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’.   the attachment between the child and the non-residence parent, (b) that parent’s competence, (c) the child’s development in terms of their ability to self-soothe and to maintain a representation of the other parent, (d) a secure attachment with the non-residence parent, which is likely to have formed if there is frequent and consistent contact leading up to that point in time.   that parent’s competence, (c) the child’s development in terms of their ability to self-soothe and to maintain a representation of the other parent, (d) a secure attachment with the non-residence parent, which is likely to have formed if there is frequent and consistent contact leading up to that point in time.   the child’s development in terms of their ability to self-soothe and to maintain a representation of the other parent, (d) a secure attachment with the non-residence parent, which is likely to have formed if there is frequent and consistent contact leading up to that point in time.   a secure attachment with the non-residence parent, which is likely to have formed if there is frequent and consistent contact leading up to that point in time.   in relation to any views expressed by the child, the child is too young to express a view. (b) in relation to the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and any other persons, including a grandparent or other relative of the child, the child is in the primary care of the mother and spends time, but not including overnight time, with the father. the child has a close and developing relationship with the father and with the paternal grandparents, particularly the paternal grandmother. (c) in relation to the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child is, to spend time and to communicate with the child, both parents seek to participate in making decisions about the child and the father has been conscientious in his approach to spending time with and communicating with the child. (ca) in relation to the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligation is to maintain the child, the father is subject to a child support assessment and there is no evidence that he has not complied with that assessment. further, the father is subject to an order of the court to pay the mother $250 a week to assist her with payment of rent so that she may practicably remain in darwin in order to foster the child’s relationship with the father. he has complied with that order. (d) in relation to the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his parents, the mother proposes a significant change in the child circumstances, the effect of which has been discussed above. (e) in relation to the practical difficulty and expensive the child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, as discussed above, the mother’s proposal will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with his father on a regular basis unless the father is able to relocate as well. (f) in relation to the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, the agreed facts between the parties include that there are currently no significant risk factors concerning either parent’s capacity to care for the child and the child is well cared for and loved by both parents. this is consistent with my assessment of the parties. i am satisfied the mother is a good and conscientious mother and the father is a devoted and conscientious father. (g) in relation to the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and of either of the child’s parents, there are no relevant matters. (h) in relation to if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child, the child is not an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. (i) in relation to the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, see (f) above. (j) in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and any other persons, including a grandparent or other relative of the child, the child is in the primary care of the mother and spends time, but not including overnight time, with the father. the child has a close and developing relationship with the father and with the paternal grandparents, particularly the paternal grandmother. (c) in relation to the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child is, to spend time and to communicate with the child, both parents seek to participate in making decisions about the child and the father has been conscientious in his approach to spending time with and communicating with the child. (ca) in relation to the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligation is to maintain the child, the father is subject to a child support assessment and there is no evidence that he has not complied with that assessment. further, the father is subject to an order of the court to pay the mother $250 a week to assist her with payment of rent so that she may practicably remain in darwin in order to foster the child’s relationship with the father. he has complied with that order. (d) in relation to the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his parents, the mother proposes a significant change in the child circumstances, the effect of which has been discussed above. (e) in relation to the practical difficulty and expensive the child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, as discussed above, the mother’s proposal will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with his father on a regular basis unless the father is able to relocate as well. (f) in relation to the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, the agreed facts between the parties include that there are currently no significant risk factors concerning either parent’s capacity to care for the child and the child is well cared for and loved by both parents. this is consistent with my assessment of the parties. i am satisfied the mother is a good and conscientious mother and the father is a devoted and conscientious father. (g) in relation to the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and of either of the child’s parents, there are no relevant matters. (h) in relation to if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child, the child is not an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. (i) in relation to the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, see (f) above. (j) in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child is, to spend time and to communicate with the child, both parents seek to participate in making decisions about the child and the father has been conscientious in his approach to spending time with and communicating with the child. (ca) in relation to the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligation is to maintain the child, the father is subject to a child support assessment and there is no evidence that he has not complied with that assessment. further, the father is subject to an order of the court to pay the mother $250 a week to assist her with payment of rent so that she may practicably remain in darwin in order to foster the child’s relationship with the father. he has complied with that order. (d) in relation to the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his parents, the mother proposes a significant change in the child circumstances, the effect of which has been discussed above. (e) in relation to the practical difficulty and expensive the child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, as discussed above, the mother’s proposal will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with his father on a regular basis unless the father is able to relocate as well. (f) in relation to the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, the agreed facts between the parties include that there are currently no significant risk factors concerning either parent’s capacity to care for the child and the child is well cared for and loved by both parents. this is consistent with my assessment of the parties. i am satisfied the mother is a good and conscientious mother and the father is a devoted and conscientious father. (g) in relation to the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and of either of the child’s parents, there are no relevant matters. (h) in relation to if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child, the child is not an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. (i) in relation to the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, see (f) above. (j) in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.  ) in relation to the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligation is to maintain the child, the father is subject to a child support assessment and there is no evidence that he has not complied with that assessment. further, the father is subject to an order of the court to pay the mother $250 a week to assist her with payment of rent so that she may practicably remain in darwin in order to foster the child’s relationship with the father. he has complied with that order. (d) in relation to the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his parents, the mother proposes a significant change in the child circumstances, the effect of which has been discussed above. (e) in relation to the practical difficulty and expensive the child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, as discussed above, the mother’s proposal will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with his father on a regular basis unless the father is able to relocate as well. (f) in relation to the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, the agreed facts between the parties include that there are currently no significant risk factors concerning either parent’s capacity to care for the child and the child is well cared for and loved by both parents. this is consistent with my assessment of the parties. i am satisfied the mother is a good and conscientious mother and the father is a devoted and conscientious father. (g) in relation to the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and of either of the child’s parents, there are no relevant matters. (h) in relation to if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child, the child is not an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. (i) in relation to the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, see (f) above. (j) in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his parents, the mother proposes a significant change in the child circumstances, the effect of which has been discussed above. (e) in relation to the practical difficulty and expensive the child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, as discussed above, the mother’s proposal will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with his father on a regular basis unless the father is able to relocate as well. (f) in relation to the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, the agreed facts between the parties include that there are currently no significant risk factors concerning either parent’s capacity to care for the child and the child is well cared for and loved by both parents. this is consistent with my assessment of the parties. i am satisfied the mother is a good and conscientious mother and the father is a devoted and conscientious father. (g) in relation to the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and of either of the child’s parents, there are no relevant matters. (h) in relation to if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child, the child is not an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. (i) in relation to the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, see (f) above. (j) in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to the practical difficulty and expensive the child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, as discussed above, the mother’s proposal will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with his father on a regular basis unless the father is able to relocate as well. (f) in relation to the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, the agreed facts between the parties include that there are currently no significant risk factors concerning either parent’s capacity to care for the child and the child is well cared for and loved by both parents. this is consistent with my assessment of the parties. i am satisfied the mother is a good and conscientious mother and the father is a devoted and conscientious father. (g) in relation to the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and of either of the child’s parents, there are no relevant matters. (h) in relation to if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child, the child is not an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. (i) in relation to the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, see (f) above. (j) in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, the agreed facts between the parties include that there are currently no significant risk factors concerning either parent’s capacity to care for the child and the child is well cared for and loved by both parents. this is consistent with my assessment of the parties. i am satisfied the mother is a good and conscientious mother and the father is a devoted and conscientious father. (g) in relation to the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and of either of the child’s parents, there are no relevant matters. (h) in relation to if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child, the child is not an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. (i) in relation to the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, see (f) above. (j) in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and of either of the child’s parents, there are no relevant matters. (h) in relation to if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child, the child is not an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. (i) in relation to the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, see (f) above. (j) in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child, the child is not an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. (i) in relation to the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, see (f) above. (j) in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, see (f) above. (j) in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, the parties made no relevant allegations. (k) family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   family violence orders are not applicable in this case. (l) in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, the court will attempt to make such an order. (m) in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   in relation to any other relevant factors circumstance, there are no other relevant factual circumstances.   from now until he is two years old each monday and wednesday from 2:30 pm to 5:30 pm and on three weekends out of four from 12 pm saturday to 1 pm sunday, (b) thereafter when the child turns three years old, the time be extended from saturday 12 pm until monday 8:30 am, (c) thereafter when the child turns four years old, that time be extended from friday 5 pm to monday 8:30 am on three weekends out of four and from 5 pm thursday to 8:30 am friday, (d) and when the child turns five years old, week about and half the school holidays.   thereafter when the child turns three years old, the time be extended from saturday 12 pm until monday 8:30 am, (c) thereafter when the child turns four years old, that time be extended from friday 5 pm to monday 8:30 am on three weekends out of four and from 5 pm thursday to 8:30 am friday, (d) and when the child turns five years old, week about and half the school holidays.   thereafter when the child turns four years old, that time be extended from friday 5 pm to monday 8:30 am on three weekends out of four and from 5 pm thursday to 8:30 am friday, (d) and when the child turns five years old, week about and half the school holidays.   and when the child turns five years old, week about and half the school holidays.
associate: dated: 27 april 2022
dated: 27 april 2022