last updated: 22 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
tyler & tyler [2022] fedcfamc2f 524
orders
the court orders that:  each sunday from 10:30am to 6:00pm, (b) on x’s birthday, if not already in the care of the father, from 4:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day and from 1:00pm to 6:00pm if a non-school day, (c) for christmas, notwithstanding any other order, from 1:00pm to 6:00pm on christmas day each year, (d) on the father’s birthday, if not already in the care of the father, from 4:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day and from 10:30am to 6:00pm if a non-school day, (e) on good friday, from 1:00pm to 6:00pm each year, and (f) at such further and other times as may be agreed to between the father and the mother from time to time in writing (including via text message).   on x’s birthday, if not already in the care of the father, from 4:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day and from 1:00pm to 6:00pm if a non-school day, (c) for christmas, notwithstanding any other order, from 1:00pm to 6:00pm on christmas day each year, (d) on the father’s birthday, if not already in the care of the father, from 4:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day and from 10:30am to 6:00pm if a non-school day, (e) on good friday, from 1:00pm to 6:00pm each year, and (f) at such further and other times as may be agreed to between the father and the mother from time to time in writing (including via text message).   for christmas, notwithstanding any other order, from 1:00pm to 6:00pm on christmas day each year, (d) on the father’s birthday, if not already in the care of the father, from 4:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day and from 10:30am to 6:00pm if a non-school day, (e) on good friday, from 1:00pm to 6:00pm each year, and (f) at such further and other times as may be agreed to between the father and the mother from time to time in writing (including via text message).   on the father’s birthday, if not already in the care of the father, from 4:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day and from 10:30am to 6:00pm if a non-school day, (e) on good friday, from 1:00pm to 6:00pm each year, and (f) at such further and other times as may be agreed to between the father and the mother from time to time in writing (including via text message).   on good friday, from 1:00pm to 6:00pm each year, and (f) at such further and other times as may be agreed to between the father and the mother from time to time in writing (including via text message).   at such further and other times as may be agreed to between the father and the mother from time to time in writing (including via text message).   the time being supervised by the paternal grandmother, and (b) the paternal grandmother executing and filing an undertaking in the terms of annexure a.   the paternal grandmother executing and filing an undertaking in the terms of annexure a.   at the paternal grandmother’s home at the commencement of the father’s time, (b) at the mother’s home at the conclusion of the father’s time, (c) the father be and is hereby restrained by injunction from entering the mother’s home or leaving his motor vehicle at changeover at the mother’s home, and (d) the father be and is hereby restrained by injunction from coming within 5 meters of the mother at changeovers at the paternal grandmother’s home.   at the mother’s home at the conclusion of the father’s time, (c) the father be and is hereby restrained by injunction from entering the mother’s home or leaving his motor vehicle at changeover at the mother’s home, and (d) the father be and is hereby restrained by injunction from coming within 5 meters of the mother at changeovers at the paternal grandmother’s home.   the father be and is hereby restrained by injunction from entering the mother’s home or leaving his motor vehicle at changeover at the mother’s home, and (d) the father be and is hereby restrained by injunction from coming within 5 meters of the mother at changeovers at the paternal grandmother’s home.   the father be and is hereby restrained by injunction from coming within 5 meters of the mother at changeovers at the paternal grandmother’s home.   insulting, belittling, abusing or otherwise denigrating the other parent or a member of their immediate household in the presence or hearing of x, (b) discussing x’s living or spend time arrangements (save and except to inform him of his movements) with x or in his presence or hearing, (c) showing x any documents associated with these proceedings, and (d) permitting any other person to do anything prohibited under this order.   discussing x’s living or spend time arrangements (save and except to inform him of his movements) with x or in his presence or hearing, (c) showing x any documents associated with these proceedings, and (d) permitting any other person to do anything prohibited under this order.   showing x any documents associated with these proceedings, and (d) permitting any other person to do anything prohibited under this order.   permitting any other person to do anything prohibited under this order.   the father has been compliant with his treatment regime, if any, (b) the father has attended all appointments as directed save for in the event of an emergency, (c) in the view of the practitioner, the father’s mental health has been stable for the preceding twelve months, (d) to the best of the knowledge of the practitioner, the father has not had a mental health admission for the preceding twelve months.   the father has attended all appointments as directed save for in the event of an emergency, (c) in the view of the practitioner, the father’s mental health has been stable for the preceding twelve months, (d) to the best of the knowledge of the practitioner, the father has not had a mental health admission for the preceding twelve months.   in the view of the practitioner, the father’s mental health has been stable for the preceding twelve months, (d) to the best of the knowledge of the practitioner, the father has not had a mental health admission for the preceding twelve months.   to the best of the knowledge of the practitioner, the father has not had a mental health admission for the preceding twelve months.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
deputy chief judge mercuri:
factual background
procedural history
proposed orders
mother’s proposed orders  she have sole parental responsibility, (b) x live with her, (c) x spend time with the father each sunday between 10:30am to 6:00pm (d) provided that the father comply with his mental health treatment, x spend additional time with the father on special occasions, being day time only, (e) x’s time with the father be in the paternal grandmother’s home with the paternal grandmother in substantial attendance, (f) she be permitted to communicate with the father’s treating health professionals about his compliance with medication and mental wellbeing, (g) the mother have the capacity to withhold x from spending time with the father in certain specified circumstances, namely in circumstances where there is a deterioration in the father’s mental health, (h) the mother be permitted to suspend the father’s weekly time with x five times each year to allow her a holiday, provided she give the father 14 days’ notice and allows make up time, and (i) the father communicate with x by skype or facetime once per week and by telephone once a fortnight.   x live with her, (c) x spend time with the father each sunday between 10:30am to 6:00pm (d) provided that the father comply with his mental health treatment, x spend additional time with the father on special occasions, being day time only, (e) x’s time with the father be in the paternal grandmother’s home with the paternal grandmother in substantial attendance, (f) she be permitted to communicate with the father’s treating health professionals about his compliance with medication and mental wellbeing, (g) the mother have the capacity to withhold x from spending time with the father in certain specified circumstances, namely in circumstances where there is a deterioration in the father’s mental health, (h) the mother be permitted to suspend the father’s weekly time with x five times each year to allow her a holiday, provided she give the father 14 days’ notice and allows make up time, and (i) the father communicate with x by skype or facetime once per week and by telephone once a fortnight.   x spend time with the father each sunday between 10:30am to 6:00pm (d) provided that the father comply with his mental health treatment, x spend additional time with the father on special occasions, being day time only, (e) x’s time with the father be in the paternal grandmother’s home with the paternal grandmother in substantial attendance, (f) she be permitted to communicate with the father’s treating health professionals about his compliance with medication and mental wellbeing, (g) the mother have the capacity to withhold x from spending time with the father in certain specified circumstances, namely in circumstances where there is a deterioration in the father’s mental health, (h) the mother be permitted to suspend the father’s weekly time with x five times each year to allow her a holiday, provided she give the father 14 days’ notice and allows make up time, and (i) the father communicate with x by skype or facetime once per week and by telephone once a fortnight.   provided that the father comply with his mental health treatment, x spend additional time with the father on special occasions, being day time only, (e) x’s time with the father be in the paternal grandmother’s home with the paternal grandmother in substantial attendance, (f) she be permitted to communicate with the father’s treating health professionals about his compliance with medication and mental wellbeing, (g) the mother have the capacity to withhold x from spending time with the father in certain specified circumstances, namely in circumstances where there is a deterioration in the father’s mental health, (h) the mother be permitted to suspend the father’s weekly time with x five times each year to allow her a holiday, provided she give the father 14 days’ notice and allows make up time, and (i) the father communicate with x by skype or facetime once per week and by telephone once a fortnight.   x’s time with the father be in the paternal grandmother’s home with the paternal grandmother in substantial attendance, (f) she be permitted to communicate with the father’s treating health professionals about his compliance with medication and mental wellbeing, (g) the mother have the capacity to withhold x from spending time with the father in certain specified circumstances, namely in circumstances where there is a deterioration in the father’s mental health, (h) the mother be permitted to suspend the father’s weekly time with x five times each year to allow her a holiday, provided she give the father 14 days’ notice and allows make up time, and (i) the father communicate with x by skype or facetime once per week and by telephone once a fortnight.   she be permitted to communicate with the father’s treating health professionals about his compliance with medication and mental wellbeing, (g) the mother have the capacity to withhold x from spending time with the father in certain specified circumstances, namely in circumstances where there is a deterioration in the father’s mental health, (h) the mother be permitted to suspend the father’s weekly time with x five times each year to allow her a holiday, provided she give the father 14 days’ notice and allows make up time, and (i) the father communicate with x by skype or facetime once per week and by telephone once a fortnight.   the mother have the capacity to withhold x from spending time with the father in certain specified circumstances, namely in circumstances where there is a deterioration in the father’s mental health, (h) the mother be permitted to suspend the father’s weekly time with x five times each year to allow her a holiday, provided she give the father 14 days’ notice and allows make up time, and (i) the father communicate with x by skype or facetime once per week and by telephone once a fortnight.   the mother be permitted to suspend the father’s weekly time with x five times each year to allow her a holiday, provided she give the father 14 days’ notice and allows make up time, and (i) the father communicate with x by skype or facetime once per week and by telephone once a fortnight.   the father communicate with x by skype or facetime once per week and by telephone once a fortnight.
father’s proposed orders
icl’s proposed orders
issues for determination
evidence
evidence of dr c
... [mr tyler] has no insight into the nature of his schizophrenic illness or that he has delusions. ... although there isn’t a threat of physical harm to [x], there is danger of emotional harm because more likely than not [mr tyler] would not be able to limit his behaviour or conversation with [x] with respect to his delusional beliefs. ... [mr tyler] was not engaged with a treating clinician and takes inadequate dose of an antipsychotic medication. because of [mr tyler]’s lack of insight, it is his experience that no one understands his perspective and this is only because of the complex and persecutory actions of a wide range of actors. understandably he is distressed.
unfortunately, the nature of his psychotic thinking has direct impact on his capacity to parent. because his delusional beliefs involve [x], there is risk that he interacts differently with the child or involves the child in his beliefs. because he has no insight into his abnormal thinking, it would make it more difficult for him to contain himself. from the history ascertained, the examiner could not find evidence that there would be direct risk of harm in a physical sense. but there is lower grade risk that his abnormal mental state is confusing to the child or that there is discussion about matters that are inappropriate and undermining of the child’s relationship with his mother.
... the current arrangement for access with mandatory supervision by [mr tyler]’s mother should continue and given [x]’s age it is not advocated that the number of hours per week is increased. as [x] becomes older and develops the capacity for comprehending more complex situations and understanding adult behaviour, he will develop resilience and capacity to tolerate difficulties, should his father become more unwell.
the course of schizophrenia differs from patient to patient and there are some patients consequently that they have periods where it becomes better. even if not on medication or without treatment...taking my consideration of [mr tyler], it is unlikely that he will make any significant substantial improvement without taking medication treatment.
... it’s the nature of his delusions. they are not the type of delusions that lead to acts of physical harm. it’s his general demeanour that he’s obviously a pleasant person, and it’s just my experience that this presentation is not somebody who will become physically aggressive. he doesn’t use substances, which would disinhibit him. and there’s nothing in the history to suggest that he has acted aggressively.
the difficulty, because he doesn’t recognise it, that he may not want to participate in [those measures][3] that would manage the risk. however, there would obviously be medication. but the other thing is that he is under a review of a clinician. there’s a shortage of psychiatrists who would be available, but given time on a waiting list he could be seeing a psychiatrist on a monthly basis, even for a 10 to 15 minute visit. you could make a very accurate evaluation as to his mental state. there are some gps who have a lot of knowledge and interest in psychiatry and would be able to do the equivalent. and this would be the most sensible measure.
evidence of the mother
i recognise that [mr tyler] is a loving father, he is very focused on doing his best for [x] but it is a permanent challenge for me trying to parent [x] in a way that enables him to safely have a relationship with [mr tyler] due to [mr tyler]’s patterns of unstable mental health and cyclic psychotic episodes.
... i have no doubt that [mr tyler] loves [x] and will want the very best for him. however i am not confident that [mr tyler]’s beliefs about me will not impact on his ability to work with or communicate with me in a healthy way. in addition, i have had two separate advos for my protection against [mr tyler] as a result of his threatening behaviour toward me. this history between us also our capacity to communicate as i continue to feel uncertain of my safety around him.
evidence of the father
‘that place should be burnt down”.
... i know what happened that day at the [sports match] and i’ve stood by that... i could have just turned around and ... done ... what [dr c] asked and that was double my dosage of ... paliperidone as he suggested, and complied and said that i’m fine now and i’m feeling a lot better, but i haven’t done that because the truth is i wasn’t schizophrenic that day at the [sports match] and i wasn’t – i’m not schizophrenic now ...[23]
family report  was reportedly unaware of who might be upset if there was a change made to the time he spends with his father. in relation to his own feelings [x] indicated that he feels things are working well for him as they are and that while he might like it a little to live week about, he prefers things as they are.   tyler] impressed as attached to [x] in a manner that has a feeling of obsession about it, and that [mr tyler] is prevented from insight about what would most benefit [x], most likely due to his mental illness as it was described by [dr c].
... it was clear that [x] is secure and benefitting from living with his mother while also being able to have an ongoing relationship with his father and paternal family. provided his relationship with [mr tyler] continues to be appropriate, at [x]’s age he will not lose his internalised connection with his father if the time he spends is enough to maintain that connection. for a child at the age of 10 years one day weekly or a couple of days fortnightly is time enough to maintain the connection when it is a positive one, along with weekly phone and facetime or skype time. ... as [x] matures, for example, when he is attending secondary school and can better ensure his own safety, there may be opportunity for him to spend time with his father unsupervised, for example, each alternate weekend when [mr tyler] has demonstrated compliance with professional opinion about his medication. it is for these reasons that there is a reluctance to make recommendations for [x]’s time with his father to increase or be unsupervised.
he seemed to be, as much as possible, protected from it. and by that i meant his mother didn’t appear to have been talking to him about it in a negative way. ... it’s a reality ... if you have a parent who has a ... serious mental illness, it’s a reality that ... you as a child need to come to terms with too. and so having it explained in a way that helps you understand that it’s not a fault of the parent, that it’s ... an illness, and that they sometimes take medication and sometimes be hospitalised, sometimes you can’t see them because of that, then that also tends to reduce the possible trauma impact or the possible negative impacts from it. it’s ... part of the reality.
... he appeared to have a warm and loving relationship with his father. the only hint of confusion is that he said that ... he was happy enough with the current arrangements but that he might like a little bit week-about and to say ‘a little bit’ to me is an indication that he might feel he needs to please somebody by saying that. so the overall impression that i had was that ... he was happy enough with the circumstances as they were because he got to see his father quite often. he didn’t speak about being fearful of him. i put that down to being quite well protected from the father’s mental health issues ...
consideration
parental responsibility
supervised time
findings
counsel for the mother: yes and what would that look like, a safety plan? [ms d]: he would need to have his own phone so that he could contact, you know, identified people ... if he was in need of support, if his father was ... becoming psychotic and he needed some help.
counsel for the father: and you also gave an answer ... when you said when [x] is at an age to keep himself safe ... you talked about what tools he would need to keep himself safe ... focussing on that issue of age, he’s 11 now. ... was there some particular sort of age bracket you had in mind of when you think he might be more capable of engaging in what i might call self-protective behaviours? [ms d]: i would probably think about mid adolescence – 14 or 15 years old, were he could, if need be, even leave the property and get help, ... when somebody has a full psychosis it can be very disturbing for adults because the lack of reality is very strange. and so if it’s disturbing for adults it’s obviously disturbing, and sometimes more so, for children. ... i would think that when he’s around 14 or 15 years old, he could have enough education ... to understand what’s going on and to be able to do what he needs to do to keep himself safe, which could be to leave. a safety plan would mean talking with somebody and actually having specific actions written down and though about and mentally practiced before he has to do them.
other parenting orders
additional considerations in s 60cc(3)
conclusion
deputy associate: dated: 28 april 2022
dated: 28 april 2022
[1] icl’s outline of case filed on 20 february 2021.[2] court transcript at page 134.
[4] court transcript at page 7.[5] court transcript at pages 13 to 14.[6] court transcript at page 19.[7] court transcript at page 21.[8] court transcript at page 22.[9] court transcript at page 24.[10] court transcript at page 27.[11] court transcript at page 27.[12] court transcript at page 28.[13] father’s affidavit affirmed on 10 october 2021 and filed on 13 october 2021 at paragraph [38].[14] court transcript at page 51.[15] court transcript at page 46.[16] court transcript at pages 37 to 38.[17] court transcript at page 39.[18] court transcript at page 39.[19] court transcript at page 44.[20] court transcript at page 44.[21] court transcript at page 45.[22] court transcript at page 55.[23] court transcript at page 55.[24] court transcript at page 117.[25] court transcript at page 108.[26] court transcript at page 109.[27] court transcript at page 110.[28] mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518.[29] court transcript at page 109.[30] order 12 of the icl’s proposed orders.[31] orders 13 and 14 of the icl’s proposed orders.