last updated: 30 june 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
horst & horst [2022] fedcfamc2f 591
standford & standford [2012] hca 52
orders
the court orders that:  first, $5000 is to be paid to the wife in respect of costs, (b) second, the remaining amount is to have added to it the parties’ superannuation as found by the judgment, (c) third, the total arrived at in (b) is to be divided to achieve an 80/20 distribution with each party retaining their superannuation.   second, the remaining amount is to have added to it the parties’ superannuation as found by the judgment, (c) third, the total arrived at in (b) is to be divided to achieve an 80/20 distribution with each party retaining their superannuation.   third, the total arrived at in (b) is to be divided to achieve an 80/20 distribution with each party retaining their superannuation.
reasons for judgment
judge burchardt
agreed or uncontroversial matters
the parties’ affidavit material
the report of dr h
mr horst reported that he worked in the sales industry in the uk for eight years before moving to australia with ms horst and working in the same field. he indicated that he had not been employed in the past three years due to a back injury. he acknowledged that he was capable of working, but needed to seek out employment that was flexible.
psychological evaluation did not identify a formal disorder, although mr horst presented with personality problems related to impulsivity and aggression, which has manifested in family violence and substance abuse/misuse. while mr horst's substance use appeared to have reduced since december 2020, he demonstrated limited insight into his risk of relapse and/or how to manage these risks. his decision to drink alcohol while his children were in his care in may 2021 reflected ongoing difficulties. parenting risk factors included mr horst having difficulty gaining control over his back pain, ongoing substance use/misuse, instability in/appropriateness of accommodation, difficulty understanding the impact of his behaviour on his children, and maintaining an unhealthy relationship with ms horst.
the submissions made and evidence given in the court
the evidence and opening of the husband
there was no re-examination
final submissions by the parties
the court’s first task – standford & standford [2012] hca 52
the pool
contribution
future needs
the wife’s costs
just and equitable
associate: dated: 13 may 2022
dated: 13 may 2022