last updated: 30 june 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
holt & holt [2022] fedcfamc2f 608
orders
the court orders that:  x born in 2014 (‘x’), and (b) y born in 2016 (‘y’)   y born in 2016 (‘y’)   until 27 june 2022: (i) in week one, from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.00pm if a non‑school day) until 4.00pm sunday, and (ii) in week two, from the conclusion of school wednesday (or 3.00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school thursday (or 9.00am if a non-school day). (b) during each school term as exercised by the children’s school, commencing 27 june 2022: (i) in week one, from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.00pm if a non‑school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 9.00am if a non-school day), and (ii) in week two, from the conclusion of school wednesday (or 3.00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school thursday (or 9.00am if a non-school day).   in week one, from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.00pm if a non‑school day) until 4.00pm sunday, and (ii) in week two, from the conclusion of school wednesday (or 3.00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school thursday (or 9.00am if a non-school day).  ) in week two, from the conclusion of school wednesday (or 3.00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school thursday (or 9.00am if a non-school day).   during each school term as exercised by the children’s school, commencing 27 june 2022: (i) in week one, from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.00pm if a non‑school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 9.00am if a non-school day), and (ii) in week two, from the conclusion of school wednesday (or 3.00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school thursday (or 9.00am if a non-school day).   in week one, from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.00pm if a non‑school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 9.00am if a non-school day), and (ii) in week two, from the conclusion of school wednesday (or 3.00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school thursday (or 9.00am if a non-school day).   during the autumn, winter and spring school holidays (i) in even-numbered years: with the mother from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the middle sunday of the school holidays, and with the father from 4.00pm on the middle sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school. (ii) in odd-numbered years: with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the middle sunday of the school holidays, and with the mother from 4.00pm on the middle sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school. (b) during the summer school holidays:- (i) in even-numbered years:- with the mother – from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays with the father – from 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school. (ii) in odd-numbered years:- with the father – from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays with the mother – from 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school.   in even-numbered years: with the mother from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the middle sunday of the school holidays, and with the father from 4.00pm on the middle sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school. (ii) in odd-numbered years: with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the middle sunday of the school holidays, and with the mother from 4.00pm on the middle sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school.  ) in odd-numbered years: with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the middle sunday of the school holidays, and with the mother from 4.00pm on the middle sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school.   during the summer school holidays:- (i) in even-numbered years:- with the mother – from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays with the father – from 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school. (ii) in odd-numbered years:- with the father – from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays with the mother – from 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school.   in even-numbered years:- with the mother – from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays with the father – from 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school. (ii) in odd-numbered years:- with the father – from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays with the mother – from 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school.  ) in odd-numbered years:- with the father – from the conclusion of school on the last day the children are required to attend school until 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays with the mother – from 4.00pm on the third sunday of the school holidays until 4.00pm on the fifth sunday of the school holidays, and from 4.00pm on the sixth sunday of the school holidays until 9.00am on the first day the children are required to return to school.   over the mother’s day weekend with the mother (if the children are not already living with the mother) from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 9.00am if a non-school day). (b) over the father’s day weekend with the father (if the children are not already spending time with the father) from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 9.00am if a non-school day). (c) on each of the children’s birthdays with the parent whom they would not otherwise see in the afternoon – (i) from the conclusion of school until 7.00pm on a school day, and (ii) from 12.00noon until 5.00pm on a non-school day. (d) during the christmas festive period – (i) in even-numbered years, with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day. (ii) in odd-numbered years, with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day.   over the father’s day weekend with the father (if the children are not already spending time with the father) from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.00pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 9.00am if a non-school day). (c) on each of the children’s birthdays with the parent whom they would not otherwise see in the afternoon – (i) from the conclusion of school until 7.00pm on a school day, and (ii) from 12.00noon until 5.00pm on a non-school day. (d) during the christmas festive period – (i) in even-numbered years, with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day. (ii) in odd-numbered years, with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day.   on each of the children’s birthdays with the parent whom they would not otherwise see in the afternoon – (i) from the conclusion of school until 7.00pm on a school day, and (ii) from 12.00noon until 5.00pm on a non-school day. (d) during the christmas festive period – (i) in even-numbered years, with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day. (ii) in odd-numbered years, with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day.   from the conclusion of school until 7.00pm on a school day, and (ii) from 12.00noon until 5.00pm on a non-school day.  ) from 12.00noon until 5.00pm on a non-school day.   during the christmas festive period – (i) in even-numbered years, with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day. (ii) in odd-numbered years, with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day.   in even-numbered years, with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day. (ii) in odd-numbered years, with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day.  ) in odd-numbered years, with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day.   where time is specified to commence or conclude on a school day then the changeover location is the children school/s, and (b) at all other times, the changeover location is the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb b.   at all other times, the changeover location is the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb b.   call the other party’s nominated mobile telephone number, and (b) ensure the children are given privacy to speak to the other party.   ensure the children are given privacy to speak to the other party.   each party is at liberty to liaise directly with any medical or allied health professional involved with the children, including being added to any case plan involving c families or any other form of counselling and to facilitate this order, the parties are to immediately notify each other in writing of the contact details of any appointments the children may have with their medical treators or allied health professionals, (b) each party is at liberty to liaise directly with the children’s educational providers as to the children’s progress including but not limited to them:- (i) receiving copies of all reports, newsletters, photographs (at their own expense), (ii) accessing any school apps, and (iii) attending any school events to which parents are usually invited to attend, (c) each party is at liberty to attend any extra-curricular or sporting events to which parents usually attend. and to give effect to the above, this order shall constitute an irrevocable authority between the parties and the various service providers for that purpose.   each party is at liberty to liaise directly with the children’s educational providers as to the children’s progress including but not limited to them:- (i) receiving copies of all reports, newsletters, photographs (at their own expense), (ii) accessing any school apps, and (iii) attending any school events to which parents are usually invited to attend, (c) each party is at liberty to attend any extra-curricular or sporting events to which parents usually attend. and to give effect to the above, this order shall constitute an irrevocable authority between the parties and the various service providers for that purpose.   receiving copies of all reports, newsletters, photographs (at their own expense), (ii) accessing any school apps, and (iii) attending any school events to which parents are usually invited to attend,  ) accessing any school apps, and (iii) attending any school events to which parents are usually invited to attend,  i) attending any school events to which parents are usually invited to attend,   each party is at liberty to attend any extra-curricular or sporting events to which parents usually attend. and to give effect to the above, this order shall constitute an irrevocable authority between the parties and the various service providers for that purpose.
and to give effect to the above, this order shall constitute an irrevocable authority between the parties and the various service providers for that purpose.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction  the allocation of parental responsibility, (b) with whom the children should live, (c) what time and what communication the children should have with the other parent.   with whom the children should live, (c) what time and what communication the children should have with the other parent.   what time and what communication the children should have with the other parent.
the evidence  further amended initiating application filed 23 february 2022, (b) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 14 may 2021, (c) affidavit of mr holt filed 7 february 2022[2], (d) affidavit of ms f (‘ms f’)[3] filed 7 february 2022, (e) affidavit of mr holt filed 23 february 2022, (f) outline of case document filed 28 february 2022 – marked exhibit “f1”. (g) various other exhibits.[4]   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 14 may 2021, (c) affidavit of mr holt filed 7 february 2022[2], (d) affidavit of ms f (‘ms f’)[3] filed 7 february 2022, (e) affidavit of mr holt filed 23 february 2022, (f) outline of case document filed 28 february 2022 – marked exhibit “f1”. (g) various other exhibits.[4]   affidavit of mr holt filed 7 february 2022[2], (d) affidavit of ms f (‘ms f’)[3] filed 7 february 2022, (e) affidavit of mr holt filed 23 february 2022, (f) outline of case document filed 28 february 2022 – marked exhibit “f1”. (g) various other exhibits.[4]   affidavit of ms f (‘ms f’)[3] filed 7 february 2022, (e) affidavit of mr holt filed 23 february 2022, (f) outline of case document filed 28 february 2022 – marked exhibit “f1”. (g) various other exhibits.[4]   affidavit of mr holt filed 23 february 2022, (f) outline of case document filed 28 february 2022 – marked exhibit “f1”. (g) various other exhibits.[4]   outline of case document filed 28 february 2022 – marked exhibit “f1”. (g) various other exhibits.[4]   various other exhibits.[4]   amended response to initiating application filed 15 february 2022, (b) affidavit of ms holt filed 15 february 2022[5], (c) affidavit of mr g (‘mr g’) filed 25 february 2022[6], (d) outline of case document filed 25 february march 2022 – marked exhibit “m1”, (e) minute of order “nsw” – marked exhibit “m2”, (f) minute of order “victoria” – marked exhibit “m3”.   affidavit of ms holt filed 15 february 2022[5], (c) affidavit of mr g (‘mr g’) filed 25 february 2022[6], (d) outline of case document filed 25 february march 2022 – marked exhibit “m1”, (e) minute of order “nsw” – marked exhibit “m2”, (f) minute of order “victoria” – marked exhibit “m3”.   affidavit of mr g (‘mr g’) filed 25 february 2022[6], (d) outline of case document filed 25 february march 2022 – marked exhibit “m1”, (e) minute of order “nsw” – marked exhibit “m2”, (f) minute of order “victoria” – marked exhibit “m3”.   outline of case document filed 25 february march 2022 – marked exhibit “m1”, (e) minute of order “nsw” – marked exhibit “m2”, (f) minute of order “victoria” – marked exhibit “m3”.   minute of order “nsw” – marked exhibit “m2”, (f) minute of order “victoria” – marked exhibit “m3”.   minute of order “victoria” – marked exhibit “m3”.
the proposals of the parties  the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, (b) the mother be restrained from relocating the residence of the children more than 25km from the town d area without his prior written consent, (c) the children to live week-about with each of the parties, provided the court was satisfied that the mother could facilitate a relationship between the children and the father, (d) the children to live with the father and spend four nights with the mother in each fortnight, if the court was not satisfied that she could facilitate a relationship between the children and the father, (e) the children to spend multiple consecutive nights with each of the parties during school holidays, in the event that the children are not living in a week-about arrangement, (f) the children to spend time with each of the parties on special occasions including mother’s day, father’s day, their birthdays and to have video communication with the parent with whom they are not living on christmas day, (g) specified arrangements for changeovers, (h) the children to have facetime communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday and wednesday, (i) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend significant school, extra-curricular and sporting events in which the children are participating, (j) the parties being restrained from doing certain things which could otherwise see the children exposed to parental conflict, (k) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the mother be restrained from relocating the residence of the children more than 25km from the town d area without his prior written consent, (c) the children to live week-about with each of the parties, provided the court was satisfied that the mother could facilitate a relationship between the children and the father, (d) the children to live with the father and spend four nights with the mother in each fortnight, if the court was not satisfied that she could facilitate a relationship between the children and the father, (e) the children to spend multiple consecutive nights with each of the parties during school holidays, in the event that the children are not living in a week-about arrangement, (f) the children to spend time with each of the parties on special occasions including mother’s day, father’s day, their birthdays and to have video communication with the parent with whom they are not living on christmas day, (g) specified arrangements for changeovers, (h) the children to have facetime communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday and wednesday, (i) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend significant school, extra-curricular and sporting events in which the children are participating, (j) the parties being restrained from doing certain things which could otherwise see the children exposed to parental conflict, (k) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the children to live week-about with each of the parties, provided the court was satisfied that the mother could facilitate a relationship between the children and the father, (d) the children to live with the father and spend four nights with the mother in each fortnight, if the court was not satisfied that she could facilitate a relationship between the children and the father, (e) the children to spend multiple consecutive nights with each of the parties during school holidays, in the event that the children are not living in a week-about arrangement, (f) the children to spend time with each of the parties on special occasions including mother’s day, father’s day, their birthdays and to have video communication with the parent with whom they are not living on christmas day, (g) specified arrangements for changeovers, (h) the children to have facetime communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday and wednesday, (i) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend significant school, extra-curricular and sporting events in which the children are participating, (j) the parties being restrained from doing certain things which could otherwise see the children exposed to parental conflict, (k) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the children to live with the father and spend four nights with the mother in each fortnight, if the court was not satisfied that she could facilitate a relationship between the children and the father, (e) the children to spend multiple consecutive nights with each of the parties during school holidays, in the event that the children are not living in a week-about arrangement, (f) the children to spend time with each of the parties on special occasions including mother’s day, father’s day, their birthdays and to have video communication with the parent with whom they are not living on christmas day, (g) specified arrangements for changeovers, (h) the children to have facetime communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday and wednesday, (i) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend significant school, extra-curricular and sporting events in which the children are participating, (j) the parties being restrained from doing certain things which could otherwise see the children exposed to parental conflict, (k) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the children to spend multiple consecutive nights with each of the parties during school holidays, in the event that the children are not living in a week-about arrangement, (f) the children to spend time with each of the parties on special occasions including mother’s day, father’s day, their birthdays and to have video communication with the parent with whom they are not living on christmas day, (g) specified arrangements for changeovers, (h) the children to have facetime communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday and wednesday, (i) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend significant school, extra-curricular and sporting events in which the children are participating, (j) the parties being restrained from doing certain things which could otherwise see the children exposed to parental conflict, (k) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the children to spend time with each of the parties on special occasions including mother’s day, father’s day, their birthdays and to have video communication with the parent with whom they are not living on christmas day, (g) specified arrangements for changeovers, (h) the children to have facetime communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday and wednesday, (i) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend significant school, extra-curricular and sporting events in which the children are participating, (j) the parties being restrained from doing certain things which could otherwise see the children exposed to parental conflict, (k) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   specified arrangements for changeovers, (h) the children to have facetime communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday and wednesday, (i) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend significant school, extra-curricular and sporting events in which the children are participating, (j) the parties being restrained from doing certain things which could otherwise see the children exposed to parental conflict, (k) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the children to have facetime communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday and wednesday, (i) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend significant school, extra-curricular and sporting events in which the children are participating, (j) the parties being restrained from doing certain things which could otherwise see the children exposed to parental conflict, (k) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend significant school, extra-curricular and sporting events in which the children are participating, (j) the parties being restrained from doing certain things which could otherwise see the children exposed to parental conflict, (k) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the parties being restrained from doing certain things which could otherwise see the children exposed to parental conflict, (k) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children, (b) the children live with her, (c) the children spend time with the father as follows:- (i) until 2022 (y’s sixth birthday) for three nights a fortnight from friday to sunday in week one and from wednesday to thursday in week two, (ii) from 27 june 2022 for four nights a fortnight from friday to monday in week one and from wednesday to thursday in week two, (d) the children to spend multiple consecutive nights with each of the parties during school holidays which broadly meant an equalisation of the holiday time, (e) the children to spend time with each of the parties on christmas day, (f) specified arrangements for changeovers, (g) the children to have facetime or other video/telephone communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday, wednesday and friday, (h) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend school events to which parents are usually invited, (i) the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (j) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the children live with her, (c) the children spend time with the father as follows:- (i) until 2022 (y’s sixth birthday) for three nights a fortnight from friday to sunday in week one and from wednesday to thursday in week two, (ii) from 27 june 2022 for four nights a fortnight from friday to monday in week one and from wednesday to thursday in week two, (d) the children to spend multiple consecutive nights with each of the parties during school holidays which broadly meant an equalisation of the holiday time, (e) the children to spend time with each of the parties on christmas day, (f) specified arrangements for changeovers, (g) the children to have facetime or other video/telephone communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday, wednesday and friday, (h) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend school events to which parents are usually invited, (i) the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (j) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the children spend time with the father as follows:- (i) until 2022 (y’s sixth birthday) for three nights a fortnight from friday to sunday in week one and from wednesday to thursday in week two, (ii) from 27 june 2022 for four nights a fortnight from friday to monday in week one and from wednesday to thursday in week two, (d) the children to spend multiple consecutive nights with each of the parties during school holidays which broadly meant an equalisation of the holiday time, (e) the children to spend time with each of the parties on christmas day, (f) specified arrangements for changeovers, (g) the children to have facetime or other video/telephone communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday, wednesday and friday, (h) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend school events to which parents are usually invited, (i) the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (j) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   until 2022 (y’s sixth birthday) for three nights a fortnight from friday to sunday in week one and from wednesday to thursday in week two, (ii) from 27 june 2022 for four nights a fortnight from friday to monday in week one and from wednesday to thursday in week two,  ) from 27 june 2022 for four nights a fortnight from friday to monday in week one and from wednesday to thursday in week two,   the children to spend multiple consecutive nights with each of the parties during school holidays which broadly meant an equalisation of the holiday time, (e) the children to spend time with each of the parties on christmas day, (f) specified arrangements for changeovers, (g) the children to have facetime or other video/telephone communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday, wednesday and friday, (h) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend school events to which parents are usually invited, (i) the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (j) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the children to spend time with each of the parties on christmas day, (f) specified arrangements for changeovers, (g) the children to have facetime or other video/telephone communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday, wednesday and friday, (h) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend school events to which parents are usually invited, (i) the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (j) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   specified arrangements for changeovers, (g) the children to have facetime or other video/telephone communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday, wednesday and friday, (h) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend school events to which parents are usually invited, (i) the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (j) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the children to have facetime or other video/telephone communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday, wednesday and friday, (h) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend school events to which parents are usually invited, (i) the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (j) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend school events to which parents are usually invited, (i) the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (j) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (j) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the mother to have sole parental responsibility for the children, (b) the children to live with her noting that her intention was to relocate the children to town e, victoria four (4) days prior to the commencement of term 2 of the victorian school year, (c) the children to spend time with the father as follows:- (i) in city af at the conclusion of week 3 of each school term from 3.00pm friday to 9.00am monday with changeovers at suburb b, (ii) in the town k area at the conclusion of week 6 of each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday with the changeover not specified, (iii) for two additional weekends each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday provided the father gave the mother at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his intention to exercise such time, and (iv) at all other times as agreed between the parties, upon the father giving at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his request to spend time within the town k area. (d) the children to spend time with the father during the school holidays as follows:- (i) eight (8) consecutive nights during the term 1 and term 3 holidays, (ii) 14 consecutive nights during the term 2 holidays, (iii) multiple consecutive nights during the term 4 holidays which alternated each year from the first to the middle saturday and then the middle to the final saturday of the holiday time,   the children to live with her noting that her intention was to relocate the children to town e, victoria four (4) days prior to the commencement of term 2 of the victorian school year, (c) the children to spend time with the father as follows:- (i) in city af at the conclusion of week 3 of each school term from 3.00pm friday to 9.00am monday with changeovers at suburb b, (ii) in the town k area at the conclusion of week 6 of each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday with the changeover not specified, (iii) for two additional weekends each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday provided the father gave the mother at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his intention to exercise such time, and (iv) at all other times as agreed between the parties, upon the father giving at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his request to spend time within the town k area. (d) the children to spend time with the father during the school holidays as follows:- (i) eight (8) consecutive nights during the term 1 and term 3 holidays, (ii) 14 consecutive nights during the term 2 holidays, (iii) multiple consecutive nights during the term 4 holidays which alternated each year from the first to the middle saturday and then the middle to the final saturday of the holiday time,   the children to spend time with the father as follows:- (i) in city af at the conclusion of week 3 of each school term from 3.00pm friday to 9.00am monday with changeovers at suburb b, (ii) in the town k area at the conclusion of week 6 of each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday with the changeover not specified, (iii) for two additional weekends each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday provided the father gave the mother at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his intention to exercise such time, and (iv) at all other times as agreed between the parties, upon the father giving at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his request to spend time within the town k area. (d) the children to spend time with the father during the school holidays as follows:- (i) eight (8) consecutive nights during the term 1 and term 3 holidays, (ii) 14 consecutive nights during the term 2 holidays, (iii) multiple consecutive nights during the term 4 holidays which alternated each year from the first to the middle saturday and then the middle to the final saturday of the holiday time,   in city af at the conclusion of week 3 of each school term from 3.00pm friday to 9.00am monday with changeovers at suburb b, (ii) in the town k area at the conclusion of week 6 of each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday with the changeover not specified, (iii) for two additional weekends each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday provided the father gave the mother at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his intention to exercise such time, and (iv) at all other times as agreed between the parties, upon the father giving at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his request to spend time within the town k area.  ) in the town k area at the conclusion of week 6 of each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday with the changeover not specified, (iii) for two additional weekends each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday provided the father gave the mother at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his intention to exercise such time, and (iv) at all other times as agreed between the parties, upon the father giving at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his request to spend time within the town k area.  i) for two additional weekends each school term from 3.00pm friday to the commencement of school monday provided the father gave the mother at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his intention to exercise such time, and (iv) at all other times as agreed between the parties, upon the father giving at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his request to spend time within the town k area.  ) at all other times as agreed between the parties, upon the father giving at least seven (7) days’ written notice of his request to spend time within the town k area.   the children to spend time with the father during the school holidays as follows:- (i) eight (8) consecutive nights during the term 1 and term 3 holidays, (ii) 14 consecutive nights during the term 2 holidays, (iii) multiple consecutive nights during the term 4 holidays which alternated each year from the first to the middle saturday and then the middle to the final saturday of the holiday time,   eight (8) consecutive nights during the term 1 and term 3 holidays, (ii) 14 consecutive nights during the term 2 holidays, (iii) multiple consecutive nights during the term 4 holidays which alternated each year from the first to the middle saturday and then the middle to the final saturday of the holiday time,  ) 14 consecutive nights during the term 2 holidays, (iii) multiple consecutive nights during the term 4 holidays which alternated each year from the first to the middle saturday and then the middle to the final saturday of the holiday time,  i) multiple consecutive nights during the term 4 holidays which alternated each year from the first to the middle saturday and then the middle to the final saturday of the holiday time,
with all changeovers to occur at town l.   the children to have facetime or other video/telephone communication with the parent they are not living with or spending time with each monday, wednesday and friday, (f) the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend school events to which parents are usually invited, (g) the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (h) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the parties being able to obtain and share with each other information about the children and otherwise be able to both attend school events to which parents are usually invited, (g) the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (h) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the parties being restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and to remove them from any person doing so, (h) the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.   the parties keeping each other informed of any changes to their residential address or contact details.
chronology
“it was pretty good when we were together because he would come home from work, and he played with them. so, it was good when he left.”[13]
89. mr holt was not a “hands on” parent during the course of our relationship as he would not assist with the night feeds, comforting or changing the children. i recall several occasions when i was feeding y and i had to force mr holt from the bed to have him respond to x. on occasions, mr holt would also shower with the children but not dry or dress them in their pyjamas or assist with other aspects of their night-time routine.
the writer called mr holt and advised that ms holt had agreed to the opc being approached about speaking with him about the counselling. he indicated he was still concerned that ms holt was refusing him being added to the case but agreed to the plan for the writer to contact the family case counselling next week to see if she would be willing to speak to him ... mr holt advised that -he initially called c families to ask to be added to the family case so as to be included in something his son was doing, provide input to the counsellor from his perspective, be informed about how his son’s counselling was going. he was told by c families that he could get no information because he was not a member of the case. ... -he does not think x needs counselling (describing him as good at school and a good little boy), but he did not want to withdraw consent for the counselling but without any information or opportunity for input he was concerned that the counselling might not be helpful or be biased. ... mr holt agreed with the plan for the writer to contact his ex-wife and seek her permission for mr holt to have some involvement in the family case or a discussion with the family case counsellor.   the children to live with the mother, (b) the children to spend time with the father in a graduated regime of :- (i) six hours each alternate saturday until he provided the mother with a hair follicle test relating to his alcohol consumption (‘the hft’), (ii) overnight time each alternate weekend from saturday to sunday, in the event that the results of the hft did not indicate a high or excessive consumption of alcohol, (iii) two consecutive overnights each alternate weekend from friday to sunday, in the event that the father provided a certificate of completion of a parenting after separation course. (c) how the parties should communicate and share information with each other about the children and otherwise avoid the children being exposed to parental conflict.   the children to spend time with the father in a graduated regime of :- (i) six hours each alternate saturday until he provided the mother with a hair follicle test relating to his alcohol consumption (‘the hft’), (ii) overnight time each alternate weekend from saturday to sunday, in the event that the results of the hft did not indicate a high or excessive consumption of alcohol, (iii) two consecutive overnights each alternate weekend from friday to sunday, in the event that the father provided a certificate of completion of a parenting after separation course. (c) how the parties should communicate and share information with each other about the children and otherwise avoid the children being exposed to parental conflict.   six hours each alternate saturday until he provided the mother with a hair follicle test relating to his alcohol consumption (‘the hft’), (ii) overnight time each alternate weekend from saturday to sunday, in the event that the results of the hft did not indicate a high or excessive consumption of alcohol, (iii) two consecutive overnights each alternate weekend from friday to sunday, in the event that the father provided a certificate of completion of a parenting after separation course.  ) overnight time each alternate weekend from saturday to sunday, in the event that the results of the hft did not indicate a high or excessive consumption of alcohol, (iii) two consecutive overnights each alternate weekend from friday to sunday, in the event that the father provided a certificate of completion of a parenting after separation course.  i) two consecutive overnights each alternate weekend from friday to sunday, in the event that the father provided a certificate of completion of a parenting after separation course.   how the parties should communicate and share information with each other about the children and otherwise avoid the children being exposed to parental conflict.
a huge happy father’s day to the most amazing dad and poppy! mr g you always led by example to show us what a great dad and husband will do for his family, i unfortunately settled for someone who was incapable of consideration for anyone but himself. 16 months post separation and out of that environment, i can now see, you have always demonstrated that we shouldn’t settle for anyone willing to do anything less. thank you for always being there for me and my 2 boys. you are the best man and role model we have in our lives...
“this is my bonding time with the children...i was put on the spot...i was not expecting the see ms f there...i felt intimidated by them making that demand without prior consultation...”   the father described his eldest son as being a “calm, cool and collected little fellow” who thought things through before acting, (b) the mother said her eldest son was a “thinker” who was kind, caring and having emotional intelligence.   the mother said her eldest son was a “thinker” who was kind, caring and having emotional intelligence.   the mother said her youngest son he too was kind and caring, a lover of animals and was a “fire cracker”, (b) the father said that y was a “pocket rocket” who was full of life and could be a “bull at a gate”.   the father said that y was a “pocket rocket” who was full of life and could be a “bull at a gate”.
the family report
...throughout her interview, the mother consistently spoke very negatively about the father, and it was evident she held a considerable amount of resentment and hostility towards him.[45]
“i guess as much as i can, allow the facetime communication, allowing them to call their dad at any time they request to. allowing him to visit them whenever he wants, within reason obviously”.[46]   emphasis)   at presentation the mother has unresolved emotional issues arising from the distress she experienced at separation.[47] (b) in the past (namely immediately post-separation) the mother had been assessed as having high levels of stress, anxiety and depression but had sought assistance through counselling which had improved her situation considerably.[48] (c) the mother has no formal diagnosis regarding mental health with her current mental health self-described as being “great”.[49] (d) currently the mother does not have a mental health condition that is likely to significantly impact on her capacity to care for the children.[50]   in the past (namely immediately post-separation) the mother had been assessed as having high levels of stress, anxiety and depression but had sought assistance through counselling which had improved her situation considerably.[48] (c) the mother has no formal diagnosis regarding mental health with her current mental health self-described as being “great”.[49] (d) currently the mother does not have a mental health condition that is likely to significantly impact on her capacity to care for the children.[50]   the mother has no formal diagnosis regarding mental health with her current mental health self-described as being “great”.[49] (d) currently the mother does not have a mental health condition that is likely to significantly impact on her capacity to care for the children.[50]   currently the mother does not have a mental health condition that is likely to significantly impact on her capacity to care for the children.[50]   in relation to her alleged concerns about the father’s parenting approach, the father’s parenting is “null and void. non-existent. it is hard for me to comment because when he lived in the house, he didn’t do anything with them, and i am not there to visualise what he does with them now. he claims he did the night-time routines, if that is the case, why do you now find it so difficult to get them to sleep. they sleep in his bed now.” she also commented, “to me he has not shown responsibility he is able to look after them”.[51] (b) it was noted the mother had described the father’s parenting approach and she was asked to describe the nature of the relationship between the children and the father. she said, “i don’t know how to answer that question.” (q. what are you struggling with?) “putting it into words.” (q. can you give me some examples?) “he has not put any of his time aside for the children. he does not go out of his way to sacrifice what he wants for what they need.”[52] (c) ...the writer asked the mother if she saw any benefits to the children of a relationship with the father and she said, “...not unless he is willing to change a whole lot” and referred to the father not doing a parenting course she had asked him to do. the mother acknowledged she did not think a parenting course would improve the father’s parenting of the children, but in her mind, the father completing a parenting course would, “show me he is willing to do something he doesn’t want to do for the benefit of his children, i was looking for some kind of gesture that he was willing to sacrifice for the benefit of his children on some level.”[53] (my emphasis)   it was noted the mother had described the father’s parenting approach and she was asked to describe the nature of the relationship between the children and the father. she said, “i don’t know how to answer that question.” (q. what are you struggling with?) “putting it into words.” (q. can you give me some examples?) “he has not put any of his time aside for the children. he does not go out of his way to sacrifice what he wants for what they need.”[52] (c) ...the writer asked the mother if she saw any benefits to the children of a relationship with the father and she said, “...not unless he is willing to change a whole lot” and referred to the father not doing a parenting course she had asked him to do. the mother acknowledged she did not think a parenting course would improve the father’s parenting of the children, but in her mind, the father completing a parenting course would, “show me he is willing to do something he doesn’t want to do for the benefit of his children, i was looking for some kind of gesture that he was willing to sacrifice for the benefit of his children on some level.”[53] (my emphasis)   ...the writer asked the mother if she saw any benefits to the children of a relationship with the father and she said, “...not unless he is willing to change a whole lot” and referred to the father not doing a parenting course she had asked him to do. the mother acknowledged she did not think a parenting course would improve the father’s parenting of the children, but in her mind, the father completing a parenting course would, “show me he is willing to do something he doesn’t want to do for the benefit of his children, i was looking for some kind of gesture that he was willing to sacrifice for the benefit of his children on some level.”[53] (my emphasis)   ...“she is a good mum who loves the boys and is very caring. sometimes i think her priorities are not quite right, everything she does she believes is in the best interests of the boys...she is very possessive of them and that side of things but in general she is a good mum, and she is caring.”[54] (b) when asked about the children’s relationship with their mother, the father said, “i think it is very loving and they certainly love their mum. they freely talk about her, and i encourage that because that is what i want in the end. the best thing in the end for them is a loving relationship with their mum and with me...”[55] (c) when asked about the benefit to the children of a relationship with their mother, the father said, “...there are huge benefits to having both parents in your life. it helps create more rounded people, input from both parents gives a better perspective on things. rather than just my perspective they have hers as well, it gives them more information to make decisions which might influence how they see the world growing up...”[56] (d) the father described the mother’s strengths as, “very caring, very loving. she is very protective of them and will do anything to protect them or to go to bat for them.[57] (my emphasis)   when asked about the children’s relationship with their mother, the father said, “i think it is very loving and they certainly love their mum. they freely talk about her, and i encourage that because that is what i want in the end. the best thing in the end for them is a loving relationship with their mum and with me...”[55] (c) when asked about the benefit to the children of a relationship with their mother, the father said, “...there are huge benefits to having both parents in your life. it helps create more rounded people, input from both parents gives a better perspective on things. rather than just my perspective they have hers as well, it gives them more information to make decisions which might influence how they see the world growing up...”[56] (d) the father described the mother’s strengths as, “very caring, very loving. she is very protective of them and will do anything to protect them or to go to bat for them.[57] (my emphasis)   when asked about the benefit to the children of a relationship with their mother, the father said, “...there are huge benefits to having both parents in your life. it helps create more rounded people, input from both parents gives a better perspective on things. rather than just my perspective they have hers as well, it gives them more information to make decisions which might influence how they see the world growing up...”[56] (d) the father described the mother’s strengths as, “very caring, very loving. she is very protective of them and will do anything to protect them or to go to bat for them.[57] (my emphasis)   the father described the mother’s strengths as, “very caring, very loving. she is very protective of them and will do anything to protect them or to go to bat for them.[57] (my emphasis)  emphasis)
“...she’s unlikely to be very flexible around the children having additional time with the father...and that worried me. when you live at a distance you need that parent who’s living at a distance to really encourage and promote it quite actively, because we’re not having what i talked about before, the father being able to promote that meaningful relationship because they’re with him more consistently. so that’s where it becomes more important.”
“...really rely on having both parents to think about who they are, the way they want to be, what role models they’ve had, and to work through to develop into their own identity. so if they haven’t had both parents that can be more of a struggle for them. you also sometimes see in adolescents if children haven’t had a relationship with one parent they can come to idealise them perhaps, and choose to live with that other parent. that can be disruptive for them. so there’s a range of possibilities, but i feel comfortable saying it would be very difficult and distressing for the children (losing the meaningful relationship with the father) and not preferred.”
“it’s about general adjustment. of course having relationships of your own, and healthy relationship is part of that adolescent period, so that could be an impact, yes. but the other possibility as well is that they come to resent the mother if they perceive that she stopped them from having a relationship with their dad”
...“mum told me dad was being mean.” (q. what did she say he was mean about?) “she didn’t say because it was just meant to be adult talk”.[69]
...but he has not given them time to process that their family is broken, before forcing a whole other family on them, he does not realise he is damaging the relationship quite a lot by himself...they say, “i don’t want to go to ms f’s house, i just want time with dad.” what was good and all fun and all play and dad is never the serious one. i think it (the relationship) is getting very damaged by the fact that he is forcing another family on them all the time and they go, “i just want to hang out with dad.”
“if the children are saying to her (the mother) things like “i don’t want to go see daddy, i don’t like daddy, it’s not fun at daddy’s” that suggests to me that they are aware to some extent. so i take what you’re saying, but what your client said makes me think, well perhaps they are aware, and my view is they’ve got a lovely relationship with dad.”
54.... “essentially i will do anything i can to stay with and near my boys. they are the most important thing in the world my boys” but said it would not be possible for him to be posted closer to the boys as he is on a contract (with the armed forces) until august 2024 during which time there is no opportunity to be posted elsewhere.” he said because he is on a contract he will not be posted away from town p for three years. he said if, after that time he was given a geographically distant posting which was away from the boys he could and would leave the armed forces.
the applicable law
... in summary, in dealing with any parenting application by a person interested in the care, welfare or development of a child, a court will determine that application applying the relevant provisions of part vii to determine whether making (or not making) a parenting order would be in the child's best interests.
reasonable practicality (5) in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have regard to: (a) how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant. note: paragraph (c) reference to future capacity--the court has power under section 13c to make orders for parties to attend family counselling or family dispute resolution or participate in courses, programs or services.
...the reality of the situation of parents and the child, not whether it is desirable that there be equal time spent by the child with each parent. the presumption in s 61da(1) is not determinative of the questions arising under s 65daa(1). section 65daa(1)(b) requires a practical assessment of whether equal time parenting is feasible.   emphasis and footnotes omitted)   emphasis and italicise with footnotes omitted)
...whatever weight should be accorded to a right of freedom of mobility of a parent, it must defer to the expressed paramount consideration, the welfare of the child if that were to be adversely affected by a movement of a parent.
evaluation of the evidence - section 60cc
section 60cc(2)
section 60cc(3)(a)
section 60cc(3)(b)
section 60cc(3)(c)
section 60cc(3)(ca)
section 60cc(3)(d)  the children live with the mother and spend substantial and significant time with the father which (by y’s sixth birthday) would see the children spending four nights per fortnight with him in a regime of alternate weekends (friday to monday) and then every other wednesday night during the school terms (‘term time’) together with half school holidays (‘holiday time’), (b) the children living in an equal time arrangement on a week-about basis with no other provision for holiday time, (c) the children living with the father and spending substantial and significant time with the mother during term time being four nights per fortnight in a regime of alternate weekends (friday to monday) and then every other thursday night together with half school holidays, and (d) the children living with the mother and spending time with the father during term time for at least two and possibly up to four weekends for three consecutive nights (friday to monday) and spending significant holiday time with the father including eight (8) nights during the autumn and spring holidays, 14 nights during the winter school holidays and up to three weeks during the summer break.   the children living in an equal time arrangement on a week-about basis with no other provision for holiday time, (c) the children living with the father and spending substantial and significant time with the mother during term time being four nights per fortnight in a regime of alternate weekends (friday to monday) and then every other thursday night together with half school holidays, and (d) the children living with the mother and spending time with the father during term time for at least two and possibly up to four weekends for three consecutive nights (friday to monday) and spending significant holiday time with the father including eight (8) nights during the autumn and spring holidays, 14 nights during the winter school holidays and up to three weeks during the summer break.   the children living with the father and spending substantial and significant time with the mother during term time being four nights per fortnight in a regime of alternate weekends (friday to monday) and then every other thursday night together with half school holidays, and (d) the children living with the mother and spending time with the father during term time for at least two and possibly up to four weekends for three consecutive nights (friday to monday) and spending significant holiday time with the father including eight (8) nights during the autumn and spring holidays, 14 nights during the winter school holidays and up to three weeks during the summer break.   the children living with the mother and spending time with the father during term time for at least two and possibly up to four weekends for three consecutive nights (friday to monday) and spending significant holiday time with the father including eight (8) nights during the autumn and spring holidays, 14 nights during the winter school holidays and up to three weeks during the summer break.   the mother is the children’s primary attachment figure, (b) the children have a close and loving relationship with both parties, and (c) accepting (as i have) the child expert’s evidence about the grief the children would experience if they no longer saw their father as regularly as they do now, i am comfortably satisfied that if their current circumstances were reversed, the children would grieve the loss of their mother in spending only substantial and significant time with her and not primarily living with her.   the children have a close and loving relationship with both parties, and (c) accepting (as i have) the child expert’s evidence about the grief the children would experience if they no longer saw their father as regularly as they do now, i am comfortably satisfied that if their current circumstances were reversed, the children would grieve the loss of their mother in spending only substantial and significant time with her and not primarily living with her.   accepting (as i have) the child expert’s evidence about the grief the children would experience if they no longer saw their father as regularly as they do now, i am comfortably satisfied that if their current circumstances were reversed, the children would grieve the loss of their mother in spending only substantial and significant time with her and not primarily living with her.
i am comfortably satisfied that if their current circumstances were reversed, the children would grieve the loss of their mother in spending only substantial and significant time with her and not primarily living with her.
section 60cc(3)(e)  the mother proposes that once a term she will deliver the children to the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb b at 3.00pm on a friday and collect them from the father at 9.00am on a monday. i remain unclear how the children will travel, and on any view, the children will miss school friday and monday once a term. (b) as recently as december 2021 and in the context of prescriptive orders about the timing of changeovers, the parties were unable to negotiate an appropriate time for the mother and the children to head south causing the mother’s car to be accidentally damaged and resulting in a delayed night time arrival for the children. (c) if the mother’s intention is to travel by car, then ignoring the many hours on the road for the children just to spend three nights with their father - i need only reflect on the difficulties that occurred in december 2021 to start having concerns about how long these trips could be sustained or the parties’ ability to negotiate a change to changeover times or days to accommodate a change in the weather or the state of the roads. looking to a future where the father spends less term time with the children, i am concerned that his ability to be flexible about the changeover time either before or after the weekend will likely be seriously impinged by the desire to spend as much time as possible with the children. (d) if the mother intends to travel by plane or other public transport then i have no evidence of the transportation carrier’s timetable (including frequency and departure and arrival times) and given the parties’ communication difficulties, some concern about whether they could negotiate alternative changeover arrangements to accommodate the convenience of the mother and the children in circumstances where the father’s attitude is that the mother has acted in a punitive[88] way to limit his time with the children. (e) the mother proposes two additional weekends per school term with the father to provide the mother not less than seven days’ written notice with time to commence from the conclusion of school friday to the commencement of school monday (‘the ad-hoc visits’). in addition, there is provision for extra time provided that the parties agree on the time, the time is spent in the town k area and the father gives seven (7) days’ notice (‘the agreed time’). (f) given her negative attitude about the father and the benefit the children receive in their relationship with him (as evidenced most cogently by her discussions with the child expert and the facebook post on father’s day 2021), i wonder whether even if the father gives the written notice, she will not at least seek to impose some conditions upon the ad-hoc and agreed visits to accommodate events or people that she holds in higher regard than the father? (g) my concern is sharpened even further by the broad terms of the agreed time order, in circumstances where it appears that in the past, these parties have been unable to easily follow what they understood at the time to be their agreements, with for example, the mother misinterpreting a shared parenting plan and the parties remaining at odds about the outcomes of a solicitor-assisted mediation. (h) my concerns are also informed by my finding that the attitude of the mother towards the father in the facebook post was lamentable, particularly given the public nature of the document.   as recently as december 2021 and in the context of prescriptive orders about the timing of changeovers, the parties were unable to negotiate an appropriate time for the mother and the children to head south causing the mother’s car to be accidentally damaged and resulting in a delayed night time arrival for the children. (c) if the mother’s intention is to travel by car, then ignoring the many hours on the road for the children just to spend three nights with their father - i need only reflect on the difficulties that occurred in december 2021 to start having concerns about how long these trips could be sustained or the parties’ ability to negotiate a change to changeover times or days to accommodate a change in the weather or the state of the roads. looking to a future where the father spends less term time with the children, i am concerned that his ability to be flexible about the changeover time either before or after the weekend will likely be seriously impinged by the desire to spend as much time as possible with the children. (d) if the mother intends to travel by plane or other public transport then i have no evidence of the transportation carrier’s timetable (including frequency and departure and arrival times) and given the parties’ communication difficulties, some concern about whether they could negotiate alternative changeover arrangements to accommodate the convenience of the mother and the children in circumstances where the father’s attitude is that the mother has acted in a punitive[88] way to limit his time with the children. (e) the mother proposes two additional weekends per school term with the father to provide the mother not less than seven days’ written notice with time to commence from the conclusion of school friday to the commencement of school monday (‘the ad-hoc visits’). in addition, there is provision for extra time provided that the parties agree on the time, the time is spent in the town k area and the father gives seven (7) days’ notice (‘the agreed time’). (f) given her negative attitude about the father and the benefit the children receive in their relationship with him (as evidenced most cogently by her discussions with the child expert and the facebook post on father’s day 2021), i wonder whether even if the father gives the written notice, she will not at least seek to impose some conditions upon the ad-hoc and agreed visits to accommodate events or people that she holds in higher regard than the father? (g) my concern is sharpened even further by the broad terms of the agreed time order, in circumstances where it appears that in the past, these parties have been unable to easily follow what they understood at the time to be their agreements, with for example, the mother misinterpreting a shared parenting plan and the parties remaining at odds about the outcomes of a solicitor-assisted mediation. (h) my concerns are also informed by my finding that the attitude of the mother towards the father in the facebook post was lamentable, particularly given the public nature of the document.   if the mother’s intention is to travel by car, then ignoring the many hours on the road for the children just to spend three nights with their father - i need only reflect on the difficulties that occurred in december 2021 to start having concerns about how long these trips could be sustained or the parties’ ability to negotiate a change to changeover times or days to accommodate a change in the weather or the state of the roads. looking to a future where the father spends less term time with the children, i am concerned that his ability to be flexible about the changeover time either before or after the weekend will likely be seriously impinged by the desire to spend as much time as possible with the children. (d) if the mother intends to travel by plane or other public transport then i have no evidence of the transportation carrier’s timetable (including frequency and departure and arrival times) and given the parties’ communication difficulties, some concern about whether they could negotiate alternative changeover arrangements to accommodate the convenience of the mother and the children in circumstances where the father’s attitude is that the mother has acted in a punitive[88] way to limit his time with the children. (e) the mother proposes two additional weekends per school term with the father to provide the mother not less than seven days’ written notice with time to commence from the conclusion of school friday to the commencement of school monday (‘the ad-hoc visits’). in addition, there is provision for extra time provided that the parties agree on the time, the time is spent in the town k area and the father gives seven (7) days’ notice (‘the agreed time’). (f) given her negative attitude about the father and the benefit the children receive in their relationship with him (as evidenced most cogently by her discussions with the child expert and the facebook post on father’s day 2021), i wonder whether even if the father gives the written notice, she will not at least seek to impose some conditions upon the ad-hoc and agreed visits to accommodate events or people that she holds in higher regard than the father? (g) my concern is sharpened even further by the broad terms of the agreed time order, in circumstances where it appears that in the past, these parties have been unable to easily follow what they understood at the time to be their agreements, with for example, the mother misinterpreting a shared parenting plan and the parties remaining at odds about the outcomes of a solicitor-assisted mediation. (h) my concerns are also informed by my finding that the attitude of the mother towards the father in the facebook post was lamentable, particularly given the public nature of the document.   if the mother intends to travel by plane or other public transport then i have no evidence of the transportation carrier’s timetable (including frequency and departure and arrival times) and given the parties’ communication difficulties, some concern about whether they could negotiate alternative changeover arrangements to accommodate the convenience of the mother and the children in circumstances where the father’s attitude is that the mother has acted in a punitive[88] way to limit his time with the children. (e) the mother proposes two additional weekends per school term with the father to provide the mother not less than seven days’ written notice with time to commence from the conclusion of school friday to the commencement of school monday (‘the ad-hoc visits’). in addition, there is provision for extra time provided that the parties agree on the time, the time is spent in the town k area and the father gives seven (7) days’ notice (‘the agreed time’). (f) given her negative attitude about the father and the benefit the children receive in their relationship with him (as evidenced most cogently by her discussions with the child expert and the facebook post on father’s day 2021), i wonder whether even if the father gives the written notice, she will not at least seek to impose some conditions upon the ad-hoc and agreed visits to accommodate events or people that she holds in higher regard than the father? (g) my concern is sharpened even further by the broad terms of the agreed time order, in circumstances where it appears that in the past, these parties have been unable to easily follow what they understood at the time to be their agreements, with for example, the mother misinterpreting a shared parenting plan and the parties remaining at odds about the outcomes of a solicitor-assisted mediation. (h) my concerns are also informed by my finding that the attitude of the mother towards the father in the facebook post was lamentable, particularly given the public nature of the document.   the mother proposes two additional weekends per school term with the father to provide the mother not less than seven days’ written notice with time to commence from the conclusion of school friday to the commencement of school monday (‘the ad-hoc visits’). in addition, there is provision for extra time provided that the parties agree on the time, the time is spent in the town k area and the father gives seven (7) days’ notice (‘the agreed time’). (f) given her negative attitude about the father and the benefit the children receive in their relationship with him (as evidenced most cogently by her discussions with the child expert and the facebook post on father’s day 2021), i wonder whether even if the father gives the written notice, she will not at least seek to impose some conditions upon the ad-hoc and agreed visits to accommodate events or people that she holds in higher regard than the father? (g) my concern is sharpened even further by the broad terms of the agreed time order, in circumstances where it appears that in the past, these parties have been unable to easily follow what they understood at the time to be their agreements, with for example, the mother misinterpreting a shared parenting plan and the parties remaining at odds about the outcomes of a solicitor-assisted mediation. (h) my concerns are also informed by my finding that the attitude of the mother towards the father in the facebook post was lamentable, particularly given the public nature of the document.   given her negative attitude about the father and the benefit the children receive in their relationship with him (as evidenced most cogently by her discussions with the child expert and the facebook post on father’s day 2021), i wonder whether even if the father gives the written notice, she will not at least seek to impose some conditions upon the ad-hoc and agreed visits to accommodate events or people that she holds in higher regard than the father? (g) my concern is sharpened even further by the broad terms of the agreed time order, in circumstances where it appears that in the past, these parties have been unable to easily follow what they understood at the time to be their agreements, with for example, the mother misinterpreting a shared parenting plan and the parties remaining at odds about the outcomes of a solicitor-assisted mediation. (h) my concerns are also informed by my finding that the attitude of the mother towards the father in the facebook post was lamentable, particularly given the public nature of the document.   my concern is sharpened even further by the broad terms of the agreed time order, in circumstances where it appears that in the past, these parties have been unable to easily follow what they understood at the time to be their agreements, with for example, the mother misinterpreting a shared parenting plan and the parties remaining at odds about the outcomes of a solicitor-assisted mediation. (h) my concerns are also informed by my finding that the attitude of the mother towards the father in the facebook post was lamentable, particularly given the public nature of the document.   my concerns are also informed by my finding that the attitude of the mother towards the father in the facebook post was lamentable, particularly given the public nature of the document.   the lack of trust each party has about either the other’s motivation for making decisions affecting each other’s time with the children, most profoundly expressed by the mother telling the child expert she did not believe anything the father said[89], (b) the evidence about the mother’s views regarding the importance of her ‘bonding time’ and the proprietary nature of her attitude about sharing time with the father when unexpected events occur, and (c) the parties’ poor communication.   the evidence about the mother’s views regarding the importance of her ‘bonding time’ and the proprietary nature of her attitude about sharing time with the father when unexpected events occur, and (c) the parties’ poor communication.   the parties’ poor communication.
section 60cc(3)(f)  believes the children love both their parents,[92] (b) says the children enjoy spending time with the father but this time is impinged by him dragging out changeovers and denigrating her in front of the children,[93] (c) encourages the children to spend time with the father.[94]   says the children enjoy spending time with the father but this time is impinged by him dragging out changeovers and denigrating her in front of the children,[93] (c) encourages the children to spend time with the father.[94]   encourages the children to spend time with the father.[94]   the mother’s trial affidavit, prepared after the family report was released includes over ten paragraphs of largely irrelevant information that explicitly or implicitly refer to the circumstances around the parties’ separation which occurred in may 2020. (b) the mother’s affidavit has limited evidence which would assuage my concerns about the mother’s capacity to support the children’s emotional needs, particularly insofar as their relationship with the father. for example at paragraph 174 of her affidavit she says –   the mother’s affidavit has limited evidence which would assuage my concerns about the mother’s capacity to support the children’s emotional needs, particularly insofar as their relationship with the father. for example at paragraph 174 of her affidavit she says –
...i understand that it is important for me to facilitate a relationship between mr holt and the children, and should my relocation be granted, i would ensure that the children were available to spend significant time with mr holt...
nowhere does she say why it is important or how she would support the children emotionally when they were not spending time with the father or communicating with him.   in her oral evidence i found the mother to be overly defensive about her decision regarding father’s day last year which appeared to prioritise the children’s relationship with mr g over spending a little bit more time with the father. (d) there was no evidence that the mother had reflected on the family report and in particular paragraph 126. although i appreciate the child expert is but one witness in the case and is not the mother’s treator, nowhere in the mother’s proposals was there any reference to the mother taking on board the oral evidence of the child expert about her engaging in therapy to address her emotional state as it pertains to the father.   there was no evidence that the mother had reflected on the family report and in particular paragraph 126. although i appreciate the child expert is but one witness in the case and is not the mother’s treator, nowhere in the mother’s proposals was there any reference to the mother taking on board the oral evidence of the child expert about her engaging in therapy to address her emotional state as it pertains to the father.
section 60cc(3)(i)  the mother failing to inform the father (in a timely manner) of a change in y’s day‑care provider, (b) the mother trying to ‘set up’ the father by asking him to care for the children on short notice, knowing that he would have to refuse because he was away on holidays, (c) the parties, less than six (6) months ago, failing to co-operate about an earlier changeover for holidays, and (d) the parties’ complaints about each of them failing to ensure the children experience regularised and uninterrupted facetime communications with the other, with the most recent example being in the 2021 summer school holidays.   the mother trying to ‘set up’ the father by asking him to care for the children on short notice, knowing that he would have to refuse because he was away on holidays, (c) the parties, less than six (6) months ago, failing to co-operate about an earlier changeover for holidays, and (d) the parties’ complaints about each of them failing to ensure the children experience regularised and uninterrupted facetime communications with the other, with the most recent example being in the 2021 summer school holidays.   the parties, less than six (6) months ago, failing to co-operate about an earlier changeover for holidays, and (d) the parties’ complaints about each of them failing to ensure the children experience regularised and uninterrupted facetime communications with the other, with the most recent example being in the 2021 summer school holidays.   the parties’ complaints about each of them failing to ensure the children experience regularised and uninterrupted facetime communications with the other, with the most recent example being in the 2021 summer school holidays.
...“i don’t think he has any at this stage. i think when the kids are old enough to do sports then he will come in with some strengths on teaching them how to play sport and i hope to be supportive and encouraging and not say, ‘you did not do good enough’. he has always been really involved with sports. at this stage though it is hard for me to comment when he was not an active parent in the house when he lived with them 24/7 and i don’t view how he is with them now. a lot of the time i wonder is he even going to bring them back this time?”
section 60cc(3) (j), (k)
section 60cc(3)(l)
section 60cc(3)(m)
“show me he is willing to do something he doesn’t want to do for the benefit of his children, i was looking for some kind of gesture that he was willing to sacrifice for the benefit of his children on some level.” [109]
...“he did not sacrifice any of his time. it defeated the purpose, i wanted him to be willing to show he would sacrifice. until he is willing to self-reflect and think, ‘hey how can i be a better parent?’. it has always been his way or the high way. it is hard for me to say there is a benefit (to the children having a relationship with the father) there at this stage. at this stage, i struggle to see him to have (sic) more time with them. it is detrimental for more time, he can’t wash their uniforms and wash their lunch boxes, what happens when they are in his care for fifty percent of the time?”   i accept that he cannot afford to refund to the armed forces the pro-rata bonus, and (b) i had no evidence about his costs of re-location, prospects of re-housing and where that would be in victoria and limited evidence about his ability to find employment with the armed forces in victoria (even if the organisation had anything to offer) or with any other employer.   i had no evidence about his costs of re-location, prospects of re-housing and where that would be in victoria and limited evidence about his ability to find employment with the armed forces in victoria (even if the organisation had anything to offer) or with any other employer.   they lose an important role model who (as observed within the family report) has much to give, (b) there is a risk that they will idealise the father, (c) their general adjustment could be adversely affected, and (d) their relationship with the mother could be adversely affected if they blame her for the loss of their relationship.   there is a risk that they will idealise the father, (c) their general adjustment could be adversely affected, and (d) their relationship with the mother could be adversely affected if they blame her for the loss of their relationship.   their general adjustment could be adversely affected, and (d) their relationship with the mother could be adversely affected if they blame her for the loss of their relationship.   their relationship with the mother could be adversely affected if they blame her for the loss of their relationship.
conclusion - equal time or substantial & significant time?
equal time  the mother not informing nor initially supporting the father having any involvement in x’s counselling (including her failure to tell him what happened at the first session), (b) the mother failing to inform the father (in a timely manner) of a change in y’s day-care provider, (c) the parties failing to effectively communicate to the other when y suffered a head injury in their respective care, (d) the parties, less than six (6) months ago, failing to co-operate about an earlier changeover for holidays, (e) the mother saying she does not believe anything the father says, and (f) the parties’ complaints about each of them failing to ensure the children experience regularised and uninterrupted facetime communications with the other, with the most recent example being in december 2021.   the mother failing to inform the father (in a timely manner) of a change in y’s day-care provider, (c) the parties failing to effectively communicate to the other when y suffered a head injury in their respective care, (d) the parties, less than six (6) months ago, failing to co-operate about an earlier changeover for holidays, (e) the mother saying she does not believe anything the father says, and (f) the parties’ complaints about each of them failing to ensure the children experience regularised and uninterrupted facetime communications with the other, with the most recent example being in december 2021.   the parties failing to effectively communicate to the other when y suffered a head injury in their respective care, (d) the parties, less than six (6) months ago, failing to co-operate about an earlier changeover for holidays, (e) the mother saying she does not believe anything the father says, and (f) the parties’ complaints about each of them failing to ensure the children experience regularised and uninterrupted facetime communications with the other, with the most recent example being in december 2021.   the parties, less than six (6) months ago, failing to co-operate about an earlier changeover for holidays, (e) the mother saying she does not believe anything the father says, and (f) the parties’ complaints about each of them failing to ensure the children experience regularised and uninterrupted facetime communications with the other, with the most recent example being in december 2021.   the mother saying she does not believe anything the father says, and (f) the parties’ complaints about each of them failing to ensure the children experience regularised and uninterrupted facetime communications with the other, with the most recent example being in december 2021.   the parties’ complaints about each of them failing to ensure the children experience regularised and uninterrupted facetime communications with the other, with the most recent example being in december 2021.
substantial and significant time  she does not say that she intends to explore professional support to address her issues about the father (as recommended by the child expert), (b) she gives no practical examples of how an improved mindset would lead to either the same or better emotional support of the children’s relationship with the father. to be clear, the mother’s affidavit does not speak about how she supports the children’s relationship with the father now other than in limited ways including to reassure the children they will have fun with their father.[114] nor does she say how she intends to do so in the future, other than to make a conclusionary statement about understanding it is important for her to facilitate a relationship and in doing so she would comply with orders regularising time.[115] (c) other than some limited comments in the family report[116] or in her affidavit[117], she does not acknowledge the positive parenting attributes the father offers or the nature of the relationship he has with the children (other than in a limited way such as to acknowledge they enjoy spending time with him).   she gives no practical examples of how an improved mindset would lead to either the same or better emotional support of the children’s relationship with the father. to be clear, the mother’s affidavit does not speak about how she supports the children’s relationship with the father now other than in limited ways including to reassure the children they will have fun with their father.[114] nor does she say how she intends to do so in the future, other than to make a conclusionary statement about understanding it is important for her to facilitate a relationship and in doing so she would comply with orders regularising time.[115] (c) other than some limited comments in the family report[116] or in her affidavit[117], she does not acknowledge the positive parenting attributes the father offers or the nature of the relationship he has with the children (other than in a limited way such as to acknowledge they enjoy spending time with him).   other than some limited comments in the family report[116] or in her affidavit[117], she does not acknowledge the positive parenting attributes the father offers or the nature of the relationship he has with the children (other than in a limited way such as to acknowledge they enjoy spending time with him).
conclusion – is it reasonably practicable?
the mother’s proposal
conclusion – parental responsibility  they will benefit from having a meaningful relationship with the father, (b) the mother has some limitations to her capacity to support the emotional needs of the children to have a meaningful relationship with the father, (c) regular weekly time between the children and the father will ensure that they get a balanced view of the father’s household and ameliorate any negativity that may arise in the mother’s household, (d) the children will benefit from the increase in time that flows from their change in circumstances because it will allow the father quality time to engage them in their schooling, any extra-curricular activities they may have in the future and general weekend and holiday time, including with other significant persons, (e) there are minimal prospects of future litigation or parental conflict if the tyranny of distance is removed from the parties’ changeover arrangements and communications.   the mother has some limitations to her capacity to support the emotional needs of the children to have a meaningful relationship with the father, (c) regular weekly time between the children and the father will ensure that they get a balanced view of the father’s household and ameliorate any negativity that may arise in the mother’s household, (d) the children will benefit from the increase in time that flows from their change in circumstances because it will allow the father quality time to engage them in their schooling, any extra-curricular activities they may have in the future and general weekend and holiday time, including with other significant persons, (e) there are minimal prospects of future litigation or parental conflict if the tyranny of distance is removed from the parties’ changeover arrangements and communications.   regular weekly time between the children and the father will ensure that they get a balanced view of the father’s household and ameliorate any negativity that may arise in the mother’s household, (d) the children will benefit from the increase in time that flows from their change in circumstances because it will allow the father quality time to engage them in their schooling, any extra-curricular activities they may have in the future and general weekend and holiday time, including with other significant persons, (e) there are minimal prospects of future litigation or parental conflict if the tyranny of distance is removed from the parties’ changeover arrangements and communications.   the children will benefit from the increase in time that flows from their change in circumstances because it will allow the father quality time to engage them in their schooling, any extra-curricular activities they may have in the future and general weekend and holiday time, including with other significant persons, (e) there are minimal prospects of future litigation or parental conflict if the tyranny of distance is removed from the parties’ changeover arrangements and communications.   there are minimal prospects of future litigation or parental conflict if the tyranny of distance is removed from the parties’ changeover arrangements and communications.
associate: dated: 13 may 2022
dated: 13 may 2022
[1] unless otherwise specified any reference to legislation shall be a reference to the family law act 1975 (cth)[2] for convenience, references to any content within the trial affidavit of mr holt shall be prefaced by “1” followed by the numbered paragraph enclosed within square brackets and any annexures to the affidavit identified alphabetically. [3] out of respect for each person’s personal preference about how they may wish to be identified in terms of their preferred honorific, persons (other than the parties or the children) shall be referred to by their surname only.[4] exhibit “f2” employment contract between j pty ltd and ms holt effective 08.11.2021, exhibit “f3” c families complete case profile report counselling note regarding x in january 2021, exhibit “f4” cops ... 29.05.2021[5] for convenience, references to any content within the trial affidavit of ms holt shall be prefaced by “..” followed by the numbered paragraph enclosed within square brackets and any annexures to the affidavit identified alphabetically.[6] for convenience, references to any content within the trial affidavit of mr g shall be prefaced by “..” followed by the numbered paragraph enclosed within square brackets and any annexures to the affidavit identified alphabetically.[7] for convenience, references to any content within the family report of ms h shall be prefaced by “..” followed by the numbered paragraph[8] [7][9] [7][10] [8][11] [228][12] [231][13] -43[14] [89][15] [59] (12 months for x) and [76] (12 months for y)[16] [103][17] see n-103 and annex “a”[18] 1-9[19] 1 [12] & annex “a”[20] [121][21] 1 [145] & [148][22] [44], [47] & [48][23] see n-19[24] 1 [71][25] 1 [88] & annex ”f”[26] 1 [92] & annex “g”[27] -88[28] see n-27[29] -67[30] -68[31] [139][32] [14][33] [142][34] 2 [11][35] 2 [12][36] [7] & [8][37] [171][38] -37[39] [10] & [11][40] [172] & [173][41] unless otherwise specified any reference to subordinate legislation shall be a reference to the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021[42] [167][43] [261][44] -25a)[45] -26[46] -38[47] -126[48] -97[49] -97[50] -101[51] -82[52] -42[53] -45[54] -55[55] -56[56] -57[57] -58
[58] -126[59] -44[60] -126[61] -124[62] -61, 64 & 96[63] -61[64] -47[65] -133 to 141[66] -124[67] -106[68] -112[69] -111[70] -41 to f-43[71] -121[72] -132[73] [169] – [171], [174] & annex ‘o’[74] u v u at [80][75] morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230 at [72] & [73][76] -121[77] see johnson & page [2007] famca 1235 at [68] where the full court endorsed comments by the hon. john fogarty a.m. including that the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term ‘unacceptable risk’ which requires an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable.[78] -127[79] -116[80] [12][81] [167][82] [261][83] -127[84] exhibit “m3”[85] -124[86] -130[87] see -129[88] -122[89] -61[90] -130[91] see n-90[92] -91[93] -133[94] by way of one example, see -147[95] -126[96] -125[97] -126[98] -126[99] -121[100] exhibit “f3” [101] -34[102] -51[103] -55[104] -77[105] -54[106] -119[107] see aims v aif at [145][108] see n-108[109] -45[110] -124[111] -127[112] -124 & 127[113] see mazorski & albright[114] [134][115] [174][116] see for example -43 where the mother acknowledges that the father loves the children[117] see for example [133][118] exhibit “f1” para 8, page 7[119] -36[120] -30[121] [172][122] see u v u[123] see n-122