last updated: 4 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sinagra & filice [2022] fedcfamc2f 732
orders
the court finds that the respondent mother has breached the orders made on 13 october 2021 on six separate occasions being as follows: (a) count 1 - that on 29 december 2021 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (b) count 2 – that on 5 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). (c) count 3 - that on 12 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (d) count 4 - that on 19 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). (e) count 5 - that on 26 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (f) count 6 - that on 2 february 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). the court further finds that the respondent mother had no reasonable excuse for breaching the orders on each of those six occasions. the court further finds that the six breaches fall within the more serious category.   count 1 - that on 29 december 2021 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (b) count 2 – that on 5 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). (c) count 3 - that on 12 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (d) count 4 - that on 19 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). (e) count 5 - that on 26 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (f) count 6 - that on 2 february 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). the court further finds that the respondent mother had no reasonable excuse for breaching the orders on each of those six occasions. the court further finds that the six breaches fall within the more serious category.   count 2 – that on 5 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). (c) count 3 - that on 12 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (d) count 4 - that on 19 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). (e) count 5 - that on 26 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (f) count 6 - that on 2 february 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). the court further finds that the respondent mother had no reasonable excuse for breaching the orders on each of those six occasions. the court further finds that the six breaches fall within the more serious category.   count 3 - that on 12 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (d) count 4 - that on 19 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). (e) count 5 - that on 26 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (f) count 6 - that on 2 february 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). the court further finds that the respondent mother had no reasonable excuse for breaching the orders on each of those six occasions. the court further finds that the six breaches fall within the more serious category.   count 4 - that on 19 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). (e) count 5 - that on 26 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (f) count 6 - that on 2 february 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). the court further finds that the respondent mother had no reasonable excuse for breaching the orders on each of those six occasions. the court further finds that the six breaches fall within the more serious category.   count 5 - that on 26 january 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of two nights in breach of order 4 (c). (f) count 6 - that on 2 february 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). the court further finds that the respondent mother had no reasonable excuse for breaching the orders on each of those six occasions. the court further finds that the six breaches fall within the more serious category.   count 6 - that on 2 february 2022 the mother without reasonable excuse withheld the children for a period of five nights in breach of order 4 (a). the court further finds that the respondent mother had no reasonable excuse for breaching the orders on each of those six occasions. the court further finds that the six breaches fall within the more serious category.
the court further finds that the respondent mother had no reasonable excuse for breaching the orders on each of those six occasions. the court further finds that the six breaches fall within the more serious category.
the court further finds that the six breaches fall within the more serious category.
the court orders that:
ex tempore reasons for judgmentjudge cope
introduction
the contravention application
count
specific order
contravention alleged
1
4(c)
29 december 2021 the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 29 december 2021 until friday 31 december 2021 (two nights)
the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 29 december 2021 until friday 31 december 2021 (two nights)
2
4(a)
5 january 2022 the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 5 january 2022 until monday 10 january 2022 (five nights)
the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 5 january 2022 until monday 10 january 2022 (five nights)
3
12 january 2022 the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 12 january 2022 until friday 14 january 2022 (two nights)
the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 12 january 2022 until friday 14 january 2022 (two nights)
4.
19 january 2022 the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 19 january 2022 until monday 24 january 2022 (five nights)
the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 19 january 2022 until monday 24 january 2022 (five nights)
5.
26 january 2022 the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 26 january 2022 until friday 28 january 2022 (two nights)
the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 26 january 2022 until friday 28 january 2022 (two nights)
6.
2 february 2022 the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 2 february 2022 until monday 7 february 2022 (five nights)
the mother, without reasonable excuse, withheld the children in her care and failed to deliver up the children to spend time with the father from wednesday 2 february 2022 until monday 7 february 2022 (five nights)
the interlocutory application
the contravention application
issues for determination  firstly, whether the mother had a reasonable excuse for the six contraventions alleged and, if that is established, that will be the end of the matter save for any arguments as to legal costs. (b) secondly, if however i find that the mother did not have a reasonable excuse for one or more of the alleged breaches, then i must turn to the issue of whether the contraventions fall within the category of less or more serious contraventions. i must then thirdly decide what penalty or consequence should apply to the mother and (c) lastly, i will determine whether it is necessary to appropriate to vary the orders made by consent on 13 october 2021 under the power invoked by section 70nba.   secondly, if however i find that the mother did not have a reasonable excuse for one or more of the alleged breaches, then i must turn to the issue of whether the contraventions fall within the category of less or more serious contraventions. i must then thirdly decide what penalty or consequence should apply to the mother and (c) lastly, i will determine whether it is necessary to appropriate to vary the orders made by consent on 13 october 2021 under the power invoked by section 70nba.   lastly, i will determine whether it is necessary to appropriate to vary the orders made by consent on 13 october 2021 under the power invoked by section 70nba.
material relied upon
orders sought
witnesses
the applicant
the respondent  presented as having well-established relationships with all three members of his family. ... [y] too presented as being comfortable with both parents...[2]
discussion and findings
the law
you must do everything a parenting order says. in doing so, you cannot be merely passive but must take positive action and this positive obligation includes taking all reasonable steps to ensure that the order is put into effect. you must also positively encourage your children to comply with the orders. for example where the order states your children are to spend time with another party, you must not only ensure that the children are available but must also positively encourage them to go and do so...
...there is an obligation cast upon the custodial parent to take reasonable steps to make the child available for access. it is not open to the custodial parent to do no more than bring the child to the front entrance and invite it to walk of its own accord to the access parent at the garden gate, and to argue that if the child refuses, all her obligations are satisfied by merely standing, as i put it, with folded arms behind the child, doing nothing either to encourage the child to walk to the father or to discourage the child from remaining on the doorstep and, indeed, this situation is directly comparable to it. it is quite clear that such an approach is wrong and that the wife in this circumstance, clearly, was in breach of her obligations under the order.
applying the law to the facts with reference to each alleged contravention
count 1
count 2
count 3
count 4
count 5
count 6
conclusion
consequences of failure to comply  all six of the alleged contraventions have been established, (b) this is the second time that the mother has withheld the children, though no contravention has previously been filed or findings made, (c) the breaches all involved a denial of contact between the children and their father, (d) the allegations relied on by the mother as a justification for her breach were also relied on in the previous proceedings, being allegations of physical abuse and threats of abuse prior to the making of the consent orders, (e) the children have not spent time with their father since 26 december 2021, (f) the mother did not file proceedings to vary the orders until march 2022, more than two months after time had been suspended and after the contravention application had been filed by the father, (g) the family report writer’s opinion that the mother struggled to speak positively of the father and the remarks that she made in that regard, (h) the family report writer’s evidence that the child, x, made disclosures that the mother asked a lot of questions when he spent time with the father’s partner, and (i) what evidence there is of the mother, in relation to attempting to address those issues, has been unsatisfactory and has been, indeed, alarming on many fronts and i have made findings about those matters.   this is the second time that the mother has withheld the children, though no contravention has previously been filed or findings made, (c) the breaches all involved a denial of contact between the children and their father, (d) the allegations relied on by the mother as a justification for her breach were also relied on in the previous proceedings, being allegations of physical abuse and threats of abuse prior to the making of the consent orders, (e) the children have not spent time with their father since 26 december 2021, (f) the mother did not file proceedings to vary the orders until march 2022, more than two months after time had been suspended and after the contravention application had been filed by the father, (g) the family report writer’s opinion that the mother struggled to speak positively of the father and the remarks that she made in that regard, (h) the family report writer’s evidence that the child, x, made disclosures that the mother asked a lot of questions when he spent time with the father’s partner, and (i) what evidence there is of the mother, in relation to attempting to address those issues, has been unsatisfactory and has been, indeed, alarming on many fronts and i have made findings about those matters.   the breaches all involved a denial of contact between the children and their father, (d) the allegations relied on by the mother as a justification for her breach were also relied on in the previous proceedings, being allegations of physical abuse and threats of abuse prior to the making of the consent orders, (e) the children have not spent time with their father since 26 december 2021, (f) the mother did not file proceedings to vary the orders until march 2022, more than two months after time had been suspended and after the contravention application had been filed by the father, (g) the family report writer’s opinion that the mother struggled to speak positively of the father and the remarks that she made in that regard, (h) the family report writer’s evidence that the child, x, made disclosures that the mother asked a lot of questions when he spent time with the father’s partner, and (i) what evidence there is of the mother, in relation to attempting to address those issues, has been unsatisfactory and has been, indeed, alarming on many fronts and i have made findings about those matters.   the allegations relied on by the mother as a justification for her breach were also relied on in the previous proceedings, being allegations of physical abuse and threats of abuse prior to the making of the consent orders, (e) the children have not spent time with their father since 26 december 2021, (f) the mother did not file proceedings to vary the orders until march 2022, more than two months after time had been suspended and after the contravention application had been filed by the father, (g) the family report writer’s opinion that the mother struggled to speak positively of the father and the remarks that she made in that regard, (h) the family report writer’s evidence that the child, x, made disclosures that the mother asked a lot of questions when he spent time with the father’s partner, and (i) what evidence there is of the mother, in relation to attempting to address those issues, has been unsatisfactory and has been, indeed, alarming on many fronts and i have made findings about those matters.   the children have not spent time with their father since 26 december 2021, (f) the mother did not file proceedings to vary the orders until march 2022, more than two months after time had been suspended and after the contravention application had been filed by the father, (g) the family report writer’s opinion that the mother struggled to speak positively of the father and the remarks that she made in that regard, (h) the family report writer’s evidence that the child, x, made disclosures that the mother asked a lot of questions when he spent time with the father’s partner, and (i) what evidence there is of the mother, in relation to attempting to address those issues, has been unsatisfactory and has been, indeed, alarming on many fronts and i have made findings about those matters.   the mother did not file proceedings to vary the orders until march 2022, more than two months after time had been suspended and after the contravention application had been filed by the father, (g) the family report writer’s opinion that the mother struggled to speak positively of the father and the remarks that she made in that regard, (h) the family report writer’s evidence that the child, x, made disclosures that the mother asked a lot of questions when he spent time with the father’s partner, and (i) what evidence there is of the mother, in relation to attempting to address those issues, has been unsatisfactory and has been, indeed, alarming on many fronts and i have made findings about those matters.   the family report writer’s opinion that the mother struggled to speak positively of the father and the remarks that she made in that regard, (h) the family report writer’s evidence that the child, x, made disclosures that the mother asked a lot of questions when he spent time with the father’s partner, and (i) what evidence there is of the mother, in relation to attempting to address those issues, has been unsatisfactory and has been, indeed, alarming on many fronts and i have made findings about those matters.   the family report writer’s evidence that the child, x, made disclosures that the mother asked a lot of questions when he spent time with the father’s partner, and (i) what evidence there is of the mother, in relation to attempting to address those issues, has been unsatisfactory and has been, indeed, alarming on many fronts and i have made findings about those matters.   what evidence there is of the mother, in relation to attempting to address those issues, has been unsatisfactory and has been, indeed, alarming on many fronts and i have made findings about those matters.
associate: dated: 7 june 2022
dated: 7 june 2022
[1]rice & asplund (1979) flc 90-725; [1978] famca 84[2] affidavit of ms c filed 15 september 2021, page 31[3] affidavit of ms c filed 15 september 2021, page 31. [4] exhibit “f1” - tender bundle, page 31. [5] sandler and kerrington [2007] famca 479 at [48]