last updated: 30 june 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
haney & todd [2022] fedcfamc2f 605
orders
the court orders that:  abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent or any member of the other parents' household in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them (b) discussing the court proceedings affecting the children with the children or either of them (c) involving the children in any form of dispute between the parents   discussing the court proceedings affecting the children with the children or either of them (c) involving the children in any form of dispute between the parents   involving the children in any form of dispute between the parents
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge burchardt
introductory
agreed or uncontroversial matters
the parties' affidavits
the mother’s affidavit
i will consent to an order to undertake supervised random drug testing notwithstanding i deny the necessity thereof if required by this honourable court.
on that occasion my father and i had argued, and i caused damage to the property (a hole in my bedroom wall and minor damage to the front fly screen).
i admit that i experienced difficulty with my mental health and drug use during and following the breakdown of our relationship. i was using drugs, mainly cannabis during the relationship. [mr todd] also smoked cannabis regularly. my relationship with [mr todd] was violent and [mr todd] perpetrated family violence against me throughout the relationship. through the counselling i have received i am aware that i used drugs to self-medicate to escape the toxic and violent relationship that i was in.
i was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 2002. i take 5mg of zyprexa per day as prescribed. over the course of our relationship, the abuse by [mr todd] increased. initially [mr todd] threw things at me, often in the presence of [x]. the abuse escalated over time including being grabbed, shaken and pushed. i could not move out. i did not have any money. i was in the late stages of pregnancy and then [x] was born. i remained with [mr todd] as he kept saying he would not hurt me again. in october 2016 [mr todd] ripped my jumper off me and threw me down the back steps of our home and locked me outside in the dark with no phone, shoes or jumper.
on thursday 21 september 2017 i was getting out of the shower when [mr todd] came into the room and tripped over something on the floor. [mr todd] charged towards me and ripped the towel off me, threw me onto the bed and got on top of me pinning me down. [mr todd] was verbally abusing me and calling me horrible names. he then placed his hands around my neck attempting to strangle me. [mr todd] left the family home again ...
in october 2018 [mr todd] began pushing and grabbing me again, leaving bruises around my arms and one on my right breast. i also found out that [mr todd] had been getting ice dropped to him at work, smoking substances during work and in the family home out in the shed at night-time. on 24 december 2018 at around 9.30am, [mr todd] became quite aggressive and put his clenched fists up to my face. i was scared of what [mr todd] might do as his anger seemed out of control. i started to run down the hallway. [mr todd] caught me and continued to yell at me and call me horrible names while pushing me around. [mr todd] stormed into our bedroom and began throwing my belongings around. he also threw my bed side table and broke it. i pleaded with him to calm down and to stop. i recall x appeared at the bedroom door as [mr todd] grabbed my shoulders and head butted me in my nose. i took x to the loungeroom and remained with him and y until the police i had called arrived.   todd] and i are both known to the police. i was placed on a community corrections order in 2014 for possession of illicit drugs. [mr todd] was convicted of a range of offences in 2015 including but not limited to, to the best of my recollection, aggravated assault, possession of illicit drugs, dishonesty offences and possession of stolen goods. [mr todd] received a community corrections order.
she admitted staying with a friend in [suburb f], she was still using cannabis and alcohol to self-medicate and was now sleeping in excess of 10 hours. she presented with major depression, as a consequence of her bipolar disorder and situational crisis. she informed me that though the order referred to "grounds where the nominated children were (likely) to suffer physical, emotional/psychological harm", she maintained that this was due to conflict with her parents, who disapproved of her alcohol, drug use and her lifestyle.
on 30 may 2019, ms haney attended and reported that she had engaged support in her drug and alcohol use the previous tuesday, she stated that she had also sought support for her domestic violence history and was receiving counselling. she stated that she had an appointment with legal aid and was determined to regain custody of her children. she had apparently resolved her differences with her parents, was seeking medication for her bipolar and cut down her cannabis use. she appeared calm, more focussed and reported that she was getting around 8 hours 'restful' sleep a night. she informed me that she “had stopped seeing herself as a victim, and turning to drugs for support”. i formed the view that she had far better insight into her situation with herself, her parents and her children than in previous sessions. . when i saw [ms haney] on 14 june, she informed me that she had not used any drugs (including cannabis for more than two weeks, she reported drinking no more than 6 standard drinks a week, and she also informed me that she had been taking olanzapine (zyprexa), an atypical antipsychotic medication specifically used in the treatment of bipolar disorder. she reported better sleep, better concentration and feeling ‘clear-headed’. she looked well, her mood was stable, responded appropriately to questions and demonstrated good insight into her situation.   haney] suffers from bipolar disorder (i), (mixed episodes), her episodes of mania are infrequent, and she stated that she had more frequent episodes of depression. this disorder is considered to be due to genetic factors rather than any drug and/or alcohol use/abuse. her condition causes significant shifts in mood, energy, thinking and behaviour. cycles can last for days or weeks, with these mood changes interfering with her functioning. symptoms may vary in their pattern, severity and frequency. amongst the behaviours and symptoms [ms haney] had reported were: having unrealistic thoughts, poor sleep, she was highly distractible, impaired judgement and impulsiveness, acting without thoughts of consequences, problematic relationships, feelings of guilt and worthlessness. self-medication with poly drug and/r alcohol are very common. as i have explained firmly and clearly to [ms haney], it is important to continue treatment, even if she is feeling well, using a combination of medication, therapy, lifestyle changes and social support.
the father's affidavit
when we broke up we had a physical altercation which resulted in the police being involved and an intervention order being issued against me. no criminal charges have resulted against either myself or ms haney in relation to this incident on 24 december 2018. a reason for our breakup was my discovery that ms haney had again been using ice and other illicit drugs.
i say that the family violence in our situation was mainly caused by [ms haney's] erratic behaviour which usually was associated with her drug use. annexed hereto and marked “[1]” is a true copy of a dhhs report dated 14 june 2019 which outlines the reasons the children were removed from [ms haney].
i agree that the children have been attending child care due to my work commitments, however due to the covid19 situation my work arrangements have changed and i have more time to spend with the children.
i deny undermining [ms haney's] involvement with the children. i want it to occur safely. since the children have lived with me since may 2019 they have settled well and it is in their best interests to be facing further upheavals in their lives by changing residence & enrolling in school at [town c].
i disagree with paragraph 27 of the affidavit and say that whilst a physical altercation occurred, it was in the context of [ms haney] attacking me with a hammer and i have not been charged with any offences as a result of the incident. the police interviewed me and i gave them my version of events and they decided not to charge me as they were satisfied i acted in self defence when [ms haney] attacked me with the hammer.
i agree that i do work and try to juggle work and care of the children. i have the assistance of my mother and father and the kindergarten and school. my work has decreased as a result of covid19 and i am available to care for the children on a more frequent basis. [ms haney] has never worked. this was one of her problems. she would·have too much time on her hands and use drugs as a diversion.   haney] lacks insight into the impact her drug use, mental health and behaviours have on [x] and [y]. [ms haney] does not take responsibility for her actions and is instead fixated on [mr todd], blaming him for her behaviours. [ms haney] is unable to be redirected during conversation due to this fixation and meaningful engagement with [ms haney] has not been possible due to this. · [ms haney's] behaviours towards multiple child protection staff of varying positions is of concern. [ms haney] is argumentative and hostile during conversations and often resorts to personal attacks. [ms haney] has referred to cpp [ms h] as a trainee stating that she "has no kids or life experience so what would you know". [ms haney] has also made personal attacks towards team manager [ms j], in relation to her decision making and that she should "go back to training with her trainee" and making allegations that tm [ms j] had yelled at her. [ms haney] has been unable to follow safety plans agreed upon throughout child protections involvement. [ms haney] initially signed a safety plan whereby she was to not remove the children from the maternal grandparents home until further assessments had occurred and to not be drug or alcohol affected whilst in the children's presence. the day following the safety plan being signed [ms haney] removed the children from the maternal grandparents home and it was reported that she had been drinking. a further safety plan was developed with [ms haney] which was also breached as she disengaged with child protection and salvocare, and failed to complete supervised urine drug screens as directed. .
the 11f reports  haney] maintained she had not consumed illicit substances for several years. she insisted that [mr todd] had used her historical drug use to continue to make false allegations, in an attempt to keep the children away from her and exert power over her. she reported she had not completed any of the court ordered drug tests and refused to do so. she maintained that all drug tests she had been ordered to complete were a result of [mr todd’s] continued false allegations and abuse toward her. as such she stated she did not believe it was “right” for her to complete any form of drug screens or testing as she maintained she was substance free.   haney] maintained [mr todd] had continued to make false allegations about her to manipulate the court and withhold the children from her. she was of the opinion [mr todd] had not engaged in any services to address his aggression or substance abuse issues. she maintained child protection had failed to protect the children and had aligned with [mr todd] in their assessments of her. [ms haney] maintained child protection had made incorrect assessments and conclusions based on information given to them by [mr todd]. she reported she was in the process of making formal complaints. [ms haney] was of the opinion [ms haney] was unsafe and the children at risk in his care. [mr todd] appeared genuine his concerns for the children. he presented child focused and as making every effort to ensure the children were settled and thriving in his care. he appeared candid in wanting to ensure and support the children having a positive relationship with [ms haney]. it was noted [ms haney] presented erratic and became heightened and defensive throughout the interview.
while there is no doubt [ms haney] loves her children, she demonstrated limited insight into their needs and the impact her choices and behaviours may have had on them. [ms haney] seemed focused solely on [mr todd's] faults and blaming him for the events leading to the current situation, unable to take any responsibility of what part she may have played. it was observed [ms haney] was unable to accept any positive changes in the children whilst in their father's care. rather she seemed to maintain the children were at significant risk in their father's care, referencing historical incidents, appearing to be unwilling to shift her view, despite the children's current presentation. [ms haney's] proposal was indicative that she was unable to prioritise the children's needs and their current stability. whilst the parties both conceded there had been historical family violence and each engaged in substance use, there is no information at this time that would suggest the children are at risk of harm in [mr todd's] care. rather, it seems that after several years of exposure to family violence and substance abuse, instability and significant changes, they appear to have been in a safety, stable and caring home environment with their father. however given the allegations of substance misuse, the court may wish to proceed with caution until such a time where [ms haney] can provide drug testing results. additionally, the court may wish to have a clearer understanding of [ms haney's] mental health and its impacts/risks, if any, on the children.
the family report  haney] maintained she had ceased consuming any illicit substances since 2019. she expressed [mr todd’s] continuous persistence that she complete drug screens was a form of abuse. [ms haney] maintained her refusal to complete any further drug screens stating she was no longer using illicit substances and did not have the financial means to complete any requests.
she reported currently attending upon a psychiatrist indicating requiring further assessments as her psychiatrist has raised concerns of potential further diagnosis of borderline personality disorder. [ms haney] stated she did not have an appointment booked for this to occur as yet. she reported attending upon a psychologist every few weeks with the next appointment in february 2022. [ms haney] indicated currently taking prescribed medication for her bipolar, anxiety and depression as prescribed by her psychiatrist and managed by her gp.
the impact of significant parental conflict and ongoing dispute on the children and their relationships with each parent and their emotional and psychological development. the parents' capacity to meet the children's overall needs and provide long-standing safety and stability. the impact of [ms haney's] alleged drug use and mental health state on the children and her parenting capacity. the parties disrupted and fractured relationship and the impact it has on parenting arrangements.   todd] reported he had made significant changes in his life in order to care for the children and be a better father. he acknowledged his past behaviours had been inappropriate, however maintained that following child protection involvement and x and y's placement in his primary care he had continued to work on himself to provide for the children. [mr todd] described himself as very happy and proud of what he had achieved for his family. he expressed that despite his past issues he was now in a position where he was proudly providing safety and stability for [x] and [y] and felt such joy are watching them grow, develop and thrive at school and in kindergarten. he reported having significant supports around him through friends and family and that although he was not engaged in any formal support services was open to doing so should the need arise. [mr todd] maintained he supported the children's relationship with their mother and insisted his only concerns had ever been regarding [ms haney] substance misuse and the impact this had upon her mental health and therefore parenting capacity. [mr todd] was of the opinion that though [ms haney] had a diagnosis of bipolar, he believed her mental health only became unstable and impacting her ability to care for the children when she engaged in substance misuse.
it was noted throughout her interview [ms haney] was difficult to engage, presenting heightened, unable to contain her emotions and at times erratic. she was tangential in her responses and seemed unable to focus and follow a line of questioning. it was observed that when challenged by the writer or presented with information that did not aligned with [ms haney's] narrative, she would become increasingly heightened and aggressive continuously interrupting the writer and threatening to end the interview. the writer made multiple attempts to re-engage [ms haney], calm her down and refocus the interview. at times [ms haney] was able to engage and answer questions briefly, however it was observed this occurred with topics relating to her mental health or current living situation. this resulted, despite multiple attempts made by the writer, in [ms haney] concluding the after only 40 minutes, with [ms haney] refusing to continue participating in this intervention. [ms haney] reported ongoing concerns that [mr todd] continued to abuse her and the children. she was persistent in her belief that the court and child protection had aligned with [mr todd] and were ignoring his perpetration of family violence towards her repeatedly stating "i'm the victim here." she reported [x] was demonstrating signs of stress and anxiety stating that a rash he had over the weekend was a result of the strange emotions living with his father. she persisted in her belief that "i am the only one that truly has their [[x] and [y]'s] best interests at heart and am the only one that can truly look after them safely." [ms haney] was of the opinion that the children were emotional suffering as they were attending before and after school care and being picked up on occasion by the paternal grandparents, thus they did not always know who was picking them up from school each day. she persisted this would not occur should the children be in her care as she would be able to do all the school pickups and drop-offs. [ms haney] confirmed that she was increasingly stressed and was currently struggling with her mental health. she stated this was a result of [mr todd's] ongoing abuse, his refusal to allow her to see the children and constant false allegations against her. [ms haney] stated her psychiatrist had indicated she would be conducting further assessments and potential diagnosis as she had concerns her presentation may suggest borderline personality disorder. [ms haney] was of the opinion that she had always managed her mental health however she currently felt overwhelmed with the circumstances and this was impacting upon her mental well-being. [ms haney] insisted her refusal to complete drug screens was not because she was using illicit substances but rather because it was her belief [mr todd] was using this as a means to control her. she stated the court was "allowing him to do this to me" without reason as she denied engaging in any illicit substance use. [ms haney] reported she was unable to afford any drug screens insisting they were unnecessary. she suggested that if [mr todd] persisted she completes such assessments, he should pay for them. the writer was unable to obtain any further information as [ms haney] became heightened, aggressive and as such interview concluded.
it was noted that when asked to speak about [x] and [y], [ms haney] became hostile when questioned about the children’s likes, dislikes and overall lives.
there is no information at this time to suggest that either [x] or [y] are at any risk of harm in [mr todd's] care. rather, it seems that through the course of the last 2 ½ years both [x] and [y] have been thriving in their father's care. there remains serious concerns as to [ms haney's] substance use and mental health following presentation throughout this intervention. it was observed [ms haney] had significant difficulty regulating her emotions and was unable to contain herself. she had difficulty engaging, was chaotic, tangential and unable to cope with anything that challenged her narrative. despite multiple attempts made by the writer to assist [ms haney] to regulate and participate in this intervention [ms haney] presented with significant mental health vulnerabilities and became heightened to the point she refused to engage further with the writer.   haney's] infrequent spend time with the children and refusal to meaningfully engage in these court proceedings raises significant concerns as to her capacity to safely provide care for the children given what appears to be her current vulnerable mental state and potential drug use. she demonstrated limited insight into the impact that her proposal for care arrangements would have upon the children. she seemed to believe that [x] and [y] would in no way be impacted by having to change schools and residencies. concerns regarding [ms haney] illicit substance use and mental health have been raised throughout these proceedings have been clearly identified a significant risk factor by child protection throughout their multiple involvements. [ms haney] insisted she was no longer engaging in substance misuse, however her presentation at both this intervention and both previous child inclusive conference interviews was suggestive that she may be using illegal drugs. her refusal to complete supervised drug screens does not support her contention of sobriety. this has resulted in there been insufficient information available in this assessment regarding her illegal drug use/misuse. formal assessment by a drug and alcohol service may be beneficial in determining [ms haney’s] level of use and its impacts on her day-to-day functioning. should [ms haney] abuse substances her capacity to adequately and safely parent the children would be undermined. given both [x] and [y] are both very young and vulnerable ages it is assessed that this would place the children at potential risk.
the parties disrupted and fractured relationship, compounded by [ms haney’s] long-term issues, offers little confidence in the capacity to maintain effective joint parental responsibility. [mr todd] has demonstrated over a significant period of time, his capacity to prioritise [x] and [y] and their needs and best interests.
the exhibited materials
this lady is a long term patient of mine and she has been coming to this clinic for many years now. she has bipolar disorder. this condition can affect judgment, it can contribute to risk taking behaviour. she fortunately decided to take care of herself. she presented to see me a few weeks ago and we recommenced her treatment. she takes antipsychotic/mood stabiliser medication zyprexa. she is already feeling better. she is not psychotic and not hypomanic. she is keen to continue her treatment. she is denying any drug use currently. she has moved back to [town c] and will be living a close proximity to her supportive parents. she agreed to come to the clinic for regular follow up. she sees a psychologist. i think she is currently able to provide her kids with appropriate care-for as long as she is taking her medication and avoids illicit drugs.
she has focused on regaining access to her children, and is determined to do everything required to have them returned to her in order to provide them with a loving, stable home.
the submissions made and evidence given at court
at the moment it is hard to see. it is tormenting me. it is even worse with the children. they cannot comprehend what is going on.
the opening and evidence of the father
the evidence of ms b
final submissions by the parties
some brief observations about the witnesses
the statutory pathway
in summary, the amendments to part vii have the following effect: unless the court makes an order changing the statutory conferral of joint parental responsibility, s 61c(1) provides that until a child turns 18, each of the child’s parents has parental responsibility for the child. “parental responsibility” means all the duties, powers, and authority which by law parents have in relation to children and parental responsibility is not displaced except by order of the court or the provisions of a parenting plan made between the parties. the making of a parenting order triggers the application of a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for each of the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility. that presumption must be applied unless there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent or a person who lives with a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence (s 61da(1) and s 61da(2)). if it is appropriate to apply the presumption, it is to be applied in relation to both final and interim orders unless, in the case of the making of an interim order, the court considers it would not be appropriate in the circumstances to apply it (s 61da(1) and s 61da(3)). the presumption may be rebutted where the court is satisfied that the application of a presumption of equal shared parental responsibility would conflict with the best interests of the child (s 61da(4)). when the presumption is applied, the first thing the court must do is to consider making an order if it is consistent with the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents. if equal time is not in the interests of the child or reasonably practicable the court must go on to consider making an order if it is consistent with the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents (s 65daa(1) and (2)). the act provides guidance as to the meaning of “substantial and significant time” (ss 65daa(3) and (4)) and as to the meaning of “reasonable practicability” (s 65daa(5)). the concept of “substantial and significant” time is defined in s 65daa to mean:   the time the child spends with the parent includes both:  days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends and holidays, and  the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:  the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and  the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent. where neither concept of equal time nor substantial and significant time delivers an outcome that promotes the child’s best interests, then the issue is at large and to be determined in accordance with the child’s best interests. the child’s best interests are ascertained by a consideration of the objects and principles in s 60b and the primary and additional considerations in s 60cc. when the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not applied, the court is at large to consider what arrangements will best promote the child’s best interests, including, if the court considers it appropriate, an order that the child spend equal or substantial and significant time with each of the parents. these considerations would particularly be so if one or other of the parties was seeking an order for equal or substantial and significant time but, as the best interests of the child are the paramount consideration, the court may consider making such orders whenever it would be in the best interests of the child to do so after affording procedural fairness to the parties. the child’s best interests remain the overriding consideration.
parental responsibility
the spend time and communication regime - the primary considerations
additional considerations - section 60cc(3)(a)
section 60cc(3)(b)
section 60cc(3)(c)
section 60cc(3)(ca)
section 60cc(3)(d)
section 60cc(3)(e)
section 60cc(3)(f)
section 60cc(3)(g)
section 60cc(3)(h)
section 60cc(3)(i)
section 60cc(3)(j)
section 60cc(3)(k)
section 60cc(3)(l)
section 60cc(3)(m)
conclusion
associate: dated: 16 may 2022
dated: 16 may 2022