last updated: 4 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kline & anthony [2022] fedcfamc2f 734
orders
the court orders that:  x born in 2016, and (b) y born in 2018   y born in 2018   save for by a lawyer or a police officer, contacting or attempting to contact the mother or children, whether face-to-face or by any electronic means of whatsoever nature and kind, (b) attending at or near the respective schools/kindergarten/day-care on any school day between 8:00am and 5:00pm, or any other place where the children live or frequent from time to time, (c) attending at the mother and the children's home, (d) remaining in the presence of the children and the mother in the event that for any reason the father and the children and mother may come into contact.   attending at or near the respective schools/kindergarten/day-care on any school day between 8:00am and 5:00pm, or any other place where the children live or frequent from time to time, (c) attending at the mother and the children's home, (d) remaining in the presence of the children and the mother in the event that for any reason the father and the children and mother may come into contact.   attending at the mother and the children's home, (d) remaining in the presence of the children and the mother in the event that for any reason the father and the children and mother may come into contact.   remaining in the presence of the children and the mother in the event that for any reason the father and the children and mother may come into contact.   any school/kindergarten/day-care at which the children may attend from time to time (b) any medical professional, counsellor or other like professional the children may attend from time to time, (c) victoria police and/or the state magistrates court, and (d) the department of families, fairness and housing.   any medical professional, counsellor or other like professional the children may attend from time to time, (c) victoria police and/or the state magistrates court, and (d) the department of families, fairness and housing.   victoria police and/or the state magistrates court, and (d) the department of families, fairness and housing.   the department of families, fairness and housing.
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy ] an undefended hearing is a difficult matter. it means that there is no assistance obtained from the other side. all important aspects of the matter must be proved on admissible evidence. ordinarily in an undefended hearing it is expected and assumed that the other side that is not participating in the hearing will have had the opportunity to look at such evidence as has been provided to them. then the court can more readily proceed on the basis of the non appearing party having been provided with all of the evidence and draw the inference that party has chosen not to participate in the proceedings or to make any application.  ] the term undefended proceedings was also referred to in lanceley and lanceley [1994] famca 94, (1994) flc 92-491. the full court considered the position of a respondent who took no active part in proceedings. barblett dcj, frederico and lindenmayer jj said at 81,104:
...unlike some other jurisdictions, such a circumstance does not and cannot lead, in this court, to a 'judgment by default' in favour of the applicant, because the court must still decide, on the evidence before it, that the applicant is entitled, in law, to the relief claimed and that, in the exercise of its discretion, it is appropriate to grant that relief...
associate: dated: 7 june 2022
dated: 7 june 2022