last updated: 5 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
elders & hewitt (no 4) [2022] fedcfamc2f 686
orders
the court orders that:  the property at, and nett proceeds of the sale of, b street, city c qld, (b) the property at, and nett proceeds of the sale, of d street, town e qld, (c) the 5 shipping containers and contents currently located at f street, town g qld,   the property at, and nett proceeds of the sale, of d street, town e qld, (c) the 5 shipping containers and contents currently located at f street, town g qld,   the 5 shipping containers and contents currently located at f street, town g qld,   within 14 days of the date of these orders, unless already listed, the properties shall be listed with a sales agent nominated by the applicant. (b) the listing price (if applicable) or reserve shall be nominated by the applicant. (c) the applicant shall accept any offer that is at least 90% of the listing price or reserve.   the listing price (if applicable) or reserve shall be nominated by the applicant. (c) the applicant shall accept any offer that is at least 90% of the listing price or reserve.   the applicant shall accept any offer that is at least 90% of the listing price or reserve.   all costs and expenses of sale, including legal costs and disbursements, agent’s commission, conveyancer’s fees (including repayment of any such expenses as have been paid by either or both of the parties), (b) the amount required to discharge any mortgage currently encumbering the properties, (c) the amounts required to pay all municipal and water rates outstanding with respect to the properties, (d) the balance to the applicant with such funds to be paid into the trust account of the applicant’s lawyers (collier lawyers pty ltd).   the amount required to discharge any mortgage currently encumbering the properties, (c) the amounts required to pay all municipal and water rates outstanding with respect to the properties, (d) the balance to the applicant with such funds to be paid into the trust account of the applicant’s lawyers (collier lawyers pty ltd).   the amounts required to pay all municipal and water rates outstanding with respect to the properties, (d) the balance to the applicant with such funds to be paid into the trust account of the applicant’s lawyers (collier lawyers pty ltd).   the balance to the applicant with such funds to be paid into the trust account of the applicant’s lawyers (collier lawyers pty ltd).   each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of, or held in the name of, such party as at the date of these orders. (b) money standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account is to become the property of the person so named as the owner of the bank account. (c) each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other. (d) all insurance policies shall become the sole property of the owner named thereunder. (e) each party shall be solely liable for an indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   money standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account is to become the property of the person so named as the owner of the bank account. (c) each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other. (d) all insurance policies shall become the sole property of the owner named thereunder. (e) each party shall be solely liable for an indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other. (d) all insurance policies shall become the sole property of the owner named thereunder. (e) each party shall be solely liable for an indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   all insurance policies shall become the sole property of the owner named thereunder. (e) each party shall be solely liable for an indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   each party shall be solely liable for an indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.
reasons for judgment
judge young
background
credibility
property pool
d street, town e
b street, city c
shipping containers
the items in the containers are no longer mine, i had to sell them to raise cash for my legal defence.
in his balance sheet, the husband asserted that the contents of the containers were worth approximately $100,000. when the husband was asked about this figure in cross-examination he said he knew nothing about it and that he had sold the contents of all five containers to his stepbrother for a total of $1,000. i do not accept the husband did so and i do not accept him to be a truthful witness in relation to this issue. his explanation of the sale of the containers and their contents or both was extremely vague, and i do not accept that they were sold to his step-brother for $1,000 or at all.
vehicles  a work truck estimated to be worth $5,000, (2) a dual axle trailer estimated to be worth $2,000, (3) two small motorcycles estimated to be worth $2,000, (4) a motorcycle estimated to be worth $5,000, and (5) tools and equipment estimated to be worth $45,000. there is no other evidence beyond that of the wife about ownership and no evidence of valuation of this property. the husband has not referred to this property at any stage of the proceedings. i do not propose to include it in the pool.   a dual axle trailer estimated to be worth $2,000, (3) two small motorcycles estimated to be worth $2,000, (4) a motorcycle estimated to be worth $5,000, and (5) tools and equipment estimated to be worth $45,000. there is no other evidence beyond that of the wife about ownership and no evidence of valuation of this property. the husband has not referred to this property at any stage of the proceedings. i do not propose to include it in the pool.   two small motorcycles estimated to be worth $2,000, (4) a motorcycle estimated to be worth $5,000, and (5) tools and equipment estimated to be worth $45,000. there is no other evidence beyond that of the wife about ownership and no evidence of valuation of this property. the husband has not referred to this property at any stage of the proceedings. i do not propose to include it in the pool.   a motorcycle estimated to be worth $5,000, and (5) tools and equipment estimated to be worth $45,000. there is no other evidence beyond that of the wife about ownership and no evidence of valuation of this property. the husband has not referred to this property at any stage of the proceedings. i do not propose to include it in the pool.   tools and equipment estimated to be worth $45,000. there is no other evidence beyond that of the wife about ownership and no evidence of valuation of this property. the husband has not referred to this property at any stage of the proceedings. i do not propose to include it in the pool.
there is no other evidence beyond that of the wife about ownership and no evidence of valuation of this property. the husband has not referred to this property at any stage of the proceedings. i do not propose to include it in the pool.
other property
superannuation
contributions
during the relationship  there was a course of violent conduct, (2) the violent conduct had a discernible impact on the victim, and (3) the victim’s contributions to the relationship were made significantly more arduous as a result of the violent conduct.   the violent conduct had a discernible impact on the victim, and (3) the victim’s contributions to the relationship were made significantly more arduous as a result of the violent conduct.   the victim’s contributions to the relationship were made significantly more arduous as a result of the violent conduct.
i have not dealt in detail with all of the assaults and bad behaviour you had exhibited towards the complainant [the wife] over the whole period of the relationship. suffice it to say that during the relationship you were extremely controlling and demanding. she not only had fulltime employment but she had to run the finances of your business which ran at a loss, attain extra money by doing other paid work, feed you and the children and attend to the children’s schooling, ensure that your alcohol was ready for you when you came home after work and to generally act as your personal servant.
you blame her for the fact that there was not enough money to meet all of the expenses, while at the time you indulged yourself in your hobby which you ordered parts both from queensland and northern territory. when money was tight, you became angry and violent towards her, regardless of whether this was her fault or not. the level of violence, punishment and degradation that you dealt her was extreme. the words “domestic violence” are inadequate to properly describe the torment that you caused her to suffer. your behaviour was callous, controlling and sadistic.
post separation
section 90sf(3) factors
associate: dated: 30 may 2022
dated: 30 may 2022
[1] australian institute of family studies, new estimates of the costs of raising children in australia (media release, 17 april 2018) 1.