last updated: 4 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bergeron & bergeron (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 722
orders
pending further order, the court further orders that:  w, a female born in 2010, (b) x, a male born in 2013, (c) y, a female born in 2014, and (d) z, a female born in 2017,   x, a male born in 2013, (c) y, a female born in 2014, and (d) z, a female born in 2017,   y, a female born in 2014, and (d) z, a female born in 2017,   z, a female born in 2017,
from the commonwealth of australia.
be and are hereby restrained from leaving the commonwealth of australia.  the judge needed to speak to their mother and their father about the case today in some detail, (b) to y and z – the new arrangements for the time with their father, being each saturday from 9:00am until 5:00pm unsupervised, and (c) to w and x – that they can join in with their sisters during the time they spend with the father if they wish.   to y and z – the new arrangements for the time with their father, being each saturday from 9:00am until 5:00pm unsupervised, and (c) to w and x – that they can join in with their sisters during the time they spend with the father if they wish.   to w and x – that they can join in with their sisters during the time they spend with the father if they wish.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction
the law
13.12 stay ... (2) if an appeal has been started, or a party has applied for leave to appeal against an order, any party may apply for an order staying the operation or enforcement of all or part of the order to which the appeal or application relates.
1.31 court may make orders or dispense with these rules (1) the court may, in the interests of justice, dispense with compliance, or full compliance, with any of these rules at any time. (2) if, in a proceeding, the court gives a direction or makes an order that is inconsistent with any of these rules, the direction or order of the court prevails in that proceeding.
1.32 applications for orders about procedures a person who wants to start a proceeding, or take a step in a proceeding, may apply to the court for an order about the procedure to be followed if: (a) the procedure is not prescribed by the family law act, these rules, or under any other act, or (b) the person is in doubt about the procedure.   question 1: does the court have jurisdiction? (2) question 2, does the court have power? (3) question 3, will the court exercise the power to do what one or other party, or both of them, are asking me to do?   question 2, does the court have power? (3) question 3, will the court exercise the power to do what one or other party, or both of them, are asking me to do?   question 3, will the court exercise the power to do what one or other party, or both of them, are asking me to do?
jurisdiction
stay of proceedings and suspension of orders (1) if an appeal to the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1) from another court has been instituted:   the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1) or a judge, or a judge of that other court (not being the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or the magistrates court of western australia), may order, on such conditions (if any) as either court or a judge thinks fit, a stay of all or any proceedings under the judgment appealed from, and (b) the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1) or a judge may, by order, on such conditions (if any) as the court or judge thinks fit, suspend the operation of an injunction or other order to which the appeal, in whole or in part, relates.   this section does not affect the operation of any provision made by or under any other act or by the rules of court for or in relation to the stay of proceedings.   if, in a proceeding, the court gives a direction or makes an order that is inconsistent with any of these rules, the direction or order of the court prevails in that proceeding.  ] in erinford properties limited & cheshire county council [1974] ch 261 megarry j granted a stay before an appeal was filed. in that case, he recited a long line of authority, which held ‘when there is an appeal about to be prosecuted, the litigation is to be considered as not at an end ...that applies ... just as much to the case where the action has been dismissed’. the principles enunciated in erinford properties ltd & cheshire county council were approved by toohey j in paringa mining & exploration co plc v north flinders mines ltd and others (1988) 81 alr 501 at 506.  ] this line of authority would support the court concluding that as the time for lodgement of an appeal has not expired and the father has informed the court it is intention to appeal, there is jurisdiction to determine his stay application. if it was considered dispensation of r 22.11(2) would nonetheless be insufficient, regard could be had to r 1.09 ...[1]  ] in the alternative, if there is any doubt about the creation of jurisdiction by a non-existent appeal during the appeal period, as an incident of the court’s inherent jurisdiction, there is power to determine this application. support for this proposition can be found in de lewinski v director general, new south wales department of community services [1996] hca 9, (1996) flc 92-678. before the court in de lewinski was an application to stay orders made by the full court of this court in abduction convention proceedings. an application for special leave to the high court had not yet been instituted. gummow j determined the full court erred in refusing a stay, even though the application for special leave to appeal had not been instituted. in his judgment, his honour pointed out the importance of the court familiar with the matter determining a stay application in a principled manner. this was, as his honour stated “important for the administration of justice”. so that it is clear it was accepted that although an application for special leave to appeal to the high court had not been filed, jurisdiction existed in both the full court and the high court to stay the orders made by the full court.   what i have quoted from her honour’s decision in sheldon v weir (no. 4), and (2) the common law of a court’s inherent jurisdiction to deal with its own orders and to see justice done, including an inferior court of record as is this division, i consider that the court does have jurisdiction to deal with the oral application made by the mother today that the final orders made today be stayed for a period of six weeks.   the common law of a court’s inherent jurisdiction to deal with its own orders and to see justice done, including an inferior court of record as is this division, i consider that the court does have jurisdiction to deal with the oral application made by the mother today that the final orders made today be stayed for a period of six weeks.
i consider that the court does have jurisdiction to deal with the oral application made by the mother today that the final orders made today be stayed for a period of six weeks.
power
how will the court exercise its power?
consideration by the court
bona fides of the mother
preliminary assessment of the strengths of the opposed appeal.
consideration of the time in which an appeal can be heard and whether there are existing satisfactory arrangements that may support the granting of a stay for a short period of time
determination
terms and conditions of the stay
associate: dated: 6 june 2022
dated: 6 june 2022
[1] emphasis added.