last updated: 11 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
barry & barry [2022] fedcfamc2f 776
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  she shall inform the father of the decision to be made, and her views in relation to such position, including the provision of any supporting documentation relevant to the decision to be made, (b) the father shall respond within seven (7) days to the mother in respect of such decision, (c) the mother shall inform the father within a further seven (7) days of the decision made.   the father shall respond within seven (7) days to the mother in respect of such decision, (c) the mother shall inform the father within a further seven (7) days of the decision made.   the mother shall inform the father within a further seven (7) days of the decision made.
time  each alternate saturday between 9am and 5pm for the period of six (6) months following the date of these orders.   from 5.00pm friday until 3.00pm sunday each alternate weekend, (b) the mother is at liberty in a further six (6) month period, to require a second hair follicle test from the father, after the overnight time has commenced in accordance with order 6(a), (c) order 6(a) will be suspended if the father fails to comply with order 8 in respect of drug testing. (d) the father is to provide to the mother, within 24 hours of these orders, his residential address, the names of any persons residing in that residence, and before overnight time commences, confirmation that z has her own bedroom and providing photographic evidence of such bedroom, (e) the father is to keep the mother informed within 24 hours of any change of residence, any change to the persons with whom he resides, and, if the child z no longer has her own bedroom.   the mother is at liberty in a further six (6) month period, to require a second hair follicle test from the father, after the overnight time has commenced in accordance with order 6(a), (c) order 6(a) will be suspended if the father fails to comply with order 8 in respect of drug testing. (d) the father is to provide to the mother, within 24 hours of these orders, his residential address, the names of any persons residing in that residence, and before overnight time commences, confirmation that z has her own bedroom and providing photographic evidence of such bedroom, (e) the father is to keep the mother informed within 24 hours of any change of residence, any change to the persons with whom he resides, and, if the child z no longer has her own bedroom.   order 6(a) will be suspended if the father fails to comply with order 8 in respect of drug testing. (d) the father is to provide to the mother, within 24 hours of these orders, his residential address, the names of any persons residing in that residence, and before overnight time commences, confirmation that z has her own bedroom and providing photographic evidence of such bedroom, (e) the father is to keep the mother informed within 24 hours of any change of residence, any change to the persons with whom he resides, and, if the child z no longer has her own bedroom.   the father is to provide to the mother, within 24 hours of these orders, his residential address, the names of any persons residing in that residence, and before overnight time commences, confirmation that z has her own bedroom and providing photographic evidence of such bedroom, (e) the father is to keep the mother informed within 24 hours of any change of residence, any change to the persons with whom he resides, and, if the child z no longer has her own bedroom.   the father is to keep the mother informed within 24 hours of any change of residence, any change to the persons with whom he resides, and, if the child z no longer has her own bedroom.
drug testing  the mother shall inform the father in writing of the request he undertake a hair follicle test, (b) the father is to submit himself for hair follicle testing within seven (7) days of such request being made to an accredited clinic, (c) the father is to provide a sample of no less than three centimetres as a minimum of body hair required for such a test over the period of twelve months from the date of these orders, and for the avoidance of doubt, the father is at liberty to provide a sample of body hair providing the testing institution indicates it is able to test body hair, (d) once the request is received, the father is restrained, and an injunction granted restraining the father from cutting, shaving, straightening or dying his hair, and or body hair, until the completion of the hair follicle test. (e) the father bears the cost of such testing, (f) the father shall provide to the mother within 48 hours of receipt any test results received by him.   the father is to submit himself for hair follicle testing within seven (7) days of such request being made to an accredited clinic, (c) the father is to provide a sample of no less than three centimetres as a minimum of body hair required for such a test over the period of twelve months from the date of these orders, and for the avoidance of doubt, the father is at liberty to provide a sample of body hair providing the testing institution indicates it is able to test body hair, (d) once the request is received, the father is restrained, and an injunction granted restraining the father from cutting, shaving, straightening or dying his hair, and or body hair, until the completion of the hair follicle test. (e) the father bears the cost of such testing, (f) the father shall provide to the mother within 48 hours of receipt any test results received by him.   the father is to provide a sample of no less than three centimetres as a minimum of body hair required for such a test over the period of twelve months from the date of these orders, and for the avoidance of doubt, the father is at liberty to provide a sample of body hair providing the testing institution indicates it is able to test body hair, (d) once the request is received, the father is restrained, and an injunction granted restraining the father from cutting, shaving, straightening or dying his hair, and or body hair, until the completion of the hair follicle test. (e) the father bears the cost of such testing, (f) the father shall provide to the mother within 48 hours of receipt any test results received by him.   once the request is received, the father is restrained, and an injunction granted restraining the father from cutting, shaving, straightening or dying his hair, and or body hair, until the completion of the hair follicle test. (e) the father bears the cost of such testing, (f) the father shall provide to the mother within 48 hours of receipt any test results received by him.   the father bears the cost of such testing, (f) the father shall provide to the mother within 48 hours of receipt any test results received by him.   the father shall provide to the mother within 48 hours of receipt any test results received by him.
mental health
restraints  using or being under the influence of illicit drugs including in the presence of the children, or permitting any other person under the influence to be in the presence of the children. the term presence also refers to within the same residence or location as the children, (b) exposing the children to family violence, (c) consuming alcohol in excess during any period when the children are in their care or in any twelve (12) hour period preceding their time with the children. for the purpose of this order it shall be deemed excessive if any at time during the aforementioned periods the parent’s blood alcohol concentration exceeds the legal driving general blood and alcohol limit, (d) discussing these proceedings and orders with the children.   exposing the children to family violence, (c) consuming alcohol in excess during any period when the children are in their care or in any twelve (12) hour period preceding their time with the children. for the purpose of this order it shall be deemed excessive if any at time during the aforementioned periods the parent’s blood alcohol concentration exceeds the legal driving general blood and alcohol limit, (d) discussing these proceedings and orders with the children.   consuming alcohol in excess during any period when the children are in their care or in any twelve (12) hour period preceding their time with the children. for the purpose of this order it shall be deemed excessive if any at time during the aforementioned periods the parent’s blood alcohol concentration exceeds the legal driving general blood and alcohol limit, (d) discussing these proceedings and orders with the children.   discussing these proceedings and orders with the children.
other
reasons for judgmentex tempore
judge young  the mother have sole parental responsibility, (b) that z lives with her and spends time with the father on alternate saturdays from 9 to 5 for a period of six months and on the condition of the receipt of two negative hair follicle tests for illicit drugs over a period of six months, (c) that on the receipt of the negative hair follicle tests, z spend friday to sunday on alternate weekends with her father, suspended if the father fails to comply with the negative testing requirement, and (d) that the father is to engage with a psychologist in regard to his emotional regulation and complete a men’s behaviour change program. the mother seeks identical orders, except that she seeks that the two hair follicle tests be conducted over a 12-month period.   that z lives with her and spends time with the father on alternate saturdays from 9 to 5 for a period of six months and on the condition of the receipt of two negative hair follicle tests for illicit drugs over a period of six months, (c) that on the receipt of the negative hair follicle tests, z spend friday to sunday on alternate weekends with her father, suspended if the father fails to comply with the negative testing requirement, and (d) that the father is to engage with a psychologist in regard to his emotional regulation and complete a men’s behaviour change program. the mother seeks identical orders, except that she seeks that the two hair follicle tests be conducted over a 12-month period.   that on the receipt of the negative hair follicle tests, z spend friday to sunday on alternate weekends with her father, suspended if the father fails to comply with the negative testing requirement, and (d) that the father is to engage with a psychologist in regard to his emotional regulation and complete a men’s behaviour change program. the mother seeks identical orders, except that she seeks that the two hair follicle tests be conducted over a 12-month period.   that the father is to engage with a psychologist in regard to his emotional regulation and complete a men’s behaviour change program. the mother seeks identical orders, except that she seeks that the two hair follicle tests be conducted over a 12-month period.
the mother seeks identical orders, except that she seeks that the two hair follicle tests be conducted over a 12-month period.   that the parents have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) that the children live with the mother, and (c) that the children spend six nights a fortnight with the father. that arrangement appears to have continued for a reasonably lengthy period however, on 2 july 2019 the mother obtained a protection order against the husband in a queensland magistrates court. she alleged that the father had sent harassing emails to her, her employer and/or associates of her employer.   that the children live with the mother, and (c) that the children spend six nights a fortnight with the father. that arrangement appears to have continued for a reasonably lengthy period however, on 2 july 2019 the mother obtained a protection order against the husband in a queensland magistrates court. she alleged that the father had sent harassing emails to her, her employer and/or associates of her employer.   that the children spend six nights a fortnight with the father. that arrangement appears to have continued for a reasonably lengthy period however, on 2 july 2019 the mother obtained a protection order against the husband in a queensland magistrates court. she alleged that the father had sent harassing emails to her, her employer and/or associates of her employer.
that arrangement appears to have continued for a reasonably lengthy period however, on 2 july 2019 the mother obtained a protection order against the husband in a queensland magistrates court. she alleged that the father had sent harassing emails to her, her employer and/or associates of her employer.   the existence of family or domestic violence between the father and his partners and the exposure of the children, particularly z, to that violence, (2) the allegations concerning the father’s use of illicit drugs, (3) the questions arising about the father’s mental health, (4) the stability of the father’s housing, and (5) the safety and wellbeing of z.   the allegations concerning the father’s use of illicit drugs, (3) the questions arising about the father’s mental health, (4) the stability of the father’s housing, and (5) the safety and wellbeing of z.   the questions arising about the father’s mental health, (4) the stability of the father’s housing, and (5) the safety and wellbeing of z.   the stability of the father’s housing, and (5) the safety and wellbeing of z.   the safety and wellbeing of z.
family violence or domestic violence
for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family or causes the family member to be fearful.
drug use
mental health
housing
family reports
given information from the parties, police, region h hospital and dcyjma, i have concerns that mr barry is presenting with a number of risk factors that he perhaps does not have insight into how they may be affecting the children and his functioning and behaviour. it has been outlined in this family report the concerns raised about mr barry possibly engaging in drug misuse, about his own mental health and emotional regulation, and about domestic violence in two previous relationships with partners who have been identified by mr barry as having mental health concerns and drug misuse issues. i am concerned, given these factors, that mr barry is being impacted on by poor mental health, personality vulnerabilities and/or drug misuse and that this is impacting on his relationship choices and ability to keep the children safe. furthermore, it is evident that some of his emotional regulation issues have meant that he has been abusive to child safety officers and led him to refuse support for managing y’s behaviour. my concern is that mr barry continued to deflect blame to ms barry and did not recognise how these factors would have impacted on the children and how they might cause alarm to ms barry.
if the court identifies a level of acceptable risk from mr barry towards z given her young age it is possible z could spend day time with her father or in line with her wishes rather than overnight time.
i accept the cce’s observations, opinions, and the broad thrust of her concerns and recommendations.
legislative pathway  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents. in the context of this case, that effectively means the benefit to z of having a meaningful relationship with her father, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.
associate: dated: 14 june 2022
dated: 14 june 2022