last updated: 4 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
lyons & lyons [2022] fedcfamc2f 715
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge betts
overview
short history
the final hearing:
mother:  further amended initiating application filed 31 may 2021,[2] (b) affidavit of the mother filed 31 may 2021, (c) affidavit of the maternal grandfather, mr b, filed 2 june 2021, (d) outline of case document.   affidavit of the mother filed 31 may 2021, (c) affidavit of the maternal grandfather, mr b, filed 2 june 2021, (d) outline of case document.   affidavit of the maternal grandfather, mr b, filed 2 june 2021, (d) outline of case document.   outline of case document.
father:  amended response filed 31 may 2021, (b) affidavit of the father filed 31 may 2021, (c) outline of case document.   affidavit of the father filed 31 may 2021, (c) outline of case document.   outline of case document.
icl:  family report by regulation 7 consultant mr c, dated 7 september 2020 (marked as exhibit “1”), (b) outline of case document.   outline of case document.
the parents as witnesses:
chronology of events
relationship dynamics
family violence
family violence & final separation on 5 march 2019
initial parenting arrangements post-separation
“i’ll ruin you, i’ll tell everyone about the abortion. how do you think this is going to look in court?”
he continued on in that vein for about forty (40) minutes.
father unilaterally retains x and tries to pressure the mother into settling parenting and property issues
mother institutes these proceedings / interim orders made
father is found guilty of intimidation, magistrate imposes a five (5) year avo
father continues to behave inappropriately
father is imprisoned, appeals and is granted supreme court bail
18 october 2019 – mother files application for supervised time & father breaches bail by drink driving
father’s appeal is successful & supervised time is ordered
supervised time begins / father continues to behave inappropriately
hey mr b, you’re probably drunk as normal. your lies only last so long mate. yeah, make sure you tell ms f [the mother’s sister] to lay off the codeine. just thinking of you.
when x spontaneously asked [the father] why he and [the mother] park separately, [the father] said it’s how it is, you don’t need to worry about it. after x had left, worker said to [the father] it’s hard when children ask you questions but you did the right thing by not going into it with x. [the father] responded along the lines of it’s a crock of shit me being here supervised because her mother’s a fucking lunatic. i want her to go through what i am going through.[8]
mr lyons said he does not want the same worker on his visit as he believes she doesn’t like him. i said this was not the case at all and the worker simply did not hear the comment or heard it differently. i then explained to mr lyons what the worker had written and heard at the visit. mr lyons said that it was a lie and that wasn’t what was said. i explained to him that once again, i had documented his concerns and this can be subpoenaed. i asked mr lyons to not approach the workers about this concern and that he needs to speak to myself or worker only. mr lyons said he won’t be talking to them at all and will be very rude. i reminded mr lyons that if he was rude or inappropriate towards staff then visits may be put on hold. mr lyons said when he meant rude, that he just won’t talk to them. i said this was his decision. mr lyons said the centre was unprofessional and if we just did our job properly, none of this would have gone against him. mr lyons said he is fucken unhappy and to get our shit together. i told mr lyons that i did not appreciate the way he has spoken to me and that it was not necessary or welcome.
visits temporarily suspended due to covid-19
father’s behaviour continues
mr lyons kept referring that he is fighting against the whole system, and it’s all a fucking joke and he is over it. i said again the zoom sessions were up to him, mr lyons said again, he doesn’t think they will work. and again said if they were at a set time on saturdays for face-to-face they should be the same for zoom. mr lyons finished the phone call, saying he will just need to go higher again before ending the call and hanging up mid-sentence.
cdt results
father’s aggressive behaviour escalates
g contact centre warn the father about his behaviour
when you commenced services with g contact centre, you signed a service agreement which outlined the expected behaviours required of all parties. this includes but is not limited to: as the ccs is a shared space, we ask everyone to be polite and courteous, in the best interests of children please keep conversation child-focused and refrain from discussing court orders, future contact arrangements or speaking negatively or inappropriately about others. the behaviour that you exhibited during the supervised contact on 9th june 2020 with your daughter and subsequent phone calls to g contact centre staff was in breach of your agreement. the abusive language in front of your daughter and towards our staff was unacceptable and g contact centre will not tolerate this behaviour. i have conferred with the ceo, ms m and if these supervised contact sessions are to continue you need to confirm that you will abide with the following terms: all correspondence to g contact centre staff be via email only – the only exception is zoom contact where the ccs staff need to speak with you. there is to be no offensive or abusive language at any time or derogatory comments to g contact centre staff or in front of your daughter. if you continue with the behaviour that you have been subjecting g contact centre staff and your daughter to, we will no longer be able to provide a service to you. as ms n is not working today please contact ms o by email on ms o@gcontactcentre.org.au with your acknowledgment of this letter and whether you accept the terms set out. no supervised contact sessions will occur until ms o has heard from you. [9]
both intimidating and threatening all i’d like to do is have supervised visits with x when my daughter hasn’t got someone else in the room controlling what she says! this is how it’s meant to be.
shortly after he sent a further message: “i accept rules of letter.” [10]
father again behaves inappropriately & g contact centre withdraw their service
as part of your response you divulged that you had recorded the ccs contact... the ccs agreement, which you have signed, clearly states “the css is a phone and recording device free zone”. considering your ongoing and persistent breaching of the ccs agreement, g contact centre has decided to discontinue your ccs service with immediate effect.[11]
the family report of 7 september 2020
the father appeared to rationalise this pattern of consumption, indicating that he, through his employment, is in an entrenched culture of males working physically together and then consuming alcohol on a daily basis.[12]
clearly the father will need to undergo further cdt tests, and possibly a hair follicle test on an ad hoc basis as requested by the independent children’s lawyer. the results of these tests over a period of time could well determine as to whether the father proceeds to resuming unsupervised time with x in the future. if the father fails to participate in any proposed testing regime or that his results remain high, the father may not be able to resume a relationship with x in the future. mr lyons must note this. [13]
cdt testing order, father fails to comply
leadup to the interim hearing  on 25 october 2020 he sent the maternal grandfather a picture of the new local area police commander, suggesting that both he (and another police officer) were corrupt, (b) on 31 october 2020 he sent the maternal grandfather an article warning of the dangers of mixing alcohol and codeine, (c) on 1 november 2020 he sent the maternal grandfather a screenshot of a message he had sent to his older daughter ms p. the father’s message contained the same article on alcohol and codeine, with the comments “so scary” and “two different dads same issues it comes from (the mother’s) jeans (sic)”.   on 31 october 2020 he sent the maternal grandfather an article warning of the dangers of mixing alcohol and codeine, (c) on 1 november 2020 he sent the maternal grandfather a screenshot of a message he had sent to his older daughter ms p. the father’s message contained the same article on alcohol and codeine, with the comments “so scary” and “two different dads same issues it comes from (the mother’s) jeans (sic)”.   on 1 november 2020 he sent the maternal grandfather a screenshot of a message he had sent to his older daughter ms p. the father’s message contained the same article on alcohol and codeine, with the comments “so scary” and “two different dads same issues it comes from (the mother’s) jeans (sic)”.
“jeez his phone records come final hearing can’t wait.” “fuck poor x with the mental health”.
i reject the father’s evidence that these were sent “accidentally”, though he was likely drinking if not intoxicated when he sent them.
trial directions made & hair strand test/s ordered
leadup to the final hearing – the father’s ongoing aggression & his non-compliance with alcohol testing orders and requests
...[a] lot of time was spent by lawyers getting up to date with my file. i knew that the family report suggested i should get a hair follicle test but did not really understand that this was ordered by the court or what the consequences of not doing so would be...
while in the very next sentence admitting that:
i thought it did not matter whether i had a hair follicle test because x was not spending time with me. [15]
parenting proceedings – the law
primary considerations  the primary considerations are:   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. note: making these considerations the primary ones is consistent with the objects of this part set out in paragraphs 60b(1)(a) and (b).   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. note: making these considerations the primary ones is consistent with the objects of this part set out in paragraphs 60b(1)(a) and (b).
note: making these considerations the primary ones is consistent with the objects of this part set out in paragraphs 60b(1)(a) and (b).  ) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b).
additional considerations  additional considerations are:   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views, (b) the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,  ) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,  i) to communicate with the child,  ) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs,  the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  ) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  i) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
best interests findings
conclusion
postscript: the paternal grandparents
“i note that the [paternal grandparents] filed their application in a case which resulted in them being joined to the proceedings last year at a time when they were spending no time with x. they now spend regular time with x by agreement with the mother. arrangements are also agreed for the paternal grandparents to spend further time with x during the holidays. they have also had some facetime with x. in the circumstances, the [paternal grandparents] have determined that it is not necessary for them to remain as parties to the proceedings”. [20]
associate: dated: 3 june 2022
dated: 3 june 2022
[1] exhibit 4[2] although she later largely adopted the icl’s draft minute [3] see the photograph which is annexure “a” to the mother’s affidavit[4] the photograph which is annexure “c” to the mother’s affidavit shows where the hole was later patched up (left side of photograph) [5] these are the two holes on the right of the photograph which is annexure ‘c’ to the mother’s affidavit[6] annexure “i” to the mother’s affidavit[7] in the witness box the father denied becoming belligerent with police. i reject that evidence[8] exhibit 21 [9] exhibit 23[10] exhibit 22[11] exhibit 19 [12] exhibit 1, paragraph 40. see also paragraph 36[13] exhibit 1, paragraphs 41 & 49. see also paragraphs 75 & 78[14] exhibit 1, paragraphs 50 & 51. see also paragraph 70[15] see paragraphs 70 & 71 of the father’s affidavit[16] mother’s affidavit, paragraphs 151(j) & (k) [17] as that term is defined in s 64b of the act[18] see the full court decision of goode & goode [2006] famcafc 1346; (2006) flc 93-286[19] exhibit 24[20] exhibit 26