last updated: 11 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
evans & evans [2022] fedcfamc2f 752
orders
on an undefended and final basis the court orders that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge beckhouse:  initiating application filed 3 march 2022, (b) affidavit of mr evans filed 3 march 2022, (c) affidavit of ms bradley filed 3 march 2022, (d) affidavits of service of christopher mackay filed 9 march 2022, 26 april 2022, 3 may 2022 and 3 june 2022, (e) affidavit of dr g filed 27 may 2022.   affidavit of mr evans filed 3 march 2022, (c) affidavit of ms bradley filed 3 march 2022, (d) affidavits of service of christopher mackay filed 9 march 2022, 26 april 2022, 3 may 2022 and 3 june 2022, (e) affidavit of dr g filed 27 may 2022.   affidavit of ms bradley filed 3 march 2022, (d) affidavits of service of christopher mackay filed 9 march 2022, 26 april 2022, 3 may 2022 and 3 june 2022, (e) affidavit of dr g filed 27 may 2022.   affidavits of service of christopher mackay filed 9 march 2022, 26 april 2022, 3 may 2022 and 3 june 2022, (e) affidavit of dr g filed 27 may 2022.   affidavit of dr g filed 27 may 2022.   mr evans and ms evans were married in 2004 before separating on a final basis in 2008. they were divorced on 6 june 2009. (b) there are two children of their union, y, who was born in 2004 and is 17, and x who is the subject of these proceedings. (c) on 28 may 2012, orders were made by altobelli fm, (as he then was), for the children to live with their father, and for him to exercise sole parental responsibility for the long-term decisions about them. orders were made for the mother to spend supervised time with the children. in his judgment, altobelli fm observed that the mother abused drugs and was involved in a drug culture. (d) in 2013, the father married ms bradley. she brought into the household her son, e, who was born in 2007 and is now 15. e’s father had died just before he was born. in 2014, ms bradley gave birth to f, who is almost eight years old. (e) the parties depose – and this is supported by psychologist, dr g – that they have successfully lived as a blended family in their home in suburb h since the marriage. (f) while the orders of altobelli fm allowed their mother to see them on a supervised basis fortnightly, the children have rarely done so. y has not seen ms evans since 2017. x has seen ms evans on approximately two occasions each year since then. she does, however, speak to her on the telephone from time to time. (g) in 2020, x enquired of her stepmother ms bradley about the possibility of being adopted by her. mr evans and ms bradley made inquiries about the process, which led to the family’s referral to dr g, a clinical psychologist. (h) dr g affirmed an affidavit in these proceedings on 27 may 2022. in her affidavit, she provides a summary of the information gathered over the course of the four meetings with x and three meetings with ms evans. dr g deposes that at the conclusion of their sessions ms evans gave her consent to the adoption. she observed that:   there are two children of their union, y, who was born in 2004 and is 17, and x who is the subject of these proceedings. (c) on 28 may 2012, orders were made by altobelli fm, (as he then was), for the children to live with their father, and for him to exercise sole parental responsibility for the long-term decisions about them. orders were made for the mother to spend supervised time with the children. in his judgment, altobelli fm observed that the mother abused drugs and was involved in a drug culture. (d) in 2013, the father married ms bradley. she brought into the household her son, e, who was born in 2007 and is now 15. e’s father had died just before he was born. in 2014, ms bradley gave birth to f, who is almost eight years old. (e) the parties depose – and this is supported by psychologist, dr g – that they have successfully lived as a blended family in their home in suburb h since the marriage. (f) while the orders of altobelli fm allowed their mother to see them on a supervised basis fortnightly, the children have rarely done so. y has not seen ms evans since 2017. x has seen ms evans on approximately two occasions each year since then. she does, however, speak to her on the telephone from time to time. (g) in 2020, x enquired of her stepmother ms bradley about the possibility of being adopted by her. mr evans and ms bradley made inquiries about the process, which led to the family’s referral to dr g, a clinical psychologist. (h) dr g affirmed an affidavit in these proceedings on 27 may 2022. in her affidavit, she provides a summary of the information gathered over the course of the four meetings with x and three meetings with ms evans. dr g deposes that at the conclusion of their sessions ms evans gave her consent to the adoption. she observed that:   on 28 may 2012, orders were made by altobelli fm, (as he then was), for the children to live with their father, and for him to exercise sole parental responsibility for the long-term decisions about them. orders were made for the mother to spend supervised time with the children. in his judgment, altobelli fm observed that the mother abused drugs and was involved in a drug culture. (d) in 2013, the father married ms bradley. she brought into the household her son, e, who was born in 2007 and is now 15. e’s father had died just before he was born. in 2014, ms bradley gave birth to f, who is almost eight years old. (e) the parties depose – and this is supported by psychologist, dr g – that they have successfully lived as a blended family in their home in suburb h since the marriage. (f) while the orders of altobelli fm allowed their mother to see them on a supervised basis fortnightly, the children have rarely done so. y has not seen ms evans since 2017. x has seen ms evans on approximately two occasions each year since then. she does, however, speak to her on the telephone from time to time. (g) in 2020, x enquired of her stepmother ms bradley about the possibility of being adopted by her. mr evans and ms bradley made inquiries about the process, which led to the family’s referral to dr g, a clinical psychologist. (h) dr g affirmed an affidavit in these proceedings on 27 may 2022. in her affidavit, she provides a summary of the information gathered over the course of the four meetings with x and three meetings with ms evans. dr g deposes that at the conclusion of their sessions ms evans gave her consent to the adoption. she observed that:   in 2013, the father married ms bradley. she brought into the household her son, e, who was born in 2007 and is now 15. e’s father had died just before he was born. in 2014, ms bradley gave birth to f, who is almost eight years old. (e) the parties depose – and this is supported by psychologist, dr g – that they have successfully lived as a blended family in their home in suburb h since the marriage. (f) while the orders of altobelli fm allowed their mother to see them on a supervised basis fortnightly, the children have rarely done so. y has not seen ms evans since 2017. x has seen ms evans on approximately two occasions each year since then. she does, however, speak to her on the telephone from time to time. (g) in 2020, x enquired of her stepmother ms bradley about the possibility of being adopted by her. mr evans and ms bradley made inquiries about the process, which led to the family’s referral to dr g, a clinical psychologist. (h) dr g affirmed an affidavit in these proceedings on 27 may 2022. in her affidavit, she provides a summary of the information gathered over the course of the four meetings with x and three meetings with ms evans. dr g deposes that at the conclusion of their sessions ms evans gave her consent to the adoption. she observed that:   the parties depose – and this is supported by psychologist, dr g – that they have successfully lived as a blended family in their home in suburb h since the marriage. (f) while the orders of altobelli fm allowed their mother to see them on a supervised basis fortnightly, the children have rarely done so. y has not seen ms evans since 2017. x has seen ms evans on approximately two occasions each year since then. she does, however, speak to her on the telephone from time to time. (g) in 2020, x enquired of her stepmother ms bradley about the possibility of being adopted by her. mr evans and ms bradley made inquiries about the process, which led to the family’s referral to dr g, a clinical psychologist. (h) dr g affirmed an affidavit in these proceedings on 27 may 2022. in her affidavit, she provides a summary of the information gathered over the course of the four meetings with x and three meetings with ms evans. dr g deposes that at the conclusion of their sessions ms evans gave her consent to the adoption. she observed that:   while the orders of altobelli fm allowed their mother to see them on a supervised basis fortnightly, the children have rarely done so. y has not seen ms evans since 2017. x has seen ms evans on approximately two occasions each year since then. she does, however, speak to her on the telephone from time to time. (g) in 2020, x enquired of her stepmother ms bradley about the possibility of being adopted by her. mr evans and ms bradley made inquiries about the process, which led to the family’s referral to dr g, a clinical psychologist. (h) dr g affirmed an affidavit in these proceedings on 27 may 2022. in her affidavit, she provides a summary of the information gathered over the course of the four meetings with x and three meetings with ms evans. dr g deposes that at the conclusion of their sessions ms evans gave her consent to the adoption. she observed that:   in 2020, x enquired of her stepmother ms bradley about the possibility of being adopted by her. mr evans and ms bradley made inquiries about the process, which led to the family’s referral to dr g, a clinical psychologist. (h) dr g affirmed an affidavit in these proceedings on 27 may 2022. in her affidavit, she provides a summary of the information gathered over the course of the four meetings with x and three meetings with ms evans. dr g deposes that at the conclusion of their sessions ms evans gave her consent to the adoption. she observed that:   dr g affirmed an affidavit in these proceedings on 27 may 2022. in her affidavit, she provides a summary of the information gathered over the course of the four meetings with x and three meetings with ms evans. dr g deposes that at the conclusion of their sessions ms evans gave her consent to the adoption. she observed that:
ms evans was visibly tearful and distressed during all three of the appointments that she attended to discuss the adoption and give consent. although it was clearly a heartbreaking wrench for ms evans to sign the adoption papers, ms evans was nevertheless adamant that she wanted to go ahead to consent to the adoption because she knew it was what x wanted, and she loved her enough to give her that. ms evans was able to talk about the pride she held for x and the young woman she has become, and for the bravery that x displayed in asking for the adoption she wanted.[1]   in her report, dr g records that she provided written information to ms evans about the new integrated birth certificate, which maintains the birth parents’ details. having done so, ms evans said that she was willing to consent to the adoption. at the last appointment on 9 november 2021, ms evans signed the consent to adoption paperwork in the presence of another clinical psychologist, ms j. (j) annexed to dr g’s report are the consents signed for the adoption of x, and the completed statement of the counsellor, as required under the new south wales adoption act 2000 (nsw) (“adoption act”). (k) on 3 april 2022, the father filed an initiating application. the matter was first listed before me on 5 may 2022, and set down for hearing today.   annexed to dr g’s report are the consents signed for the adoption of x, and the completed statement of the counsellor, as required under the new south wales adoption act 2000 (nsw) (“adoption act”). (k) on 3 april 2022, the father filed an initiating application. the matter was first listed before me on 5 may 2022, and set down for hearing today.   on 3 april 2022, the father filed an initiating application. the matter was first listed before me on 5 may 2022, and set down for hearing today.
should orders be made on an undefended basis?
does this court have power to make the orders sought?
the question then, in my view, can be expressed in this way: is it in the relevant child or children’s best interests to permit adoption proceedings to proceed in the (state) magistrates court with the potential consequences that a parent shall (with the consent of the other parent or, absent consent, by court order) cease to have any of the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority in respect of his or her child, as distinct from orders being made in this court that might involve the parent and step-parent?
is the order in x’s best interests?
9 participation of child in decisions (1)... (a) adequate information, in a manner and language that the child can understand, concerning the decision, (b) the opportunity to express his or her views freely, according to his or her abilities, (c) information about the outcome of the decision and an explanation of the reasons for the decision, ...
x
i concluded that x has a mature understanding of facts surrounding her decision to be adopted by ms bradley, and was able to weigh up the facts, options and consequences and communicate her decision clearly and with maturity...[4]
conclusion
associate: dated: 4 july 2022
dated: 4 july 2022
[1] affidavit of dr g filed 27 may 2022, p.8.[2] adoption act (nsw) 2000[3] which specifically gives effect to the united nations convention on the rights of the child.[4] affidavit of dr g filed 27 may 2022, p.8.