last updated: 4 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
roble & roble [2022] fedcfamc2f 684
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:  education (both current and future), (b) health, (c) religion, (d) living arrangements, (e) issue of passport, and (f) international travel.   health, (c) religion, (d) living arrangements, (e) issue of passport, and (f) international travel.   religion, (d) living arrangements, (e) issue of passport, and (f) international travel.   living arrangements, (e) issue of passport, and (f) international travel.   issue of passport, and (f) international travel.   international travel.   the parents will communicate by using the co-parenting application divvito (“divvito”), (b) on no fewer than two (2) occasions per year, the mother will provide a written update to the father as to the children’s progress, including but not limited to their health, education and general development and progress, (c) the parents be permitted to advise each other in writing of a significant life event that occurs (for example, the death of one of the children’s grandparents, an aunt, uncle or cousin), (d) pursuant to s 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”), each parent is restrained by injunction from using abusive and/or aggressive language in any form of communication between them.   on no fewer than two (2) occasions per year, the mother will provide a written update to the father as to the children’s progress, including but not limited to their health, education and general development and progress, (c) the parents be permitted to advise each other in writing of a significant life event that occurs (for example, the death of one of the children’s grandparents, an aunt, uncle or cousin), (d) pursuant to s 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”), each parent is restrained by injunction from using abusive and/or aggressive language in any form of communication between them.   the parents be permitted to advise each other in writing of a significant life event that occurs (for example, the death of one of the children’s grandparents, an aunt, uncle or cousin), (d) pursuant to s 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”), each parent is restrained by injunction from using abusive and/or aggressive language in any form of communication between them.   pursuant to s 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”), each parent is restrained by injunction from using abusive and/or aggressive language in any form of communication between them.   within fourteen (14) days’ of the date of these orders each parent will do all things necessary to download the divvito mobile phone application and thereafter sign up to divvito, and (b) the mother is solely responsible for the costs associated with divvito.   the mother is solely responsible for the costs associated with divvito.   except as otherwise permitted in order 4 above, contacting or approaching or attempting to contact or approach the mother by any means whatsoever including through any third party, (b) attending or being within 500 metres of the ordinary place of residence of the mother and attending or being within 500 metres of any place of employment of the mother, (c) contacting, or attempting to contact or approach the children by any means whatsoever, including through any third parties, and further the father is restrained from being within 500 metres of the children’s ordinary place of residence or being within 500 metres of any school or educational institution or extracurricular activities, without the mother’s written consent, (d) attending or being within 500 metres of the current residence of mr b and ms c (“the children’s maternal grandparents”) namely d street, suburb e, nsw, and (e) speaking or permitting any other person to speak to or about the mother or members of her family in a negative, offensive or unpleasant fashion in the presence or hearing of the children.   attending or being within 500 metres of the ordinary place of residence of the mother and attending or being within 500 metres of any place of employment of the mother, (c) contacting, or attempting to contact or approach the children by any means whatsoever, including through any third parties, and further the father is restrained from being within 500 metres of the children’s ordinary place of residence or being within 500 metres of any school or educational institution or extracurricular activities, without the mother’s written consent, (d) attending or being within 500 metres of the current residence of mr b and ms c (“the children’s maternal grandparents”) namely d street, suburb e, nsw, and (e) speaking or permitting any other person to speak to or about the mother or members of her family in a negative, offensive or unpleasant fashion in the presence or hearing of the children.   contacting, or attempting to contact or approach the children by any means whatsoever, including through any third parties, and further the father is restrained from being within 500 metres of the children’s ordinary place of residence or being within 500 metres of any school or educational institution or extracurricular activities, without the mother’s written consent, (d) attending or being within 500 metres of the current residence of mr b and ms c (“the children’s maternal grandparents”) namely d street, suburb e, nsw, and (e) speaking or permitting any other person to speak to or about the mother or members of her family in a negative, offensive or unpleasant fashion in the presence or hearing of the children.   attending or being within 500 metres of the current residence of mr b and ms c (“the children’s maternal grandparents”) namely d street, suburb e, nsw, and (e) speaking or permitting any other person to speak to or about the mother or members of her family in a negative, offensive or unpleasant fashion in the presence or hearing of the children.   speaking or permitting any other person to speak to or about the mother or members of her family in a negative, offensive or unpleasant fashion in the presence or hearing of the children.   provide support to the children and the mother in relation to the loss or grief associated with the children not spending time with the father, (b) provide, via a narrative therapy approach if possible, a developmentally and age-appropriate explanation to the children regarding the reasons why they are not spending time with the father, (c) addressing any other concerns identified by ms j (or the psychologist she recommends).   provide, via a narrative therapy approach if possible, a developmentally and age-appropriate explanation to the children regarding the reasons why they are not spending time with the father, (c) addressing any other concerns identified by ms j (or the psychologist she recommends).   addressing any other concerns identified by ms j (or the psychologist she recommends).   leave is granted to the mother to provide a copy of the family report dated 20 december 2019, a copy of the reasons for judgment dated 30 may 2022 and a copy of these orders to ms j (or the psychologist she recommends) during the first scheduled appointment, (b) the mother shall do all acts and things necessary to ensure that she and the children attend on ms j (or the psychologist she recommends) for joint and/or individual sessions as recommended by ms j (or the psychologist she recommends) and at a frequency recommended by ms j (or the psychologist she recommends), (c) in the event that ms j (or the psychologist she recommends) recommends that the mother and/or the children participate in any other program or course, the mother will do all acts and things necessary to ensure that she and the children participate in and complete such program or course, (d) the mother is solely responsible for the costs of such therapy.   the mother shall do all acts and things necessary to ensure that she and the children attend on ms j (or the psychologist she recommends) for joint and/or individual sessions as recommended by ms j (or the psychologist she recommends) and at a frequency recommended by ms j (or the psychologist she recommends), (c) in the event that ms j (or the psychologist she recommends) recommends that the mother and/or the children participate in any other program or course, the mother will do all acts and things necessary to ensure that she and the children participate in and complete such program or course, (d) the mother is solely responsible for the costs of such therapy.   in the event that ms j (or the psychologist she recommends) recommends that the mother and/or the children participate in any other program or course, the mother will do all acts and things necessary to ensure that she and the children participate in and complete such program or course, (d) the mother is solely responsible for the costs of such therapy.   the mother is solely responsible for the costs of such therapy.
reasons for judgment
introduction
issues in dispute  should the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children, or whether an order for equal shared parental responsibility is in the children’s best interests, (b) the amount of time the children should spend with their father, if any, and how this would be facilitated to protect the children from any risks identified as probable, (c) whether it is necessary to make any injunctions restraining the behaviour of the parties towards each other and the children, (d) how the parties should communicate, (e) whether the mother should be permitted to obtain passports for the children and travel overseas with them in the future, and (f) how these orders will be explained to the children.   the amount of time the children should spend with their father, if any, and how this would be facilitated to protect the children from any risks identified as probable, (c) whether it is necessary to make any injunctions restraining the behaviour of the parties towards each other and the children, (d) how the parties should communicate, (e) whether the mother should be permitted to obtain passports for the children and travel overseas with them in the future, and (f) how these orders will be explained to the children.   whether it is necessary to make any injunctions restraining the behaviour of the parties towards each other and the children, (d) how the parties should communicate, (e) whether the mother should be permitted to obtain passports for the children and travel overseas with them in the future, and (f) how these orders will be explained to the children.   how the parties should communicate, (e) whether the mother should be permitted to obtain passports for the children and travel overseas with them in the future, and (f) how these orders will be explained to the children.   whether the mother should be permitted to obtain passports for the children and travel overseas with them in the future, and (f) how these orders will be explained to the children.   how these orders will be explained to the children.
background   the mother lives with the children in the city h area. she is in good health. (b) the mother works as an admin assistant. when working, she receives assistance and support for the care of the children from her parents, who live close by. (c) the father resides in the large home with his paternal family in city m. the home is shared with his mother, brother mr n, sister-in-law ms o, and their two children. (d) the father is a builder by trade but has not worked for some time, which has caused both financial hardship and stress to him.   the mother works as an admin assistant. when working, she receives assistance and support for the care of the children from her parents, who live close by. (c) the father resides in the large home with his paternal family in city m. the home is shared with his mother, brother mr n, sister-in-law ms o, and their two children. (d) the father is a builder by trade but has not worked for some time, which has caused both financial hardship and stress to him.   the father resides in the large home with his paternal family in city m. the home is shared with his mother, brother mr n, sister-in-law ms o, and their two children. (d) the father is a builder by trade but has not worked for some time, which has caused both financial hardship and stress to him.   the father is a builder by trade but has not worked for some time, which has caused both financial hardship and stress to him.
x and y
the children, especially x, conveyed strong feelings of excitement and enthusiasm at the prospect of having contact with their father. both children made clear requests to see their father and freely expressed positive feelings about him. x recalled positive memories of his father and eagerness to have the opportunity to engage in such activities again. the observation of the children with mr roble appeared warm, affectionate, and loving. x conveyed a sense of longing and closeness to his father and a desire to stay close to him and to spend time with him. y seemed less focused on her father, but also open and curious about him. there was nothing in the children’s presentation on the day or in the content of their interviews to suggest they were fearful of mr roble or anxious about having contact with him.[1] (as per the original)
documents relied upon  initiating application filed 15 august 2016, (b) notice of risk filed 15 august 2016, (c) amended application for final orders filed 31 october 2018, (d) affidavit of ms roble filed 31 october 2021, (e) affidavit of ms c filed 31 october 2018, (f) child dispute memorandum by family consultant ms l dated 27 april 2017 (“cdc memorandum”), and (g) family report by family consultant ms l dated 20 december 2019 (“family report”).   notice of risk filed 15 august 2016, (c) amended application for final orders filed 31 october 2018, (d) affidavit of ms roble filed 31 october 2021, (e) affidavit of ms c filed 31 october 2018, (f) child dispute memorandum by family consultant ms l dated 27 april 2017 (“cdc memorandum”), and (g) family report by family consultant ms l dated 20 december 2019 (“family report”).   amended application for final orders filed 31 october 2018, (d) affidavit of ms roble filed 31 october 2021, (e) affidavit of ms c filed 31 october 2018, (f) child dispute memorandum by family consultant ms l dated 27 april 2017 (“cdc memorandum”), and (g) family report by family consultant ms l dated 20 december 2019 (“family report”).   affidavit of ms roble filed 31 october 2021, (e) affidavit of ms c filed 31 october 2018, (f) child dispute memorandum by family consultant ms l dated 27 april 2017 (“cdc memorandum”), and (g) family report by family consultant ms l dated 20 december 2019 (“family report”).   affidavit of ms c filed 31 october 2018, (f) child dispute memorandum by family consultant ms l dated 27 april 2017 (“cdc memorandum”), and (g) family report by family consultant ms l dated 20 december 2019 (“family report”).   child dispute memorandum by family consultant ms l dated 27 april 2017 (“cdc memorandum”), and (g) family report by family consultant ms l dated 20 december 2019 (“family report”).   family report by family consultant ms l dated 20 december 2019 (“family report”).   amended response to final orders filed 29 september 2017, (b) affidavit of mr roble filed 16 november 2021.   affidavit of mr roble filed 16 november 2021.   cdc memorandum, and (b) family report.   family report.
evidence
proposals  the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, (b) the children live with their mother, (c) the children spend time with the father each alternate weekend after school friday to before school monday, and one half of school holiday periods and other special days, (d) the father’s time be supervised by his mother, brother mr n or his sister-in-law ms o until he provides a clear hair follicle test covering a period of three months, (e) changeovers occur at mcdonalds, suburb r, (f) various orders as to how the parties will communicate with each other, (g) an order restraining the parties from making critical remarks to the children, (h) an order requiring each party to facilitate the attendance of the children at extracurricular activities, and inform each other of illnesses, (i) for the parties to use a communication book to record issues relating to the children, (j) provision for either parent to travel overseas with the children.   the children live with their mother, (c) the children spend time with the father each alternate weekend after school friday to before school monday, and one half of school holiday periods and other special days, (d) the father’s time be supervised by his mother, brother mr n or his sister-in-law ms o until he provides a clear hair follicle test covering a period of three months, (e) changeovers occur at mcdonalds, suburb r, (f) various orders as to how the parties will communicate with each other, (g) an order restraining the parties from making critical remarks to the children, (h) an order requiring each party to facilitate the attendance of the children at extracurricular activities, and inform each other of illnesses, (i) for the parties to use a communication book to record issues relating to the children, (j) provision for either parent to travel overseas with the children.   the children spend time with the father each alternate weekend after school friday to before school monday, and one half of school holiday periods and other special days, (d) the father’s time be supervised by his mother, brother mr n or his sister-in-law ms o until he provides a clear hair follicle test covering a period of three months, (e) changeovers occur at mcdonalds, suburb r, (f) various orders as to how the parties will communicate with each other, (g) an order restraining the parties from making critical remarks to the children, (h) an order requiring each party to facilitate the attendance of the children at extracurricular activities, and inform each other of illnesses, (i) for the parties to use a communication book to record issues relating to the children, (j) provision for either parent to travel overseas with the children.   the father’s time be supervised by his mother, brother mr n or his sister-in-law ms o until he provides a clear hair follicle test covering a period of three months, (e) changeovers occur at mcdonalds, suburb r, (f) various orders as to how the parties will communicate with each other, (g) an order restraining the parties from making critical remarks to the children, (h) an order requiring each party to facilitate the attendance of the children at extracurricular activities, and inform each other of illnesses, (i) for the parties to use a communication book to record issues relating to the children, (j) provision for either parent to travel overseas with the children.   changeovers occur at mcdonalds, suburb r, (f) various orders as to how the parties will communicate with each other, (g) an order restraining the parties from making critical remarks to the children, (h) an order requiring each party to facilitate the attendance of the children at extracurricular activities, and inform each other of illnesses, (i) for the parties to use a communication book to record issues relating to the children, (j) provision for either parent to travel overseas with the children.   various orders as to how the parties will communicate with each other, (g) an order restraining the parties from making critical remarks to the children, (h) an order requiring each party to facilitate the attendance of the children at extracurricular activities, and inform each other of illnesses, (i) for the parties to use a communication book to record issues relating to the children, (j) provision for either parent to travel overseas with the children.   an order restraining the parties from making critical remarks to the children, (h) an order requiring each party to facilitate the attendance of the children at extracurricular activities, and inform each other of illnesses, (i) for the parties to use a communication book to record issues relating to the children, (j) provision for either parent to travel overseas with the children.   an order requiring each party to facilitate the attendance of the children at extracurricular activities, and inform each other of illnesses, (i) for the parties to use a communication book to record issues relating to the children, (j) provision for either parent to travel overseas with the children.   for the parties to use a communication book to record issues relating to the children, (j) provision for either parent to travel overseas with the children.   provision for either parent to travel overseas with the children.   the children live with her, (b) she have sole parental responsibility for the children, (c) the children spend time and communicate with the father as agreed between the parents in writing, (d) an order be made for the personal protection of the children and the mother restraining the father by injunction from communicating with the children, approaching the children or the mother, approaching the residence of the maternal grandparents, or any residence where the children, mother or grandparents may be, or approaching the children or mother’s place of employment or education, (e) the mother be permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth of australia for the purpose of a holiday, and apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   she have sole parental responsibility for the children, (c) the children spend time and communicate with the father as agreed between the parents in writing, (d) an order be made for the personal protection of the children and the mother restraining the father by injunction from communicating with the children, approaching the children or the mother, approaching the residence of the maternal grandparents, or any residence where the children, mother or grandparents may be, or approaching the children or mother’s place of employment or education, (e) the mother be permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth of australia for the purpose of a holiday, and apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   the children spend time and communicate with the father as agreed between the parents in writing, (d) an order be made for the personal protection of the children and the mother restraining the father by injunction from communicating with the children, approaching the children or the mother, approaching the residence of the maternal grandparents, or any residence where the children, mother or grandparents may be, or approaching the children or mother’s place of employment or education, (e) the mother be permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth of australia for the purpose of a holiday, and apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   an order be made for the personal protection of the children and the mother restraining the father by injunction from communicating with the children, approaching the children or the mother, approaching the residence of the maternal grandparents, or any residence where the children, mother or grandparents may be, or approaching the children or mother’s place of employment or education, (e) the mother be permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth of australia for the purpose of a holiday, and apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   the mother be permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth of australia for the purpose of a holiday, and apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children, (b) that the children live with the mother, (c) that the parents communicate using a co-parenting application known as divvito, and that the mother be required to provide information pertaining to the children via that app, (d) a requirement for the parents to advise each other in writing of significant life events, (e) a restraint under s 68b from either parent using abusive or aggressive language in any form of communication, (f) that the children spend time and communicate with the father as agreed between the parents in writing, (g) an injunction under s 68b in similar terms to that sought by the mother, but in addition, that they provide powers to a police officer who, on reasonable grounds, believes that such orders or injunctions have been breached to arrest a party without warrant, (h) that within 28 days, the mother arrange and participate in therapy and counselling with a view to providing support to the children and the mother in relation to these orders, and any other concerns identified, (i) that the mother is permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth for the purposes of a holiday, and to apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   that the children live with the mother, (c) that the parents communicate using a co-parenting application known as divvito, and that the mother be required to provide information pertaining to the children via that app, (d) a requirement for the parents to advise each other in writing of significant life events, (e) a restraint under s 68b from either parent using abusive or aggressive language in any form of communication, (f) that the children spend time and communicate with the father as agreed between the parents in writing, (g) an injunction under s 68b in similar terms to that sought by the mother, but in addition, that they provide powers to a police officer who, on reasonable grounds, believes that such orders or injunctions have been breached to arrest a party without warrant, (h) that within 28 days, the mother arrange and participate in therapy and counselling with a view to providing support to the children and the mother in relation to these orders, and any other concerns identified, (i) that the mother is permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth for the purposes of a holiday, and to apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   that the parents communicate using a co-parenting application known as divvito, and that the mother be required to provide information pertaining to the children via that app, (d) a requirement for the parents to advise each other in writing of significant life events, (e) a restraint under s 68b from either parent using abusive or aggressive language in any form of communication, (f) that the children spend time and communicate with the father as agreed between the parents in writing, (g) an injunction under s 68b in similar terms to that sought by the mother, but in addition, that they provide powers to a police officer who, on reasonable grounds, believes that such orders or injunctions have been breached to arrest a party without warrant, (h) that within 28 days, the mother arrange and participate in therapy and counselling with a view to providing support to the children and the mother in relation to these orders, and any other concerns identified, (i) that the mother is permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth for the purposes of a holiday, and to apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   a requirement for the parents to advise each other in writing of significant life events, (e) a restraint under s 68b from either parent using abusive or aggressive language in any form of communication, (f) that the children spend time and communicate with the father as agreed between the parents in writing, (g) an injunction under s 68b in similar terms to that sought by the mother, but in addition, that they provide powers to a police officer who, on reasonable grounds, believes that such orders or injunctions have been breached to arrest a party without warrant, (h) that within 28 days, the mother arrange and participate in therapy and counselling with a view to providing support to the children and the mother in relation to these orders, and any other concerns identified, (i) that the mother is permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth for the purposes of a holiday, and to apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   a restraint under s 68b from either parent using abusive or aggressive language in any form of communication, (f) that the children spend time and communicate with the father as agreed between the parents in writing, (g) an injunction under s 68b in similar terms to that sought by the mother, but in addition, that they provide powers to a police officer who, on reasonable grounds, believes that such orders or injunctions have been breached to arrest a party without warrant, (h) that within 28 days, the mother arrange and participate in therapy and counselling with a view to providing support to the children and the mother in relation to these orders, and any other concerns identified, (i) that the mother is permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth for the purposes of a holiday, and to apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   that the children spend time and communicate with the father as agreed between the parents in writing, (g) an injunction under s 68b in similar terms to that sought by the mother, but in addition, that they provide powers to a police officer who, on reasonable grounds, believes that such orders or injunctions have been breached to arrest a party without warrant, (h) that within 28 days, the mother arrange and participate in therapy and counselling with a view to providing support to the children and the mother in relation to these orders, and any other concerns identified, (i) that the mother is permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth for the purposes of a holiday, and to apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   an injunction under s 68b in similar terms to that sought by the mother, but in addition, that they provide powers to a police officer who, on reasonable grounds, believes that such orders or injunctions have been breached to arrest a party without warrant, (h) that within 28 days, the mother arrange and participate in therapy and counselling with a view to providing support to the children and the mother in relation to these orders, and any other concerns identified, (i) that the mother is permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth for the purposes of a holiday, and to apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   that within 28 days, the mother arrange and participate in therapy and counselling with a view to providing support to the children and the mother in relation to these orders, and any other concerns identified, (i) that the mother is permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth for the purposes of a holiday, and to apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.   that the mother is permitted to remove the children from the commonwealth for the purposes of a holiday, and to apply and renew passports for the children without the father’s consent.
the law
primary considerations
meaningful relationship
the need to protect the children from harm
drug use  from 2012 onwards, the mother observed the father behaving unusually,[6] absent from the home for long periods of time,[7] substantial and unexplained arrears arising in their rental payments,[8] and strange interactions involving police.[9] (b) during the marriage “she found pipes in [the father’s] laptop bag, packets of cocaine, a set of scales, syringes, swabs and what she believed at the time to be, steroids.”[10] (c) following their separation on 9 june 2016, the mother alleges that she found steroids and other drug paraphernalia in the father’s home.[11] the mother took photographs of the drug paraphernalia and annexed these to her affidavit. in addition, she found vials hidden in the back of the fridge which she understood to contain a steroid.[12] the father refuted this under cross-examination and said they were a hair growth hormone which he never took.   during the marriage “she found pipes in [the father’s] laptop bag, packets of cocaine, a set of scales, syringes, swabs and what she believed at the time to be, steroids.”[10] (c) following their separation on 9 june 2016, the mother alleges that she found steroids and other drug paraphernalia in the father’s home.[11] the mother took photographs of the drug paraphernalia and annexed these to her affidavit. in addition, she found vials hidden in the back of the fridge which she understood to contain a steroid.[12] the father refuted this under cross-examination and said they were a hair growth hormone which he never took.   following their separation on 9 june 2016, the mother alleges that she found steroids and other drug paraphernalia in the father’s home.[11] the mother took photographs of the drug paraphernalia and annexed these to her affidavit. in addition, she found vials hidden in the back of the fridge which she understood to contain a steroid.[12] the father refuted this under cross-examination and said they were a hair growth hormone which he never took.
...mr roble said that he does not use illicit drugs. he said that he last used recreational drugs such as ecstasy or cocaine twenty years ago, prior to having children, but that he had not used drugs since. he specifically denied any use of “ice” or any intravenous drug use. when asked about claims that he had produced positive drug tests, mr roble stated that one positive test was following a “buck’s night” where he assumes that his drink was spiked, and the other positive test recently can only be explained by having taken a tablet, he believed to be valium, from a friend. he said that the drug paraphernalia referred to by ms roble in her affidavit belonged to his cousin and that he agreed to store it in his garage five or six years ago.[13] (as per the original)
request no
date of request
date of compliance
outcome
1
11/12/2017
n/a
father did not comply with request
2
10/01/2018
11/01/2018
positive – amphetamines
3
5/02/2018
4
28/03/2018
5
17/04/2018
6
9/05/2018
7
18/06/2018
10/07/2018 letter sent to father requesting copies of above results
letter sent to father requesting copies of above results
8
8/11/2018
14/11/2018
negative but sample provided late
9
17/12/2018
31/12/2018
10
07/01/2019
11
05/02/2019
12
04/03/2019
05/03/2019
negative but creatinine 1.3 (less than 1.8)
13
09/04/2019
10/04/2019
negative but creatinine 0.9 (less than 1.8)
14
29/05/2019
04/06/2019
negative but sample provided late and creatinine 0.8 (less than 1.8)
15
02/07/2019
03/07/2019
negative but creatinine 0.8 (less than 1.8)
16
19/08/2019
17
16/09/2019
17/09/2019
negative but creatinine 0.7 (less than 1.8)
18
21/10/2019
22/10/2019
creatinine 1.0 (less than 1.8) – sample does not meet integrity. amphetamine – require further testing – consistent with methamphetamine
19
17/12/2019
09/01/2020
20
20/01/2020
24/01/2020
3 days late, creatinine 13.58, benzos further testing required – negative
21
16/06/2020
negative but creatinine 1.3 – sample not met integrity
22
16/07/2020
23
10/08/2020
11/08/2020
negative – creatinine 9.2
24
16/09/2020
17/09/2020
negative – creatinine 9.4
25
10/11/2020
11/11/2020
negative – creatinine 13.5
26
13/01/2021
14/01/2020
negative – creatinine 19
27
31/03/2021
1/04/2021
negative – creatinine 12.7
28
18/05/2021
29/05/2021
negative – creatinine 5.3
29
15/06/2021
16/06/2021
negative – creatinine 12.4
30
07/07/2021
08/07/2021
negative – creatinine 12.1   on 26 august 2012 the father was involved in an incident in suburb t. the father and another person of interest were searched. the cops system recorded that the man accompanying the father was involved in the proceeds of crime and drugs and amphetamines. later, a vehicle search was conducted on the vehicle that the father was travelling in. the police found drugs and drug paraphernalia. the record refers to the father’s use of methamphetamines recreationally and a disagreement arising in relation to that. (b) on 6 january 2014 the father was searched and a random breath test was conducted. a search of his vehicle found a small resealable bag containing clear crystals which were suspected to be methamphetamines. no charges were laid. (c) on 3 october 2019 the father was observed driving a bicycle with no helmet through city m cbd and was stopped. he was searched and police located a smoking glass pipe, and two small satchels containing methamphetamines. he was placed under arrest but the charges were later dropped. (d) on 5 october 2019 the police approached the father in city m mall, in the belief that he may have been purchasing drugs. he was given a move on direction. (e) on 1 december 2020 the father was stopped in suburb u for riding a bike without a bike helmet. he was observed to have glazed eyes with small pupils, and the police formed the view he was under the influence of drugs. the police found a small foil in his pants. the foil contained a crystal rock-type substance which the police suspected was methamphetamines. he was placed under arrest and charged, although the charges were later withdrawn. the father maintained that he was holding these items for a friend. (f) on 20 august 2020 the father was driving a vehicle through suburb v, when he was pulled over for the purpose of a roadside breath test. the police observed a glass ice pipe lying at the feet of a passenger, and searched the vehicle, where they found numerous clear resealable bags and two ice pipes. (g) on 7 may 2021 the father was sighted riding a bicycle with no helmet on a footpath and he was searched. the police recorded finding a half-cut straw, an ice pipe, and an empty, small, clear resealable plastic bag. the father said he was minding these items for a friend.   on 6 january 2014 the father was searched and a random breath test was conducted. a search of his vehicle found a small resealable bag containing clear crystals which were suspected to be methamphetamines. no charges were laid. (c) on 3 october 2019 the father was observed driving a bicycle with no helmet through city m cbd and was stopped. he was searched and police located a smoking glass pipe, and two small satchels containing methamphetamines. he was placed under arrest but the charges were later dropped. (d) on 5 october 2019 the police approached the father in city m mall, in the belief that he may have been purchasing drugs. he was given a move on direction. (e) on 1 december 2020 the father was stopped in suburb u for riding a bike without a bike helmet. he was observed to have glazed eyes with small pupils, and the police formed the view he was under the influence of drugs. the police found a small foil in his pants. the foil contained a crystal rock-type substance which the police suspected was methamphetamines. he was placed under arrest and charged, although the charges were later withdrawn. the father maintained that he was holding these items for a friend. (f) on 20 august 2020 the father was driving a vehicle through suburb v, when he was pulled over for the purpose of a roadside breath test. the police observed a glass ice pipe lying at the feet of a passenger, and searched the vehicle, where they found numerous clear resealable bags and two ice pipes. (g) on 7 may 2021 the father was sighted riding a bicycle with no helmet on a footpath and he was searched. the police recorded finding a half-cut straw, an ice pipe, and an empty, small, clear resealable plastic bag. the father said he was minding these items for a friend.   on 3 october 2019 the father was observed driving a bicycle with no helmet through city m cbd and was stopped. he was searched and police located a smoking glass pipe, and two small satchels containing methamphetamines. he was placed under arrest but the charges were later dropped. (d) on 5 october 2019 the police approached the father in city m mall, in the belief that he may have been purchasing drugs. he was given a move on direction. (e) on 1 december 2020 the father was stopped in suburb u for riding a bike without a bike helmet. he was observed to have glazed eyes with small pupils, and the police formed the view he was under the influence of drugs. the police found a small foil in his pants. the foil contained a crystal rock-type substance which the police suspected was methamphetamines. he was placed under arrest and charged, although the charges were later withdrawn. the father maintained that he was holding these items for a friend. (f) on 20 august 2020 the father was driving a vehicle through suburb v, when he was pulled over for the purpose of a roadside breath test. the police observed a glass ice pipe lying at the feet of a passenger, and searched the vehicle, where they found numerous clear resealable bags and two ice pipes. (g) on 7 may 2021 the father was sighted riding a bicycle with no helmet on a footpath and he was searched. the police recorded finding a half-cut straw, an ice pipe, and an empty, small, clear resealable plastic bag. the father said he was minding these items for a friend.   on 5 october 2019 the police approached the father in city m mall, in the belief that he may have been purchasing drugs. he was given a move on direction. (e) on 1 december 2020 the father was stopped in suburb u for riding a bike without a bike helmet. he was observed to have glazed eyes with small pupils, and the police formed the view he was under the influence of drugs. the police found a small foil in his pants. the foil contained a crystal rock-type substance which the police suspected was methamphetamines. he was placed under arrest and charged, although the charges were later withdrawn. the father maintained that he was holding these items for a friend. (f) on 20 august 2020 the father was driving a vehicle through suburb v, when he was pulled over for the purpose of a roadside breath test. the police observed a glass ice pipe lying at the feet of a passenger, and searched the vehicle, where they found numerous clear resealable bags and two ice pipes. (g) on 7 may 2021 the father was sighted riding a bicycle with no helmet on a footpath and he was searched. the police recorded finding a half-cut straw, an ice pipe, and an empty, small, clear resealable plastic bag. the father said he was minding these items for a friend.   on 1 december 2020 the father was stopped in suburb u for riding a bike without a bike helmet. he was observed to have glazed eyes with small pupils, and the police formed the view he was under the influence of drugs. the police found a small foil in his pants. the foil contained a crystal rock-type substance which the police suspected was methamphetamines. he was placed under arrest and charged, although the charges were later withdrawn. the father maintained that he was holding these items for a friend. (f) on 20 august 2020 the father was driving a vehicle through suburb v, when he was pulled over for the purpose of a roadside breath test. the police observed a glass ice pipe lying at the feet of a passenger, and searched the vehicle, where they found numerous clear resealable bags and two ice pipes. (g) on 7 may 2021 the father was sighted riding a bicycle with no helmet on a footpath and he was searched. the police recorded finding a half-cut straw, an ice pipe, and an empty, small, clear resealable plastic bag. the father said he was minding these items for a friend.   on 20 august 2020 the father was driving a vehicle through suburb v, when he was pulled over for the purpose of a roadside breath test. the police observed a glass ice pipe lying at the feet of a passenger, and searched the vehicle, where they found numerous clear resealable bags and two ice pipes. (g) on 7 may 2021 the father was sighted riding a bicycle with no helmet on a footpath and he was searched. the police recorded finding a half-cut straw, an ice pipe, and an empty, small, clear resealable plastic bag. the father said he was minding these items for a friend.   on 7 may 2021 the father was sighted riding a bicycle with no helmet on a footpath and he was searched. the police recorded finding a half-cut straw, an ice pipe, and an empty, small, clear resealable plastic bag. the father said he was minding these items for a friend.
conclusion on drug use  he has been a long-standing user of drugs including methamphetamines, (b) he has not been honest with the court about the extent of his drug use, (c) urine samples were diluted or manipulated to mask his drug use, and he also wilfully manipulated the urinalysis test results, (d) the father was aware that the hair follicle testing ordered by the court would provide an accurate reflection of his drug use. consistently throughout these proceedings he did not comply with orders, requests, and his own undertakings to participate in hair follicle testing, (e) he has done nothing to address his drug use, nor was he, at any time, candid about it, (f) the father is associated with drug lifestyle and culture.   he has not been honest with the court about the extent of his drug use, (c) urine samples were diluted or manipulated to mask his drug use, and he also wilfully manipulated the urinalysis test results, (d) the father was aware that the hair follicle testing ordered by the court would provide an accurate reflection of his drug use. consistently throughout these proceedings he did not comply with orders, requests, and his own undertakings to participate in hair follicle testing, (e) he has done nothing to address his drug use, nor was he, at any time, candid about it, (f) the father is associated with drug lifestyle and culture.   urine samples were diluted or manipulated to mask his drug use, and he also wilfully manipulated the urinalysis test results, (d) the father was aware that the hair follicle testing ordered by the court would provide an accurate reflection of his drug use. consistently throughout these proceedings he did not comply with orders, requests, and his own undertakings to participate in hair follicle testing, (e) he has done nothing to address his drug use, nor was he, at any time, candid about it, (f) the father is associated with drug lifestyle and culture.   the father was aware that the hair follicle testing ordered by the court would provide an accurate reflection of his drug use. consistently throughout these proceedings he did not comply with orders, requests, and his own undertakings to participate in hair follicle testing, (e) he has done nothing to address his drug use, nor was he, at any time, candid about it, (f) the father is associated with drug lifestyle and culture.   he has done nothing to address his drug use, nor was he, at any time, candid about it, (f) the father is associated with drug lifestyle and culture.   the father is associated with drug lifestyle and culture.
father’s criminal activity and involvement with police and drug culture  from 2013 to 2015 there were a series of concerns raised by the police about the theft of fuel at various locations involving two motor vehicles one registered in the father’s name and the other in the mother’s name. such concerns were raised in relation to failure to pay for fuel on the following dates: (i) 20 november 2013, (ii) 5 march 2014, (iii) 11 april 2014, (iv) 14 april 2014, (v) 17 july 2014, (vi) 23 october 2015, (vii) 15 december 2015, and (viii) 16 december 2015. (b) on 12 november 2016 the father was charged with driving a motor vehicle whilst disqualified. (c) on 14 june 2019 nsw police were issued with a search warrant to search the location of the father’s residence for firearms, firearm parts, and ammunition. a contractor who had been undertaking a routine pest control inspection reported to the police that he had seen two firearms laying on the father’s bed. the firearms were described to police as being similar to submachine guns. (d) on 15 june 2019 at 12:55am the police executed a search warrant. at the time of the raid, the father’s niece and nephew, aged around eight and 10, were at home. they, with other members of the father’s family, waited outside in the street for several hours. the father agreed it was a stressful and upsetting incident for them all. the police seized an airsoft pistol during the raid and located parts of a gun that were dismantled and inoperable. they observed there to be several other toy guns around the premises belonging to children. no charges were laid. the father said that the broken gun parts had been found in a local park by the children when they were playing. he denied owning firearms.   20 november 2013, (ii) 5 march 2014, (iii) 11 april 2014, (iv) 14 april 2014, (v) 17 july 2014, (vi) 23 october 2015, (vii) 15 december 2015, and (viii) 16 december 2015.  ) 5 march 2014, (iii) 11 april 2014, (iv) 14 april 2014, (v) 17 july 2014, (vi) 23 october 2015, (vii) 15 december 2015, and (viii) 16 december 2015.  i) 11 april 2014, (iv) 14 april 2014, (v) 17 july 2014, (vi) 23 october 2015, (vii) 15 december 2015, and (viii) 16 december 2015.  ) 14 april 2014, (v) 17 july 2014, (vi) 23 october 2015, (vii) 15 december 2015, and (viii) 16 december 2015.   17 july 2014, (vi) 23 october 2015, (vii) 15 december 2015, and (viii) 16 december 2015.  ) 23 october 2015, (vii) 15 december 2015, and (viii) 16 december 2015.  i) 15 december 2015, and (viii) 16 december 2015.  ii) 16 december 2015.   on 12 november 2016 the father was charged with driving a motor vehicle whilst disqualified. (c) on 14 june 2019 nsw police were issued with a search warrant to search the location of the father’s residence for firearms, firearm parts, and ammunition. a contractor who had been undertaking a routine pest control inspection reported to the police that he had seen two firearms laying on the father’s bed. the firearms were described to police as being similar to submachine guns. (d) on 15 june 2019 at 12:55am the police executed a search warrant. at the time of the raid, the father’s niece and nephew, aged around eight and 10, were at home. they, with other members of the father’s family, waited outside in the street for several hours. the father agreed it was a stressful and upsetting incident for them all. the police seized an airsoft pistol during the raid and located parts of a gun that were dismantled and inoperable. they observed there to be several other toy guns around the premises belonging to children. no charges were laid. the father said that the broken gun parts had been found in a local park by the children when they were playing. he denied owning firearms.   on 14 june 2019 nsw police were issued with a search warrant to search the location of the father’s residence for firearms, firearm parts, and ammunition. a contractor who had been undertaking a routine pest control inspection reported to the police that he had seen two firearms laying on the father’s bed. the firearms were described to police as being similar to submachine guns. (d) on 15 june 2019 at 12:55am the police executed a search warrant. at the time of the raid, the father’s niece and nephew, aged around eight and 10, were at home. they, with other members of the father’s family, waited outside in the street for several hours. the father agreed it was a stressful and upsetting incident for them all. the police seized an airsoft pistol during the raid and located parts of a gun that were dismantled and inoperable. they observed there to be several other toy guns around the premises belonging to children. no charges were laid. the father said that the broken gun parts had been found in a local park by the children when they were playing. he denied owning firearms.   on 15 june 2019 at 12:55am the police executed a search warrant. at the time of the raid, the father’s niece and nephew, aged around eight and 10, were at home. they, with other members of the father’s family, waited outside in the street for several hours. the father agreed it was a stressful and upsetting incident for them all. the police seized an airsoft pistol during the raid and located parts of a gun that were dismantled and inoperable. they observed there to be several other toy guns around the premises belonging to children. no charges were laid. the father said that the broken gun parts had been found in a local park by the children when they were playing. he denied owning firearms.
conclusion on the father’s criminal activity and involvement with police and drug culture   the father continues to be involved in criminal activities, or at least associates himself with people who are involved in criminal activities. (b) the father’s criminality appears to be associated with drug use. the drug use has led to his association with people who use violence, firearms and drugs. (c) the father does not take responsibility for his criminal associations either now or in the past, nor the impact that exposure to them would have on the children.   the father’s criminality appears to be associated with drug use. the drug use has led to his association with people who use violence, firearms and drugs. (c) the father does not take responsibility for his criminal associations either now or in the past, nor the impact that exposure to them would have on the children.   the father does not take responsibility for his criminal associations either now or in the past, nor the impact that exposure to them would have on the children.
family violence by the father and in the father’s household
...you are a fucking pig... if y and x are not with me this sunday, father’s day, i promise i will not stop until i destroy you...stop the fucking bullshit, stop destroying their lives. stop being a selfish cunt...[17]
conclusion on family violence by the father and in the father’s household
for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (emphasis in original)   the father has been the perpetrator of family violence against the mother. (b) the father has continued to communicate with the mother in an offensive and violent fashion. (c) the children have been present when the father has used these words or communicated with the mother in this fashion. (d) the father does not accept or understand the impact of his behaviour on the mother or the children.   the father has continued to communicate with the mother in an offensive and violent fashion. (c) the children have been present when the father has used these words or communicated with the mother in this fashion. (d) the father does not accept or understand the impact of his behaviour on the mother or the children.   the children have been present when the father has used these words or communicated with the mother in this fashion. (d) the father does not accept or understand the impact of his behaviour on the mother or the children.   the father does not accept or understand the impact of his behaviour on the mother or the children.
inability to follow court orders or directions and take responsibility for his behaviour  on 24 october 2016 a cost order was made against the father. it remains unpaid. (b) the mother alleges that there have been numerous occasions where the father failed to attend and spend time with the children as provided for in the orders, or at all. (c) on 23 and 24 july 2016 the father retained the children overnight without the mother’s consent. (d) on 1 and 2 october 2016 the father failed to return the children to the mother at the agreed changeover location. (e) on 6 november 2016 the father attended the mother’s home uninvited to spend time with the children. (f) on 27 november 2016 the father did not return the children to the mother’s care as agreed. (g) on 1 and 2 january 2017 the father did not return the children to the mother. he advised her “nobody and no bit of paper is going to tell me when i can see my kids”.[19] he retained them overnight. (h) on 14 january 2017 the father said to the mother in the presence of y “the order and these papers [the undertakings] are just toilet paper. they mean shit.”[20] (i) on 15 december 2016 orders were made allowing the father fortnightly time with the children provided that signed undertakings were received from the paternal family. the mother alleges that on 31 december 2016 an undertaking was provided to her purportedly signed by the paternal grandmother, but on 2 january 2017 when the mother collected the children the paternal grandmother had no knowledge of the undertaking and denied signing it. on 25 january 2017 the mother raised her concerns through legal correspondence about the allegedly forged undertakings. the mother further alleges that upon requesting undertakings being duly certified by a solicitor, she observed that the signature of the paternal grandmother on the undertaking certified by the solicitor did not resemble the signature on the earlier undertaking provided by the paternal grandmother. (j) on 11 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking to supervise the father’s time with the children she was not present when the children were returned to the mother. (k) on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   the mother alleges that there have been numerous occasions where the father failed to attend and spend time with the children as provided for in the orders, or at all. (c) on 23 and 24 july 2016 the father retained the children overnight without the mother’s consent. (d) on 1 and 2 october 2016 the father failed to return the children to the mother at the agreed changeover location. (e) on 6 november 2016 the father attended the mother’s home uninvited to spend time with the children. (f) on 27 november 2016 the father did not return the children to the mother’s care as agreed. (g) on 1 and 2 january 2017 the father did not return the children to the mother. he advised her “nobody and no bit of paper is going to tell me when i can see my kids”.[19] he retained them overnight. (h) on 14 january 2017 the father said to the mother in the presence of y “the order and these papers [the undertakings] are just toilet paper. they mean shit.”[20] (i) on 15 december 2016 orders were made allowing the father fortnightly time with the children provided that signed undertakings were received from the paternal family. the mother alleges that on 31 december 2016 an undertaking was provided to her purportedly signed by the paternal grandmother, but on 2 january 2017 when the mother collected the children the paternal grandmother had no knowledge of the undertaking and denied signing it. on 25 january 2017 the mother raised her concerns through legal correspondence about the allegedly forged undertakings. the mother further alleges that upon requesting undertakings being duly certified by a solicitor, she observed that the signature of the paternal grandmother on the undertaking certified by the solicitor did not resemble the signature on the earlier undertaking provided by the paternal grandmother. (j) on 11 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking to supervise the father’s time with the children she was not present when the children were returned to the mother. (k) on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 23 and 24 july 2016 the father retained the children overnight without the mother’s consent. (d) on 1 and 2 october 2016 the father failed to return the children to the mother at the agreed changeover location. (e) on 6 november 2016 the father attended the mother’s home uninvited to spend time with the children. (f) on 27 november 2016 the father did not return the children to the mother’s care as agreed. (g) on 1 and 2 january 2017 the father did not return the children to the mother. he advised her “nobody and no bit of paper is going to tell me when i can see my kids”.[19] he retained them overnight. (h) on 14 january 2017 the father said to the mother in the presence of y “the order and these papers [the undertakings] are just toilet paper. they mean shit.”[20] (i) on 15 december 2016 orders were made allowing the father fortnightly time with the children provided that signed undertakings were received from the paternal family. the mother alleges that on 31 december 2016 an undertaking was provided to her purportedly signed by the paternal grandmother, but on 2 january 2017 when the mother collected the children the paternal grandmother had no knowledge of the undertaking and denied signing it. on 25 january 2017 the mother raised her concerns through legal correspondence about the allegedly forged undertakings. the mother further alleges that upon requesting undertakings being duly certified by a solicitor, she observed that the signature of the paternal grandmother on the undertaking certified by the solicitor did not resemble the signature on the earlier undertaking provided by the paternal grandmother. (j) on 11 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking to supervise the father’s time with the children she was not present when the children were returned to the mother. (k) on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 1 and 2 october 2016 the father failed to return the children to the mother at the agreed changeover location. (e) on 6 november 2016 the father attended the mother’s home uninvited to spend time with the children. (f) on 27 november 2016 the father did not return the children to the mother’s care as agreed. (g) on 1 and 2 january 2017 the father did not return the children to the mother. he advised her “nobody and no bit of paper is going to tell me when i can see my kids”.[19] he retained them overnight. (h) on 14 january 2017 the father said to the mother in the presence of y “the order and these papers [the undertakings] are just toilet paper. they mean shit.”[20] (i) on 15 december 2016 orders were made allowing the father fortnightly time with the children provided that signed undertakings were received from the paternal family. the mother alleges that on 31 december 2016 an undertaking was provided to her purportedly signed by the paternal grandmother, but on 2 january 2017 when the mother collected the children the paternal grandmother had no knowledge of the undertaking and denied signing it. on 25 january 2017 the mother raised her concerns through legal correspondence about the allegedly forged undertakings. the mother further alleges that upon requesting undertakings being duly certified by a solicitor, she observed that the signature of the paternal grandmother on the undertaking certified by the solicitor did not resemble the signature on the earlier undertaking provided by the paternal grandmother. (j) on 11 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking to supervise the father’s time with the children she was not present when the children were returned to the mother. (k) on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 6 november 2016 the father attended the mother’s home uninvited to spend time with the children. (f) on 27 november 2016 the father did not return the children to the mother’s care as agreed. (g) on 1 and 2 january 2017 the father did not return the children to the mother. he advised her “nobody and no bit of paper is going to tell me when i can see my kids”.[19] he retained them overnight. (h) on 14 january 2017 the father said to the mother in the presence of y “the order and these papers [the undertakings] are just toilet paper. they mean shit.”[20] (i) on 15 december 2016 orders were made allowing the father fortnightly time with the children provided that signed undertakings were received from the paternal family. the mother alleges that on 31 december 2016 an undertaking was provided to her purportedly signed by the paternal grandmother, but on 2 january 2017 when the mother collected the children the paternal grandmother had no knowledge of the undertaking and denied signing it. on 25 january 2017 the mother raised her concerns through legal correspondence about the allegedly forged undertakings. the mother further alleges that upon requesting undertakings being duly certified by a solicitor, she observed that the signature of the paternal grandmother on the undertaking certified by the solicitor did not resemble the signature on the earlier undertaking provided by the paternal grandmother. (j) on 11 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking to supervise the father’s time with the children she was not present when the children were returned to the mother. (k) on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 27 november 2016 the father did not return the children to the mother’s care as agreed. (g) on 1 and 2 january 2017 the father did not return the children to the mother. he advised her “nobody and no bit of paper is going to tell me when i can see my kids”.[19] he retained them overnight. (h) on 14 january 2017 the father said to the mother in the presence of y “the order and these papers [the undertakings] are just toilet paper. they mean shit.”[20] (i) on 15 december 2016 orders were made allowing the father fortnightly time with the children provided that signed undertakings were received from the paternal family. the mother alleges that on 31 december 2016 an undertaking was provided to her purportedly signed by the paternal grandmother, but on 2 january 2017 when the mother collected the children the paternal grandmother had no knowledge of the undertaking and denied signing it. on 25 january 2017 the mother raised her concerns through legal correspondence about the allegedly forged undertakings. the mother further alleges that upon requesting undertakings being duly certified by a solicitor, she observed that the signature of the paternal grandmother on the undertaking certified by the solicitor did not resemble the signature on the earlier undertaking provided by the paternal grandmother. (j) on 11 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking to supervise the father’s time with the children she was not present when the children were returned to the mother. (k) on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 1 and 2 january 2017 the father did not return the children to the mother. he advised her “nobody and no bit of paper is going to tell me when i can see my kids”.[19] he retained them overnight. (h) on 14 january 2017 the father said to the mother in the presence of y “the order and these papers [the undertakings] are just toilet paper. they mean shit.”[20] (i) on 15 december 2016 orders were made allowing the father fortnightly time with the children provided that signed undertakings were received from the paternal family. the mother alleges that on 31 december 2016 an undertaking was provided to her purportedly signed by the paternal grandmother, but on 2 january 2017 when the mother collected the children the paternal grandmother had no knowledge of the undertaking and denied signing it. on 25 january 2017 the mother raised her concerns through legal correspondence about the allegedly forged undertakings. the mother further alleges that upon requesting undertakings being duly certified by a solicitor, she observed that the signature of the paternal grandmother on the undertaking certified by the solicitor did not resemble the signature on the earlier undertaking provided by the paternal grandmother. (j) on 11 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking to supervise the father’s time with the children she was not present when the children were returned to the mother. (k) on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 14 january 2017 the father said to the mother in the presence of y “the order and these papers [the undertakings] are just toilet paper. they mean shit.”[20] (i) on 15 december 2016 orders were made allowing the father fortnightly time with the children provided that signed undertakings were received from the paternal family. the mother alleges that on 31 december 2016 an undertaking was provided to her purportedly signed by the paternal grandmother, but on 2 january 2017 when the mother collected the children the paternal grandmother had no knowledge of the undertaking and denied signing it. on 25 january 2017 the mother raised her concerns through legal correspondence about the allegedly forged undertakings. the mother further alleges that upon requesting undertakings being duly certified by a solicitor, she observed that the signature of the paternal grandmother on the undertaking certified by the solicitor did not resemble the signature on the earlier undertaking provided by the paternal grandmother. (j) on 11 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking to supervise the father’s time with the children she was not present when the children were returned to the mother. (k) on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 15 december 2016 orders were made allowing the father fortnightly time with the children provided that signed undertakings were received from the paternal family. the mother alleges that on 31 december 2016 an undertaking was provided to her purportedly signed by the paternal grandmother, but on 2 january 2017 when the mother collected the children the paternal grandmother had no knowledge of the undertaking and denied signing it. on 25 january 2017 the mother raised her concerns through legal correspondence about the allegedly forged undertakings. the mother further alleges that upon requesting undertakings being duly certified by a solicitor, she observed that the signature of the paternal grandmother on the undertaking certified by the solicitor did not resemble the signature on the earlier undertaking provided by the paternal grandmother. (j) on 11 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking to supervise the father’s time with the children she was not present when the children were returned to the mother. (k) on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 11 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking to supervise the father’s time with the children she was not present when the children were returned to the mother. (k) on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 25 and 26 march 2017 the mother alleges that despite the paternal grandmother having executed an undertaking, in breach of the undertaking, she was not present when the children returned to the mother. (l) over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   over the easter long weekend in 2017 the mother alleges that in breach of the undertaking, the paternal grandmother was not present at the commencement or conclusion of the father’s time with the children. (m) on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 5 may 2018 the father’s brother and sister-in-law arrived uninvited and unannounced at the maternal grandparents’ residence, attempting to spend time with the children. (n) on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   on 28 september 2018 the father attended the residence of the maternal grandparents and attempted to spend time with the children. (o) the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   the father did not comply with orders for drug testing as previously discussed.   allowing y to play on his mobile telephone during supervised contact sessions. (b) during outdoor play, commencing a running race that effectively removed the children from the supervision of the family support worker. (c) during supervised outdoor play, allowing the children to meet their uncle, mr z, in a park.   during outdoor play, commencing a running race that effectively removed the children from the supervision of the family support worker. (c) during supervised outdoor play, allowing the children to meet their uncle, mr z, in a park.   during supervised outdoor play, allowing the children to meet their uncle, mr z, in a park.   the father was asked about the positive drug test result that he returned on 11 january 2018. under cross-examination, the father said his drink was spiked by friends, and although he was concerned about it, he said, “what can i do? it happened.” (b) he was asked under cross-examination about the positive methamphetamine result collected on 22 october 2019. he said it occurred because it was after the children’s birthdays and he had not seen or spoken to them, and it only happened the one time because of the stress of not seeing the children. (c) he was cross-examined about the nsw police record of events on 3 october 2019, when he was stopped by the police and found with a pipe used for smoking methamphetamines. the father said that the pipe did not belong to him, but to a guy “walking behind me who seemed to have vanished”. (d) when cross-examined about an incident on 20 august 2020 when the nsw police found an ice pipe on the passenger seat of his motor vehicle his explanation was similarly evasive. he said that it belonged to a passenger who had been in the car who he had just met. he said that he had agreed to drop him off at the shops, and that he must have dropped the pipe on the floor of the car. (e) he gave similar evidence in relation to an event that took place on 7 may 2021 when he was found with an ice pipe. he said it did not belong to him, but rather a friend who had dropped around to his place at approximately 10.00pm the night before. his friend had left the ice pipe on the table in the garage and he was returning it to him.   he was asked under cross-examination about the positive methamphetamine result collected on 22 october 2019. he said it occurred because it was after the children’s birthdays and he had not seen or spoken to them, and it only happened the one time because of the stress of not seeing the children. (c) he was cross-examined about the nsw police record of events on 3 october 2019, when he was stopped by the police and found with a pipe used for smoking methamphetamines. the father said that the pipe did not belong to him, but to a guy “walking behind me who seemed to have vanished”. (d) when cross-examined about an incident on 20 august 2020 when the nsw police found an ice pipe on the passenger seat of his motor vehicle his explanation was similarly evasive. he said that it belonged to a passenger who had been in the car who he had just met. he said that he had agreed to drop him off at the shops, and that he must have dropped the pipe on the floor of the car. (e) he gave similar evidence in relation to an event that took place on 7 may 2021 when he was found with an ice pipe. he said it did not belong to him, but rather a friend who had dropped around to his place at approximately 10.00pm the night before. his friend had left the ice pipe on the table in the garage and he was returning it to him.   he was cross-examined about the nsw police record of events on 3 october 2019, when he was stopped by the police and found with a pipe used for smoking methamphetamines. the father said that the pipe did not belong to him, but to a guy “walking behind me who seemed to have vanished”. (d) when cross-examined about an incident on 20 august 2020 when the nsw police found an ice pipe on the passenger seat of his motor vehicle his explanation was similarly evasive. he said that it belonged to a passenger who had been in the car who he had just met. he said that he had agreed to drop him off at the shops, and that he must have dropped the pipe on the floor of the car. (e) he gave similar evidence in relation to an event that took place on 7 may 2021 when he was found with an ice pipe. he said it did not belong to him, but rather a friend who had dropped around to his place at approximately 10.00pm the night before. his friend had left the ice pipe on the table in the garage and he was returning it to him.   when cross-examined about an incident on 20 august 2020 when the nsw police found an ice pipe on the passenger seat of his motor vehicle his explanation was similarly evasive. he said that it belonged to a passenger who had been in the car who he had just met. he said that he had agreed to drop him off at the shops, and that he must have dropped the pipe on the floor of the car. (e) he gave similar evidence in relation to an event that took place on 7 may 2021 when he was found with an ice pipe. he said it did not belong to him, but rather a friend who had dropped around to his place at approximately 10.00pm the night before. his friend had left the ice pipe on the table in the garage and he was returning it to him.   he gave similar evidence in relation to an event that took place on 7 may 2021 when he was found with an ice pipe. he said it did not belong to him, but rather a friend who had dropped around to his place at approximately 10.00pm the night before. his friend had left the ice pipe on the table in the garage and he was returning it to him.
conclusion on father’s inability to follow court orders or directions and take responsibility for his behaviour  the father has demonstrated an inability to comply with rules, agreements and court orders, even when he has agreed to them and said that he would honour them. (b) the father demonstrated no appreciation or understanding of the importance of complying with rules, agreements, court orders, or an intention to do so into the future. (c) the father has made poor decisions and has exposed the children to risks of harm that those various rules, agreements and court orders were trying to protect them from. (d) the father has taken no personal responsibility for the decisions that he has made. nor has he demonstrated remorse for the impact of these decisions. (e) the father demonstrates a lack of insight into the impact of his behaviour on the children and others.   the father demonstrated no appreciation or understanding of the importance of complying with rules, agreements, court orders, or an intention to do so into the future. (c) the father has made poor decisions and has exposed the children to risks of harm that those various rules, agreements and court orders were trying to protect them from. (d) the father has taken no personal responsibility for the decisions that he has made. nor has he demonstrated remorse for the impact of these decisions. (e) the father demonstrates a lack of insight into the impact of his behaviour on the children and others.   the father has made poor decisions and has exposed the children to risks of harm that those various rules, agreements and court orders were trying to protect them from. (d) the father has taken no personal responsibility for the decisions that he has made. nor has he demonstrated remorse for the impact of these decisions. (e) the father demonstrates a lack of insight into the impact of his behaviour on the children and others.   the father has taken no personal responsibility for the decisions that he has made. nor has he demonstrated remorse for the impact of these decisions. (e) the father demonstrates a lack of insight into the impact of his behaviour on the children and others.   the father demonstrates a lack of insight into the impact of his behaviour on the children and others.
the law as it applies to cases about risk
discussion of risk  he uses illicit drugs and substances, especially methamphetamines and his drug use will continue. this presents both physical and psychological harm for the children when in his care. (b) the father may expose the children to criminal activities and a drug culture. this presents both a physical and psychological harm for the children when in his care. (c) the father and/or his family members may expose the children to family violence. this represents a psychological harm for the children. (d) the father’s propensity to breach rules, agreements and court orders poses a risk of psychological harm to the children and may compromise the mother’s parenting capacity and ability in the future. (e) the father has not been proactive in addressing any of the risk issues identified nor has he acknowledged them. the father’s lack of insight into his behaviour, and its impact on the children and others poses a risk of psychological harm for the children.   the father may expose the children to criminal activities and a drug culture. this presents both a physical and psychological harm for the children when in his care. (c) the father and/or his family members may expose the children to family violence. this represents a psychological harm for the children. (d) the father’s propensity to breach rules, agreements and court orders poses a risk of psychological harm to the children and may compromise the mother’s parenting capacity and ability in the future. (e) the father has not been proactive in addressing any of the risk issues identified nor has he acknowledged them. the father’s lack of insight into his behaviour, and its impact on the children and others poses a risk of psychological harm for the children.   the father and/or his family members may expose the children to family violence. this represents a psychological harm for the children. (d) the father’s propensity to breach rules, agreements and court orders poses a risk of psychological harm to the children and may compromise the mother’s parenting capacity and ability in the future. (e) the father has not been proactive in addressing any of the risk issues identified nor has he acknowledged them. the father’s lack of insight into his behaviour, and its impact on the children and others poses a risk of psychological harm for the children.   the father’s propensity to breach rules, agreements and court orders poses a risk of psychological harm to the children and may compromise the mother’s parenting capacity and ability in the future. (e) the father has not been proactive in addressing any of the risk issues identified nor has he acknowledged them. the father’s lack of insight into his behaviour, and its impact on the children and others poses a risk of psychological harm for the children.   the father has not been proactive in addressing any of the risk issues identified nor has he acknowledged them. the father’s lack of insight into his behaviour, and its impact on the children and others poses a risk of psychological harm for the children.
conclusion on whether the risk is unacceptable and can be mitigated against  the children are still young and need to be protected from the harms identified, (b) no drug testing regime could be relied upon because the father has previously manipulated test results and failed to comply with orders requiring him to submit samples for testing, (c) a supervised contact service has been trialled. it is not a suitable long term option because of the father’s inability to follow and observe the centre rules and service agreements, as demonstrated by such things as his wilful attempts to remove the children from a supervised setting. there might well be an alternate service available but there is a strong and real possibility that such a service may not be prepared to provide an ongoing supervision service in the long term. added to that, i cannot be satisfied that supervised time would in the future protect the children from psychological harm from the father, (d) i cannot on the evidence presented find that the paternal family are appropriate supervisors, (e) the father’s unwillingness to follow court orders, and his inability to understand the impact of his behaviour on the children and the mother cannot be mitigated against, except for a no time order.   no drug testing regime could be relied upon because the father has previously manipulated test results and failed to comply with orders requiring him to submit samples for testing, (c) a supervised contact service has been trialled. it is not a suitable long term option because of the father’s inability to follow and observe the centre rules and service agreements, as demonstrated by such things as his wilful attempts to remove the children from a supervised setting. there might well be an alternate service available but there is a strong and real possibility that such a service may not be prepared to provide an ongoing supervision service in the long term. added to that, i cannot be satisfied that supervised time would in the future protect the children from psychological harm from the father, (d) i cannot on the evidence presented find that the paternal family are appropriate supervisors, (e) the father’s unwillingness to follow court orders, and his inability to understand the impact of his behaviour on the children and the mother cannot be mitigated against, except for a no time order.   a supervised contact service has been trialled. it is not a suitable long term option because of the father’s inability to follow and observe the centre rules and service agreements, as demonstrated by such things as his wilful attempts to remove the children from a supervised setting. there might well be an alternate service available but there is a strong and real possibility that such a service may not be prepared to provide an ongoing supervision service in the long term. added to that, i cannot be satisfied that supervised time would in the future protect the children from psychological harm from the father, (d) i cannot on the evidence presented find that the paternal family are appropriate supervisors, (e) the father’s unwillingness to follow court orders, and his inability to understand the impact of his behaviour on the children and the mother cannot be mitigated against, except for a no time order.   i cannot on the evidence presented find that the paternal family are appropriate supervisors, (e) the father’s unwillingness to follow court orders, and his inability to understand the impact of his behaviour on the children and the mother cannot be mitigated against, except for a no time order.   the father’s unwillingness to follow court orders, and his inability to understand the impact of his behaviour on the children and the mother cannot be mitigated against, except for a no time order.
the other primary and additional considerations
parental responsibility
other orders
associate: dated: 9 june 2022
dated: 9 june 2022
[1]family report dated 20 december 2019 (“family report”), paragraph 58. [2] family report paragraph 58. [3] family report paragraph 60.[4] see mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; [2009] flc 93-405 at [119]- [122]. [5] affidavit of ms roble filed 25 october 2021 (“mother’s affidavit”), paragraph 43.[6] ibid, paragraph 60, 64.[7] ibid, paragraphs 43, 51, 52, 56, 60, 64, 71.[8] ibid, paragraph 44. [9] ibid, paragraphs 49-50, 62, 63, 71.[10] family report paragraph 23.[11] mother’s affidavit, paragraphs 90-91.[12] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 92. [13] family report paragraph 30.[14] family report paragraph 23.[15] family report paragraph 30.[16] family report paragraph 35. also of note, during the family report interview the meeting was suspended so she could access ‘sick bags’ in case she needed to vomit (family report paragraph 22)[17] mother’s affidavit, annexure w2.[18] family report paragraph 24. [19] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 157.[20] ibid, paragraph 162.[21] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 122. [22] ibid. [23] ibid.[24] deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82 at [61]. [25] blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 at [83]. [26] exhibit 1.[27] family report paragraph 69.[28] family report paragraph 65.