last updated: 11 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
welsh & welsh [2022] fedcfamc2f 779
orders
the court orders that:  x, born in 2013, (b) y, born in 2013, and (c) z, born in 2014   y, born in 2013, and (c) z, born in 2014   z, born in 2014  e children”) provided always that the father keep the mother informed of significant long term decisions that he makes in relation to the child and actively seeks the mother’s input on such issues.  the father shall advise the mother by email of his proposal relating to the children, (b) if the mother wishes to comment on the father’s proposal (or if the mother has any proposal she wishes to make relating to the children on this issue) she shall, within seven (7) days after the date of the father’s email, advise the father by one email (to the email address from which the mother sent her communication) of her views, (c) upon receipt of any comment or proposal by the mother, the father shall give consideration to the mother’s views, (d) after the father has considered the mother’s comments, he shall make a decision and advise the mother by email or sms text message of the outcome immediately after making that decision, and (e) if the mother does not respond by email as provided in order 3(b) hereof, the father shall be entitled to presume that the mother does not wish to be involved and he may decide the issue.   if the mother wishes to comment on the father’s proposal (or if the mother has any proposal she wishes to make relating to the children on this issue) she shall, within seven (7) days after the date of the father’s email, advise the father by one email (to the email address from which the mother sent her communication) of her views, (c) upon receipt of any comment or proposal by the mother, the father shall give consideration to the mother’s views, (d) after the father has considered the mother’s comments, he shall make a decision and advise the mother by email or sms text message of the outcome immediately after making that decision, and (e) if the mother does not respond by email as provided in order 3(b) hereof, the father shall be entitled to presume that the mother does not wish to be involved and he may decide the issue.   upon receipt of any comment or proposal by the mother, the father shall give consideration to the mother’s views, (d) after the father has considered the mother’s comments, he shall make a decision and advise the mother by email or sms text message of the outcome immediately after making that decision, and (e) if the mother does not respond by email as provided in order 3(b) hereof, the father shall be entitled to presume that the mother does not wish to be involved and he may decide the issue.   after the father has considered the mother’s comments, he shall make a decision and advise the mother by email or sms text message of the outcome immediately after making that decision, and (e) if the mother does not respond by email as provided in order 3(b) hereof, the father shall be entitled to presume that the mother does not wish to be involved and he may decide the issue.   if the mother does not respond by email as provided in order 3(b) hereof, the father shall be entitled to presume that the mother does not wish to be involved and he may decide the issue.   each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school friday, or 3.00pm if a non-school day, to 5.00pm sunday. (b) each wednesday from the conclusion of school until 7.00pm in the city m area, unless the mother has advised the father via text or telephone message that she is unavailable, with such notification to be given 24 hours or more before the mother’s time is scheduled to begin, (c) for the first week of the mid-term school holidays from 3.30pm friday at the conclusion of school until midday sunday of the following week, (d) during the long summer holidays, each alternate week from 10.00am on the first monday of the month until 10.00am on the following monday, (e) on each of the children’s birthdays for no less than 2 hours with the birthday child, at times as agreed in writing between the parties and failing agreement from 5.00pm until 7.00pm. (f) for christmas 2022, from 3.00pm boxing day until 3.00pm on 27 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (g) for christmas 2023, from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm boxing day and each alternate year thereafter, and (h) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   each wednesday from the conclusion of school until 7.00pm in the city m area, unless the mother has advised the father via text or telephone message that she is unavailable, with such notification to be given 24 hours or more before the mother’s time is scheduled to begin, (c) for the first week of the mid-term school holidays from 3.30pm friday at the conclusion of school until midday sunday of the following week, (d) during the long summer holidays, each alternate week from 10.00am on the first monday of the month until 10.00am on the following monday, (e) on each of the children’s birthdays for no less than 2 hours with the birthday child, at times as agreed in writing between the parties and failing agreement from 5.00pm until 7.00pm. (f) for christmas 2022, from 3.00pm boxing day until 3.00pm on 27 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (g) for christmas 2023, from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm boxing day and each alternate year thereafter, and (h) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   for the first week of the mid-term school holidays from 3.30pm friday at the conclusion of school until midday sunday of the following week, (d) during the long summer holidays, each alternate week from 10.00am on the first monday of the month until 10.00am on the following monday, (e) on each of the children’s birthdays for no less than 2 hours with the birthday child, at times as agreed in writing between the parties and failing agreement from 5.00pm until 7.00pm. (f) for christmas 2022, from 3.00pm boxing day until 3.00pm on 27 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (g) for christmas 2023, from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm boxing day and each alternate year thereafter, and (h) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   during the long summer holidays, each alternate week from 10.00am on the first monday of the month until 10.00am on the following monday, (e) on each of the children’s birthdays for no less than 2 hours with the birthday child, at times as agreed in writing between the parties and failing agreement from 5.00pm until 7.00pm. (f) for christmas 2022, from 3.00pm boxing day until 3.00pm on 27 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (g) for christmas 2023, from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm boxing day and each alternate year thereafter, and (h) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   on each of the children’s birthdays for no less than 2 hours with the birthday child, at times as agreed in writing between the parties and failing agreement from 5.00pm until 7.00pm. (f) for christmas 2022, from 3.00pm boxing day until 3.00pm on 27 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (g) for christmas 2023, from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm boxing day and each alternate year thereafter, and (h) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   for christmas 2022, from 3.00pm boxing day until 3.00pm on 27 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (g) for christmas 2023, from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm boxing day and each alternate year thereafter, and (h) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   for christmas 2023, from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm boxing day and each alternate year thereafter, and (h) as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.
international travel  provide the non-travelling party with no less than twenty-eight (28) days prior written notice (‘notice’) of the proposed travel and obtain the non-travelling party’s written consent with such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. (b) for the purposes of paragraph 6.1, the notice to include the following details: (i) the period of proposed absence from the commonwealth of australia (ii) a copy of the travel itinerary or any other documentation evidencing the proposed destination(s) and the dates and times of the departure and return, and (iii) all complete addresses, telephone numbers or other contact details where the non-travelling party can contact the children during the travel period.   for the purposes of paragraph 6.1, the notice to include the following details: (i) the period of proposed absence from the commonwealth of australia (ii) a copy of the travel itinerary or any other documentation evidencing the proposed destination(s) and the dates and times of the departure and return, and (iii) all complete addresses, telephone numbers or other contact details where the non-travelling party can contact the children during the travel period.   the period of proposed absence from the commonwealth of australia (ii) a copy of the travel itinerary or any other documentation evidencing the proposed destination(s) and the dates and times of the departure and return, and (iii) all complete addresses, telephone numbers or other contact details where the non-travelling party can contact the children during the travel period.  ) a copy of the travel itinerary or any other documentation evidencing the proposed destination(s) and the dates and times of the departure and return, and (iii) all complete addresses, telephone numbers or other contact details where the non-travelling party can contact the children during the travel period.  i) all complete addresses, telephone numbers or other contact details where the non-travelling party can contact the children during the travel period.
the court orders by consent that:  any illness or injury requiring a medical examination or medical consultation, (b) any illness requiring the provision to any of the children of any medicine prescribed by their general practitioner, (c) any hospital attendance for examination, consultation, or treatment, (d) any dental treatment, and (e) any issue of concern raised with either parent by any of the children’s school/s in relation to any of the children’s education, welfare, or behaviour.   any illness requiring the provision to any of the children of any medicine prescribed by their general practitioner, (c) any hospital attendance for examination, consultation, or treatment, (d) any dental treatment, and (e) any issue of concern raised with either parent by any of the children’s school/s in relation to any of the children’s education, welfare, or behaviour.   any hospital attendance for examination, consultation, or treatment, (d) any dental treatment, and (e) any issue of concern raised with either parent by any of the children’s school/s in relation to any of the children’s education, welfare, or behaviour.   any dental treatment, and (e) any issue of concern raised with either parent by any of the children’s school/s in relation to any of the children’s education, welfare, or behaviour.   any issue of concern raised with either parent by any of the children’s school/s in relation to any of the children’s education, welfare, or behaviour.   organising events for any of the child/ren during the period the child/ren are not in their respective care without prior written consent of the other party, (b) denigrating the other party or member of the other party’s family in the presence of or within hearing of any of the children and the parties shall take all reasonable steps necessary to ensure that no other person denigrates the other party or members of the other party’s family in the presence or within hearing of any of the children, and (c) discussing these proceedings in the presence of or within the hearing of any of the children.   denigrating the other party or member of the other party’s family in the presence of or within hearing of any of the children and the parties shall take all reasonable steps necessary to ensure that no other person denigrates the other party or members of the other party’s family in the presence or within hearing of any of the children, and (c) discussing these proceedings in the presence of or within the hearing of any of the children.   discussing these proceedings in the presence of or within the hearing of any of the children.
interstate travel  provide the non-travelling party with no less than twenty-eight (28) days prior written notice (‘notice’) of the proposed travel and obtain the non-travelling party’s written consent with such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. (b) for the purposes of paragraph 6.1, the notice to include the following details: (i) the period of proposed absence from the state of victoria, (ii) a copy of the travel itinerary or any other documentation evidencing the proposed destination(s) and the dates and times of the departure and return, and (iii) all complete addresses, telephone numbers or other contact details where the non-travelling party can contact the children during the travel period.   for the purposes of paragraph 6.1, the notice to include the following details: (i) the period of proposed absence from the state of victoria, (ii) a copy of the travel itinerary or any other documentation evidencing the proposed destination(s) and the dates and times of the departure and return, and (iii) all complete addresses, telephone numbers or other contact details where the non-travelling party can contact the children during the travel period.   the period of proposed absence from the state of victoria, (ii) a copy of the travel itinerary or any other documentation evidencing the proposed destination(s) and the dates and times of the departure and return, and (iii) all complete addresses, telephone numbers or other contact details where the non-travelling party can contact the children during the travel period.
reasons for judgment
judge harland:
background
2018 consent orders
3.1 each alternate weekend in from 5:00pm after school friday until 5:00pm sunday as agreed between the parties in writing, if the monday following the sunday specified in paragraph 3.1 is a public holiday, the applicant father shall spend time with the children until 5:00pm monday, 3.2 each wednesday from the completion of school until 7:00pm, unless the applicant father provides the respondent mother with notification that he is unavailable, such notification specified in paragraph 3.2 shall not be effective unless: provided in writing by text message 12 hours or more before the applicant father’s time with the children is scheduled to begin. 3.3 for the first week of the midterm school holidays, from 3:30pm friday at the conclusion of school until 12:00pm sunday the following week. 3.4 during the summer school holidays, each alternate week from 10:00am on the first monday of the month until 10:00am on the following monday. 3.5 on each of the children’s birthdays, for no less than 2 hours with the birthday child on times as agreed in writing between the parties, failing agreement as stipulated in paragraph 3.5, from 3:30pm until 7:00pm if the birthday is a school day and from 3:30pm until 5:00pm if a school day. 3.6 any other times as agreed between the parties in writing. for the purposes of handover and unless otherwise stipulated above, the applicant father shall collect the children from the respondent mother’s residence in suburb h on friday, and the respondent mother shall collect the children from the applicant father’s residence in town e on sunday, and 4.1 handover may occur in any other way and at any other time as agreed between the parties in writing. the parties shall keep each other informed at all times of their residential address and mobile telephone numbers and email address and advise of any such changes 48 hours prior to such changes. both parties be restrained by injunction, and the injunction hereby be granted restraining each party from the following: 12.1 enrolling the any of the children in any school without both parties’ written consent, 12.2 organising events for any of the children during the period the child is not in their respective care without prior written consent of the other party, 12.3 denigrating the other party or member of the other party’s family in the presence or within hearing of any of the children and the parties shall take all reasonable steps necessary to ensure that no other person denigrates the other party or members of the other party’s family in the presence or within hearing of any of the children, and 12.4 discussing these proceedings in the presence or within hearing of any of the children. in the event that the parties are unable to reach an agreement in relation to major long-term issues affecting the child or parenting arrangements pursuant to these orders, the parents must attend (in person or by telephone) upon an agreed, appropriately qualified family dispute resolution practitioner or counsellor in an attempt to resolve those issues without recourse or further litigation.
the father’s case
the mother’s case
documents relied on  father’s notice of risk filed on 26 february 2020, (2) affidavit of ms q filed 20 april 2020, (3) section 11f child dispute conference report dated 4 may 2020, (4) affidavit of dr p filed 14 january 2021, (5) affidavit of the father filed 15 january 2021, (6) financial statement of the father filed 27 august 2021, (7) affidavit of mr r filed 27 august 2021, and (8) affidavit of the father filed 10 january 2022, (9) tendered material.   affidavit of ms q filed 20 april 2020, (3) section 11f child dispute conference report dated 4 may 2020, (4) affidavit of dr p filed 14 january 2021, (5) affidavit of the father filed 15 january 2021, (6) financial statement of the father filed 27 august 2021, (7) affidavit of mr r filed 27 august 2021, and (8) affidavit of the father filed 10 january 2022, (9) tendered material.   section 11f child dispute conference report dated 4 may 2020, (4) affidavit of dr p filed 14 january 2021, (5) affidavit of the father filed 15 january 2021, (6) financial statement of the father filed 27 august 2021, (7) affidavit of mr r filed 27 august 2021, and (8) affidavit of the father filed 10 january 2022, (9) tendered material.   affidavit of dr p filed 14 january 2021, (5) affidavit of the father filed 15 january 2021, (6) financial statement of the father filed 27 august 2021, (7) affidavit of mr r filed 27 august 2021, and (8) affidavit of the father filed 10 january 2022, (9) tendered material.   affidavit of the father filed 15 january 2021, (6) financial statement of the father filed 27 august 2021, (7) affidavit of mr r filed 27 august 2021, and (8) affidavit of the father filed 10 january 2022, (9) tendered material.   financial statement of the father filed 27 august 2021, (7) affidavit of mr r filed 27 august 2021, and (8) affidavit of the father filed 10 january 2022, (9) tendered material.   affidavit of mr r filed 27 august 2021, and (8) affidavit of the father filed 10 january 2022, (9) tendered material.   affidavit of the father filed 10 january 2022, (9) tendered material.   tendered material.   financial statement of the mother filed 8 september 2021, and (2) affidavit of the mother filed 11 september 2021, (3) tendered material.   affidavit of the mother filed 11 september 2021, (3) tendered material.   tendered material.   section 11f child dispute conference report dated 4 may 2020, (5) affidavit of dr p filed 14 january 2021, (6) family report released 18 may 2022.   affidavit of dr p filed 14 january 2021, (6) family report released 18 may 2022.   family report released 18 may 2022.
issues in dispute
at the commencement of the father’s time with the children, the father to collect the children from school at the conclusion of school on friday and if not a school day, then changeover to occur at 3.30pm at the s supermarket carpark in suburb h, and at the conclusion of the father’s time with the children, the mother to collect the children from mcdonald’s near the father’s home.
family violence
the paternal grandfather
language difficulties
contravention hearing
children’s education and development
b school
“if the issue of a change of school involved genuine debate over the best interests of the children. i agree it would be up to the parent seeking change to make an application to the court. but in this case it is obviously in the children’s interests that they attend c school is only this school is within walking distance of their home.”
i do not intend on wasting money on a court application on the right course of action is so obvious.
50. the mother must have known from the time she purchased her new home that once the family moved, it would be impracticable for the children to remain at b school given her reliance on the maternal grandmother and on the poor public transport options. she should have raised those matters with the father well before the new school year, and prior to her actually taking possession and moving, so that the parties could have had the opportunity of visiting and considering other schools in the area that may have been acceptable to both parents. if no agreement had been reached the parties could have sought assistance through mediation, and if there was still no agreement, she should have issued court proceedings. instead, the mother delayed raising the issues as to practicality at a very late stage, making it almost impossible for the parties to have any meaningful negotiations or discussions, and preventing the parties from being able to realistically consider other options. i do not accept the mother’s evidence that she tried to discuss the matter with the father in any meaningful way prior to determining to change the children’s enrolment and then doing so. 51. accordingly, i am satisfied that the mother did not take reasonable steps to comply with either the order for equal shared parental responsibility, nor with the restraint on changing schools without the other parent’s written consent. in the circumstances, i am satisfied that she contravened both order 1 and order 12.1 of the primary orders. the flavour of her evidence was that she felt entitled to make the decision as to where the children would attend school, and that the father’s views were not particularly relevant to her or the children.
c school
dear ms w, your client does not consent to change of the school? how does your client see the children to attend the school in suburb h while residing in suburb o? i would like to remind you of the fact that your client was very much against the school that the girls attended previously. it looks it is in the nature of your client not to consent to any of my proposals. i hope your client understands how important and pressing is the issue of schooling. the girls need to continue their education and it would be the best time for them to start after a lockdown as he kids come back to school after a break. it will be easier for the girls to adapt into new environment together with others. so, in the best interests of or children, i urge your client to make a choice between two schools so that girls could start their schooling immediately. if you client continues bluntly disagree without any proposals or discussions i would not have a choice but enrol them into school i find the best for them. regards, ms welsh
interim arrangments during the trial
the father’s parenting capacity
psychological assessments for the children
stability
parents repartnering
ms q
the father’s current partner
the mother’s partner
expert evidence
dr p
the parents
the children ] observations of the girls with their father were notable for a number of reasons. first mr welsh appeared intent on trying to compel the children to behave in a certain manner. when the children greeted him upon entering the observation room, they were aloof, only to be met with “are you happy to see daddy or not?” he was also observed to tell the children to smile at one point. second, mr welsh’s attempts at physical affection towards the children were generally rebuffed or unreciprocated, particularly with x, who refused to give her father a cuddle. third, there was a paucity of dialogue between the children and their father. for much of the observation, the children interacted among themselves, seldom including their father. z showed almost no interaction with mr welsh throughout the observation period. finally, mr welsh appeared to lack basic competencies when attempting to engage the girls. his efforts to interact with them with laboured and cumbersome – distinctly not pitched at a 6 and 7 year old level. his level of emotional attunement was poor. at the end of the observation, the girls were not moved even to say goodbye to their father, seemingly unaffected by him leaving the room. [31] with their mother, the children were far more interactive, conversant, and playful. their collective demeanours elevated when observed with mr welsh. whereas the respondent mother was noted to be far more direct and forthright with the children, contrasting mr welsh’s more passive and laid-back parenting style, the children appeared to respond far better to her overtures and attempts to engage them in play. mrs welsh coordinated the children’s activities extremely well. she took up educational opportunities as they presented. she participated in imaginary play. when the children became bored or disinterested in one task, she quickly moved him to the next activity, with comments such as, “what do we do next”. she divided her attention between the three girls evenly. z particularly was noted to be far more buoyant and involved within the interaction. at the end of the observation, the children were asked to pack up some blocks that they had been playing with, and they immediately complied with their mother’s instruction, completing the task thorough upon her immediate request.  ] there are likely a multitude of factors that have contributed to the tension between these parents. at base, they have very different approaches to raising their daughters – ms welsh is more assertive and directive, and mr welsh is more permissive, laid back and passive. there are also cultural factors and expectations that are a source of some agitation, as evidenced by the occasional co-sleeping issues. it is clear also that both parents have developed consolidated views of the other. mr welsh views the respondent mother as intemperate, and reactive and aggressive. he is concerned that these tendencies are now affecting the children, as he claims they did himself. he characterises ms welsh as domineering, controlling and uncompromising. he believes that she is exploitative and money oriented, even when he has attempted to be generous towards her beyond what is required. conversely, ms welsh views the applicant father as oppositional and obstinate. she claims that her genuine efforts to support the children around their medical, psychological, and developmental needs have been discouraged and ignored by mr welsh, simply to be oppositional. she feels as though her efforts to support the children to change schools, when they were legitimately struggling at their former catholic school, were refused out of hand by the applicant father whom she claimed showed little insight into the challenges that x and y were facing. she considers the proposals for the children to live primarily with their father to be impractical and ambit. she questions his motivations, and believes he uses the legal system to threaten, harass and pressure her. [35] unfortunately, it is plainly apparent that all three of the girls are aware of the disharmony that exists between their mother and father. while all three girls appeared reticent to discuss their family circumstances during the current assessment, they collectively agreed that their father and mother do not communicate and that a negative sentiment exists on both sides. as will be outlined below, i do believe that both parents have spoken in an inappropriate manner to the children about the other party. there has been little effort by these parents to quarantine their children from their own disagreements and ill will. there are consistent messages of restraint about these children having a relationship with the other side of their family. the children feel the tension. not only is it distressing for these girls to grow up against the backdrop of agitation between their mother and father, i suspect they do not feel the emotional permission from either parent to fully enjoy their relationship with the other. their reticence to talk about their family here is unsurprising. research conducted into situations where there is entrenched parental disharmony is well established – children raised in these circumstances show higher rates of interpersonal problems, social maladjustment, anxiety, learning difficulties and in their teenage years, more significant issues such as aggressive behaviour, early school dropout, and drug and alcohol use. this is not to suggest that these outcomes will inevitable attend these children, however both parents need to understand that the conflict and lack of consistency and agitation between them may have come to have serious implications for their daughters.
cross-examination
from my perspective, all of that appears to be in furtherance of the type of dynamics and interplay and difficulties that were existing at the time that i saw the family. again, there were questions about – in relation to both parties about how thoroughly they had had adhered to the orders.
so all of what had been outlined before the court, during the course of this morning session, i would argue is in furtherance of that quite pathological dimensions exists between the parties and have existed for some protracted time throughout the post separation.
but at that time, there was not the type of markers for obvious dysfunction in these children. yes, there was some concerns about and enquiries around the potential autism spectrum presentation, but – and there was some reference to the behaviour of these children, but it was not at the more extreme end of the continuum and so, under circumstances where the children are kind of ticking along okay, they are getting to school, their functioning at school academically and socially, interpersonally – it was not as dire as it would seem pursuant to those reports.
it is entirely possible that it simply just these latent issues starting to manifest now that the girls are of a certain age, that is entirely possible. i would posit, however, that to presuppose that the children have not been affected to some degree by the dysfunction within the family of origin and a highly conflictual relationship between the parents and very inconsistent parenting arrangements, or at least the implementation of those, it would be in my view, unreasonable to suggest that those sorts of issues will not be impacting on these girls and their functioning and their behaviour and their relationship and all of those things where we seeing instability.”
ms ab e mother]’s resistance to addressing and seeking professional input regarding her directive parenting style which was recommended in the previous family report [the father]’s difficulty in understanding and accepting the outcome of the recent cognitive assessments for x and y, and what professional supports and interventions they may require the stark difference in the children’s engagement levels and ability to provide more balanced views about their parents during the interviews, compared to the previous family report in november 2021 a resist/refuse dynamic y is currently displaying towards [the mother], and all three children identifying that they are struggling with their mothers strict style of parenting
the children did not present as being fearful or tense around ms welsh, however y was observed to be conscious in watching her mother. while the children appeared to enjoy having their mother participate in their game, and did not exhibit signs of discomfort around her, there was also an absence of any particular affection or initiation by the children to seek out their mother’s attention as you would expect in children their age.
ms welsh did not interaction directly with y, and y did not actively seek out her mother’s attention or speak with her directly at any point. however, when y was with her father, she noticed that he spread his attention between her and her siblings and appeared comfortable with this. y was much more talkative, actively seeking mr welsh and addressing him as “daddy”.
recommendations
emotionally devastating for the children who have had ongoing disruptions and changes to their lives, a lack of consistency and stability and ongoing exposure to the parental dispute which is impacted their emotional wellbeing and relationship with their parents and with one another.
the parents have considerably different parenting styles, personalities, values and ways of communicating, and this has left the children in a position of having no consistency across the two houses which has been confusing and stressful for them. they have received mixed messages from their parents in relation to rules, values, education, health and development, and this has created a situation where the children have needed to adapt their behaviours and ways of expressing themselves depending upon which parent they are with. this is very concerning for children of this age who will be entering their adolescence in the next few years, and should be in a position where they feel safe to be themselves in both households. as they become teenagers, they will need to be encouraged and given permission by both parents to explore their identify and sense of self, rather than having to adapt to a style that is suited to each parent, and this is unlikely to occur if the children remain in the dynamic they are currently in. x, y and z all present as being timid, nervous and vulnerable children who are struggling emotionally and socially. whether this is a result of developmental issues, or an emotional and psychological response from what they have experienced in relation to the ongoing parental dispute, these are children that particularly require consistency, nurturing and genuine support from both their parents. unfortunately, the children’s current difficulties are not being prioritised and adequately addressed by either parent, as their attention and energy is consumed by the parental dispute and ongoing ligation in the family court.
mr welsh appears to have made a noticeable shift in his ability to understand and relate to the children and has demonstrated his capacity to reflect upon previous behaviours that contributed to the parental dispute. he was able to articulate how his negative feelings about the relationship with ms welsh and their acrimonious separation, clouded his ability to be solely child focused. he appears to have made genuine efforts over the last twelve months to better understand and meet the needs of the children and improve his parenting skills. mr welsh has completed a “tuning into kids” course which he found to be informative and beneficial to improve his parenting skills. he was able to articulate how this course has allowed him to change his style of interacting with the children, and has enabled him to better engage and connect with the children on their level. as a result, he has been much more active and involved with the children when they are in his care, making an effort to ask them questions and allow them an environment where they are able to express their feelings and emotions.
mr welsh does not appear to understand that there may also be developmental issues for the twins which have been identified by professional assessments. if mr welsh is unable to seek and accept professional support and adhere to treatment plans for the children, they are unlikely to receive interventions they may require. however, it is likely that his current views has been impacted by his own lack of understanding about developmental issues and conditions in children, and by his experience of being dismissed and separated by ms welsh in the assessment and diagnostic process. given mr welsh has demonstrated a willingness and ability to seek professional education about the children, and make the recommended adaptations to his parenting style, it is likely that he will be receptive to learning about these issues, and making the necessary changes to better meet the children’s needs.
since the previous report, ms welsh appears to have been less obstructive regarding the children’s ability to spend time and maintain a relationship with their father. over the last twelve months, ms welsh has been more consistent in facilitating the children’s spend time with mr welsh and this has demonstrated to the children her acceptance and permission for them to have a relationship with their father. this is significant progress as previously ms welsh had demonstrated a pattern of behaviour that has not necessarily promoted the children’s relationship with mr welsh. in addition to this improved consistency with facilitating the children’s spend time with mr welsh, was ms welsh’s suggestion with her proposing to move to a shared care arrangement. this has significantly benefited the children by allowing them to spend more quality time with mr welsh and consequently feeling more comfortable and familiar with him. this gesture has also contributed to the slight improvement in the co-parenting relationship by allowing mr welsh to be more actively involved in the children’s lives.
if ms welsh continues to have difficulties understanding how her current parenting style is impacting the children, or fails seek professional support to assist her in changing the way she interacts with the children, her relationship with the children may be damaged beyond repair. if this dynamic continues, the children will continue to distance themselves emotionally from ms welsh, and will likely seek out more permanent living arrangements with mr welsh as they enter their adolescences. it is also likely that ms welsh’s previous position of encouraging the children to align with her, has provided a template of resist/refuse behaviour for them. as such, this may have limited their capacity to integrate both homes, and tolerate different parenting approaches, leading to a current rejection of the parenting style that does not meet their needs.
if the children were to live with mr welsh, then they children should attend a school in the city m region. given mr welsh has lived in city m for the majority of his life and owns his own property this option may provide stability for the children in the long term, despite the short term disruption associated with changing schools. in this arrangement, the children are also likely to maintain relationships with both parents, as mr welsh has demonstrated the understanding of the importance for the children to spend time with both parents, and his views about the co-parenting relationship have improved. if the children were to remain living with ms welsh, she would need to demonstrate a commitment to remaining in her current location until the children have completed their education. there are inherent risks with this option as ms welsh has previously unilaterally changed the children’s schools and shows limited insight into the impact on this on the children. additionally, she has previously demonstrated limited capacity to promote the relationship between the children and ms welsh. therefore, should the children primarily reside with ms welsh, it may be beneficial for there to be restrictions on her to change the children’s education provider or to relocate out of the region.
i think your style is quite intimidating and quite authoritarian and i think it is very difficult to work with someone who does not value someone’s opinion. i think that is a part of it, and then i think, in the past, mr welsh, as it happens, then you get your backup about something and there becomes a dynamic
i think it is the tone. i think it is the volume. i think it is the facial expressions. i think it is the body language. i – i find that i am – i find it uncomfortable as an adult.
re-opening of evidence
impressions of the parties
general legal principles with respect to parenting matters
section 65daa(1) is expressed in imperative terms. it obliges the court to consider both the question whether it is in the best interests of the child to spend equal time with each of the parents (para (a)) and the question whether it is reasonably practicable that the child spend equal time with each of them (para (b)). it is only where both questions are answered in the affirmative that consideration may be given, under para (c), to the making of an order. the words in which para (c) commences (if it is) refer back to the two preceding questions and make plain that the making of an order can only be considered if the findings mentioned are made. a determination as a question of fact that it is reasonably practicable that equal time be spent with each court has the power to make a parenting order of that kind. it is a matter upon which power is conditioned much as it is where a jurisdictional fact must be proved to exist. if such a finding cannot be made, subs (2)(a) and (b) require that the prospect of the child spending substantial and significant time with each parent then be considered. that subsection follows the same structure as subs (1) and requires the same questions concerning the child’s best interests and reasonable practicability to be answered in the context of the child spending substantial and significant time with each parent.
application of legal principles to the facts of this case
conclusion
associate: dated: 15 june 2022
dated: 15 june 2022