last updated: 6 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
salvi & mandava [2022] fedcfamc2f 1771
orders
the court orders by consent that:
spend time   during the long summer holidays in queensland by agreement and failing agreement, from the saturday after school ends until 22 january in each year, (b) during school term holidays, in queensland at an agreed time in writing and failing agreement, for half the school holidays commencing on the saturday after the last day of school term until the midpoint of the holidays in even numbered years, and from the midpoint of the holidays until the saturday prior to the recommencement of the school term in odd numbered years, (c) by telephone or electronic means in accordance with x’s wishes, (d) by telephone or electronic means with the father to initiate the contact with x, no more than three times per week (and in default of agreement, monday, thursday and saturday at 7.00pm). (e) as otherwise agreed in writing between the parties.   during school term holidays, in queensland at an agreed time in writing and failing agreement, for half the school holidays commencing on the saturday after the last day of school term until the midpoint of the holidays in even numbered years, and from the midpoint of the holidays until the saturday prior to the recommencement of the school term in odd numbered years, (c) by telephone or electronic means in accordance with x’s wishes, (d) by telephone or electronic means with the father to initiate the contact with x, no more than three times per week (and in default of agreement, monday, thursday and saturday at 7.00pm). (e) as otherwise agreed in writing between the parties.   by telephone or electronic means in accordance with x’s wishes, (d) by telephone or electronic means with the father to initiate the contact with x, no more than three times per week (and in default of agreement, monday, thursday and saturday at 7.00pm). (e) as otherwise agreed in writing between the parties.   by telephone or electronic means with the father to initiate the contact with x, no more than three times per week (and in default of agreement, monday, thursday and saturday at 7.00pm). (e) as otherwise agreed in writing between the parties.   as otherwise agreed in writing between the parties.   no more than twice a week (and by default, each monday and thursday), (b) in accordance with x’s wishes.   in accordance with x’s wishes.
illness/injury
education
communication between the parents
supervised drug screen  produces a positive drug screen result, (b) fails to comply with the mother’s request for a drug screen in accordance with this order,   fails to comply with the mother’s request for a drug screen in accordance with this order,
in which case the mother may suspend the time that x spends with the father until such time as the father, at his election, produces two consecutive negative drug screen results to the mother and/or complies with the mother’s request to undergo a supervised drug screen (in the event he has failed or refused to do so).
restraints  denigrating the other or their family members to or in the hearing or presence of x or allowing anyone else to do so, (b) exposing x to parental conflict, (c) discussing x attending any school in queensland, and (d) allowing x to view any documents filed in these proceedings, or discussing any documents filed or that form part of these proceedings with x or within her hearing or presence, or allowing any one else to do so.   exposing x to parental conflict, (c) discussing x attending any school in queensland, and (d) allowing x to view any documents filed in these proceedings, or discussing any documents filed or that form part of these proceedings with x or within her hearing or presence, or allowing any one else to do so.   discussing x attending any school in queensland, and (d) allowing x to view any documents filed in these proceedings, or discussing any documents filed or that form part of these proceedings with x or within her hearing or presence, or allowing any one else to do so.   allowing x to view any documents filed in these proceedings, or discussing any documents filed or that form part of these proceedings with x or within her hearing or presence, or allowing any one else to do so.   any legal medication prescribed for the father by a registered medical practitioner, and taken and used by the father strictly in accordance with such prescription, and (b) any over-the-counter medication or pharmaceutical substance and taken or used by the father strictly in accordance with the directions appearing on such medication or pharmaceutical substance.   any over-the-counter medication or pharmaceutical substance and taken or used by the father strictly in accordance with the directions appearing on such medication or pharmaceutical substance.
travel
father’s overseas travel
general
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
section 117 costs (1) subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just. (2a) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to:   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and
...
the court orders that: the applicant has leave to proceed to final orders on an undefended basis this day. there be final parenting orders, in terms of the minute of orders proposed by the applicant and dated 20 march 2019 (“the minute”). the lawyers for the applicant mother engross the minute and provide a clean, duly certified copy of the same in a microsoft word format (“the copy”) to the registry of this court within seven (7) days. all extant applications be otherwise dismissed and the proceedings be removed from the list of pending cases. it is directed that: 5. the minute be placed upon the court file and marked exhibit “a”. and the court notes that: pursuant to ss.65da(2) and 62b of the family law act 1975 the particulars of the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may follow if a person contravenes these orders are set out in annexure a and these particulars are included in these orders. the respondent father has liberty to apply to set aside these orders pursuant to rule 16.05 of the federal circuit court rules 2001 provided that: he makes such an application within 28 days of service upon him of these orders, and he files an affidavit setting out the basis of the application and explaining his non attendance at court today.
hi [the father], i am writing in response to your request for [the child] to spend time with you for a week this christmas. you are obviously aware that, since the final orders made in march 2019, you have not spent any time with [the child]. in fact, you have not spent any time with [the child] since september 2018, notwithstanding a very short time spent with [the child] in january 2019. notwithstanding that telephone contact is quite regular i.e. facetime and/or a variation of telephone contact, it would obviously be a gigantic step for [the child] to spend a week with you without any graduation to seeing you, let alone spending a week in another state given the history, i could not sanction such a proposal at this time. notwithstanding the reservations about the issue, i am keen to encourage and facilitate [the child] having as positive a relationship with you as is possible. i would much prefer that you initially make arrangements to visit [the child] in melbourne and i would be present so as to ensure a smooth transition/handover to you. i want to assure you that i would not be obstructive and, on the contrary, i think it would work best if a mechanism along these lines is adopted. i am more than happy to consider overnight visits once an initial rapport/familiarity has been established. i am also happy to host [child [d]] and [child [c]] overnight at my apartment if you and [[ms e]] are comfortable with this. if you can navigate an initial visit, i am than happy to accompany [the child] to queensland for 5 or so days. it will obviously be too ambitious, given the recent covid-19 restrictions, for it to happen over this christmas. i would need you to undertake and/or pay in advance travel and accommodation before committing to this arrangement. i suspect the total amount would be $2,700 made up as follows: return flights - $700 rental vehicle in qld - $70 par day accommodation - $300 per night airport transfers in melbourne - $150 obviously, i will require written assurance that you will comply with the court orders and particularly in relation to the denigration or belittling of me or my family. i also note that you have yet to address the child support arrears and request that you do so immediately. if you could make an immediate contribution of $1,000 towards uniform, technology and camping fees for [the child’s] high school next week, this would be much appreciated. i obviously want to ensure that you do not have any issues with any drug dependency. it seems you have moved a number of times and this does flag concerns in my mind about risk issues relating to [the child]. this latter is sent in good faith and i look forward to a response. kind regards, [the mother]  he pulled my hair slapped me bit me and said the she wanted to stragle [sic] me and laughed and said that it would be funny if she punched out my teeth all because i wouldnt [sic] give her my phone ... [s]hes [sic] a psychotic bitch. ... [s]he bit me. ... [photo of marks on a wrist] ... [d]ad ... [p]lease
... around 5:13pm i was advised by the afp member [[mr f]] that staff at [airline g] counter informed him that [the child] departed on a [flight] to brisbane at 4:40pm, accompanied by a female passenger under a name [[ms e]]. at this point it was my belief that [the child] was instructed by her father [the father] (also known as [the father’s alternate name] an elaborate and detailed lie to evade my suspicion, take an uber or a taxi service to the airport, board a plane with his wife [[ms e]], to avoid questioning by the staff and fly to qld. i discovered that [the child’s] expired passport and birth certificate were also missing. at 6:53pm [[h]] sent me a photo of [the child’s] location from snapchat app as bushand [sic] near [[suburb j]], qld. [child [h]’s] mother [[ms k]] suggested i contact qld police to conduct a welfare check at her father's last known address and the location identified by her son via snapchat. ... since [the child’s] departure i have perused her ipad and discovered a series of text exchanges between [the child] and her father planning her getaway. [the father’s] actions provide no comfort that it is [the child’s] best interest to remain in his care. encouraging [the child] to steal her passport and birth certificate from my home office, to lie to me and to encourage her to travel to another state without my knowledge or consent is shocking and shows that he has little to no insight into what is in [the child’s] best interest.
section 60i attending family dispute resolution before applying for part vii order object of this section (1) the object of this section is to ensure that all persons who have a dispute about matters that may be dealt with by an order under this part (a part vii order) make a genuine effort to resolve that dispute by family dispute resolution before the part vii order is applied for.
section 60b objects of part and principles underlying it (1) the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child's best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). (3) for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child's or torres strait islander child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right:   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.  ) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   an additional object of this part is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child done at new york on 20 november 1989. [emphasis added]
associate: dated: 20 december 2022
dated: 20 december 2022