last updated: 1 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hewett & emery (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 954
orders
the court orders that:
the threshold issue
next steps   the parties each pay one half of ms e's costs of preparing the report, (b) the parties attend upon ms e on 31 august 2022, or such other date as agreed in writing should that date become unavailable, and (c) not less than 7 days prior to the appointments in paragraph [3.2], each party forward to ms e the court documents filed on their behalf in the proceeding to date, and (d) the parties each otherwise follow all reasonable directions of ms e to assist her in preparing the report including providing any further information or authority to liaise with any medical practitioner or psychologist upon whom the parties or children attend.   the parties attend upon ms e on 31 august 2022, or such other date as agreed in writing should that date become unavailable, and (c) not less than 7 days prior to the appointments in paragraph [3.2], each party forward to ms e the court documents filed on their behalf in the proceeding to date, and (d) the parties each otherwise follow all reasonable directions of ms e to assist her in preparing the report including providing any further information or authority to liaise with any medical practitioner or psychologist upon whom the parties or children attend.   not less than 7 days prior to the appointments in paragraph [3.2], each party forward to ms e the court documents filed on their behalf in the proceeding to date, and (d) the parties each otherwise follow all reasonable directions of ms e to assist her in preparing the report including providing any further information or authority to liaise with any medical practitioner or psychologist upon whom the parties or children attend.   the parties each otherwise follow all reasonable directions of ms e to assist her in preparing the report including providing any further information or authority to liaise with any medical practitioner or psychologist upon whom the parties or children attend.
dispute resolution   part 1 of the confidential court-based family dispute resolution (fdr) conference with a registrar (as family dispute resolution practitioner) on a date to be fixed (requested to be not before 10 october 2022), with each party to attend separately at times to be advised, and (b) part 2 of the confidential court-based fdr conference on a date and at a time to be fixed but not later than seven (7) days after the date referred to in order 5(a).   part 2 of the confidential court-based fdr conference on a date and at a time to be fixed but not later than seven (7) days after the date referred to in order 5(a).
part 1 of the fdr conference  ensure that all documents required to be exchanged between parties pursuant to chapter 6 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 have been exchanged, (b) ensure that any private expert report that is relevant to the proceedings has been filed, (c) provide to the court by email and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution), (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).   ensure that any private expert report that is relevant to the proceedings has been filed, (c) provide to the court by email and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution), (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).   provide to the court by email and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution), (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).   a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution), (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).  ) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).  i) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).  ) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).
fdr conference  of non-attendance by either party at part 1 of the conference, or (b) that pursuant to regulation 29 of the family law (family dispute resolution practitioners) regulations 2008, the registrar is no longer satisfied that the conference is appropriate.   that pursuant to regulation 29 of the family law (family dispute resolution practitioners) regulations 2008, the registrar is no longer satisfied that the conference is appropriate.
miscellaneous
and the court notes that:  this matter is suitable for a full day conference, (b) this matter would benefit from the involvement of a court child expert (as family counsellor) in the fdr conference.   this matter would benefit from the involvement of a court child expert (as family counsellor) in the fdr conference.   the party's actual costs, both paid and owing, up to and including the family dispute resolution conference, and (b) the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event, including trial, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of the expenses.   the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event, including trial, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of the expenses.   any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of the expenses.   parties and their legal representatives in short (four hour) conferences are expected to be available until at least 1.00pm and at the specific times requested by the registrar, and (b) parties and their legal representatives in full day conferences are expected to be available for the entirety of the day and at the specific times requested by the registrar.   parties and their legal representatives in full day conferences are expected to be available for the entirety of the day and at the specific times requested by the registrar.
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
the applicable law  the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based. (2) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. (3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.
... in miller & harrington [2008] famcafc 150, (2008) flc 93-383 warnick, boland and murphy jj distinguished the rule in rice & asplund from procedures such as “striking out” and “summary dismissal”. the court (at [80]) did not accept that the only way which the rule in rice & asplund can be applied at a preliminary stage is on the basis that the case of the applicant for parenting orders is taken at its highest. importantly, the court said:  ] nor, as presently advised, do we think that the authorities cited by warnick j in sps preclude the possibility that, in a "preliminary" hearing for the purpose of ascertaining if an application for parenting orders should go no further because of the rule in rice and asplund, some resolution of factual disputes may occur, for example, whether a change of circumstances has or has not occurred. [82] however, the qualitative question of whether a change that has occurred is or is not sufficiently significant to justify a full further hearing of a parenting issue may be one much more difficult to answer in a preliminary hearing involving resolution of only some disputed facts.
16. in marsden & winch the full court said:  ]. in miller ... the court posed the question:
[105] adapting the language used by warnick j in sps and pls ... the question for consideration is: assuming the evidence of the [applicant] is accepted, is there a sufficient change of circumstances shown to justify embarking on a hearing? ]. that question might be better formulated in another way in the following proposition, namely that there is a requirement:  for a prima facie case of changed circumstances to have been established, and (2) for a consideration as to whether that case is a sufficient change of circumstances to justify embarking on a hearing.
the parties submissions  each alternate weekend from the conclusion of day care / school friday until the commencement of day care / school monday. in the event friday is a school free day or public holiday, aside from easter, time shall commence at the conclusion of day care / school thursday. in the event monday is a school free day or public holiday, changeover occur on the next day care / school day, (b) on each alternate monday, being the monday immediately after the weekend the husband does not have care of the children pursuant to subparagraph (a) herein, with the wife to deliver the children to day care/school and the husband to collect them from day care when he wishes or otherwise at the conclusion of school monday until the conclusion of school/day care tuesday, with the husband to ensure the children attend school and day care on tuesday for the wife to collect that afternoon, (c) for half of each of the victorian gazetted school term holidays as agreed, but failing agreement the second half, from 5:00pm on the middle saturday of the said holidays until commencement of day care and school the next term, (d) during the long summer holidays as follows: (i) in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) herein until 5:00pm on christmas eve each year, (ii) in even numbered years from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 10:00am on boxing day, (iii) in even numbered years, from the date representing the mid-point between boxing day and the date the school resumes until 5:00pm on the day before the resumption of the new school year, (iv) in odd numbered years from 10:00am on boxing day until the mid-point of the remaining school holiday period,   on each alternate monday, being the monday immediately after the weekend the husband does not have care of the children pursuant to subparagraph (a) herein, with the wife to deliver the children to day care/school and the husband to collect them from day care when he wishes or otherwise at the conclusion of school monday until the conclusion of school/day care tuesday, with the husband to ensure the children attend school and day care on tuesday for the wife to collect that afternoon, (c) for half of each of the victorian gazetted school term holidays as agreed, but failing agreement the second half, from 5:00pm on the middle saturday of the said holidays until commencement of day care and school the next term, (d) during the long summer holidays as follows: (i) in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) herein until 5:00pm on christmas eve each year, (ii) in even numbered years from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 10:00am on boxing day, (iii) in even numbered years, from the date representing the mid-point between boxing day and the date the school resumes until 5:00pm on the day before the resumption of the new school year, (iv) in odd numbered years from 10:00am on boxing day until the mid-point of the remaining school holiday period,   for half of each of the victorian gazetted school term holidays as agreed, but failing agreement the second half, from 5:00pm on the middle saturday of the said holidays until commencement of day care and school the next term, (d) during the long summer holidays as follows: (i) in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) herein until 5:00pm on christmas eve each year, (ii) in even numbered years from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 10:00am on boxing day, (iii) in even numbered years, from the date representing the mid-point between boxing day and the date the school resumes until 5:00pm on the day before the resumption of the new school year, (iv) in odd numbered years from 10:00am on boxing day until the mid-point of the remaining school holiday period,   during the long summer holidays as follows: (i) in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) herein until 5:00pm on christmas eve each year, (ii) in even numbered years from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 10:00am on boxing day, (iii) in even numbered years, from the date representing the mid-point between boxing day and the date the school resumes until 5:00pm on the day before the resumption of the new school year, (iv) in odd numbered years from 10:00am on boxing day until the mid-point of the remaining school holiday period,   in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) herein until 5:00pm on christmas eve each year, (ii) in even numbered years from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 10:00am on boxing day, (iii) in even numbered years, from the date representing the mid-point between boxing day and the date the school resumes until 5:00pm on the day before the resumption of the new school year, (iv) in odd numbered years from 10:00am on boxing day until the mid-point of the remaining school holiday period,  ) in even numbered years from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 10:00am on boxing day, (iii) in even numbered years, from the date representing the mid-point between boxing day and the date the school resumes until 5:00pm on the day before the resumption of the new school year, (iv) in odd numbered years from 10:00am on boxing day until the mid-point of the remaining school holiday period,  i) in even numbered years, from the date representing the mid-point between boxing day and the date the school resumes until 5:00pm on the day before the resumption of the new school year, (iv) in odd numbered years from 10:00am on boxing day until the mid-point of the remaining school holiday period,  ) in odd numbered years from 10:00am on boxing day until the mid-point of the remaining school holiday period,
with the children to be in the care of the mother at all other times between christmas eve and the resumption of school each year. (f) on father’s day from 9:00am until 6:00pm, if it is not a weekend when the children are already with the husband pursuant to these orders, with the husband’s time to be suspended for the same period on mother’s day each year, in the event it coincides with the husband’s time, (g) by telephone each thursday the children are not otherwise spending time with the husband between 6:00pm and 6:30pm. in the event that it is not practicable for the husband to speak to the children during the specified time, the wife will advise him in advance and propose an alternative time for him to speak to them, (h) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing (including sms). the husband’s time with the children pursuant to orders 3 (a) and (b) herein be suspended during all school term holiday periods and recommence when school resumes as though the suspension had not occurred. as far as practicable changeover for the husband’s time with the children occur at the children’s day care or school. in the event that changeover occurs on a day when the children are not attending day care or school, changeover occur in the car park of [[b school]] car park, unless otherwise agreed. both parties shall ensure they facilitate the children phoning the other parent when they wish to speak to that parent and that the children telephone the other parent on that parent’s birthday each year, if the children are not in that parent’s care. the parties advise the other and at all times keep the other advised of their current residential address, email address and contact telephone number. each parent shall immediately advise the other in the event of the children or any of them suffering an illness or injury requiring medical attention and shall provide the other with the name and contact details of any treating doctor or health professional and authorise by this order the other parent obtaining information from the doctor or health professional. both parties be and hereby authorised to obtain all information ordinarily disseminated to parents by the children’s day care or schools and both are at liberty to attend any parent teacher interviews, school concerts, sports days or any other school events at which parents ordinarily attend. both parties shall obtain school photo orders forms, school reports, medical reports and the like at their sole expense, if applicable. both parties shall facilitate the children’s attendance at all schooling events, sporting events, social events and agreed extracurricular activities which coincide with their care. both parties advise the other in the event the children are too unwell to attend at school or day care and advise the other, via email or sms, of any attendances by the children, in advance if possible, upon any medical practitioner or allied health professional and advise the other as soon as practicable of the outcome of any appointment. the husband and the wife be and are hereby restrained from: (a) denigrating the other in the presence or hearing of the children and shall use their best endeavours to prevent any other person from doing so, and (b) committing any form of family violence against or inflicting physical discipline upon the children and shall ensure no other person does so. save in the event of an emergency, the parties shall attend upon the following medical practitioners for treatment for the children: (a) [medical centre 1], (b) [medical centre 2], (c) [medical centre 3]. as far as practicable, the parties shall communicate via sms or email, save in the event of an emergency. both parties will advise the other in the event they intend to travel with the children outside of the state of victoria during periods of their care, with such advice to be provided no less than seven days prior to the proposed travel and to include the details of the address the children will be staying at during the period of travel. in the event either party plans to travel overseas with the children, they shall provide the other with 28 days’ written notice, via email, of their intention to do so, with such written notice to include a detailed itinerary of their departure and return dates, the country or countries the children will be travelling to, the approximate dates on which the children will arrive and depart each country and details as to the accommodation for the children while they are travelling. the wife shall hold the children’s passports and shall provide them to the husband 14 days’ prior to the children’s overseas travel with the husband, with the husband to return the passports to the wife forthwith and no less than 14 days after the children return from overseas. both parties shall forthwith do all things necessary to renew the children’s passports, when they expire, and shall share equally in the cost of such renewal. pursuant to s.65da(2) and s.62b, the particulars of the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may follow if a person contravenes these orders and details of who can assist the parties adjust to and comply with an order are set out in the fact sheet attached hereto and these particulars are included in these orders.  on father’s day from 9:00am until 6:00pm, if it is not a weekend when the children are already with the husband pursuant to these orders, with the husband’s time to be suspended for the same period on mother’s day each year, in the event it coincides with the husband’s time, (g) by telephone each thursday the children are not otherwise spending time with the husband between 6:00pm and 6:30pm. in the event that it is not practicable for the husband to speak to the children during the specified time, the wife will advise him in advance and propose an alternative time for him to speak to them, (h) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing (including sms).   by telephone each thursday the children are not otherwise spending time with the husband between 6:00pm and 6:30pm. in the event that it is not practicable for the husband to speak to the children during the specified time, the wife will advise him in advance and propose an alternative time for him to speak to them, (h) such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing (including sms).   such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing (including sms).   denigrating the other in the presence or hearing of the children and shall use their best endeavours to prevent any other person from doing so, and (b) committing any form of family violence against or inflicting physical discipline upon the children and shall ensure no other person does so.   committing any form of family violence against or inflicting physical discipline upon the children and shall ensure no other person does so.   [medical centre 1], (b) [medical centre 2], (c) [medical centre 3].   [medical centre 2], (c) [medical centre 3].   [medical centre 3].
1. all previous orders in relation to the children:   [child 1], born 2012 (b) [child 2], born 2013 (c) [child 3], born 2015 (children) be discharged. the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children and for that purpose:   neither party be permitted to enrol the children or any of them in a school other than their current school without first obtaining the express written consent of the other, (b) neither party be permitted to authorise the children or any of them attending upon a psychologist or psychiatrist for assessment or treatment without first obtaining the written consent of the other, (c) neither party be permitted to authorise the children or any of them receiving any irreversible medical treatment and/or undergoing any operation without first obtaining the written consent of the other, and (d) neither party be permitted to facilitate the children or any of them participating in any religious ceremony which confers upon that child a religious position, right or sacrament (for example — baptism, first holy communion, confirmation, anointing ceremony) without first obtaining the written consent of the other and inviting the other to attend such event including details as to the time and date of the event. if the parties are unable to reach agreement as to how to exercise parental responsibility jointly, the following process shall apply: (a) the father shall provide the mother with a written outline as to his preference in respect of the decision to be made including the basis upon which his preference has been arrived at ("the father's preference"), (b) within 7 days of receiving the father's preference, the mother shall provide the father with a written outline as to her preference in respect of the decision to be made including the basis upon which her preference has been arrived at ("the mother's preference"), and (c) if after the exchange of preferences the parties cannot reach agreement within a further 7 days, the parties attend at their equal and shared expense upon an agreed fdr practitioner for the purpose of receiving assistance in negotiating an outcome for the children, and (d) if the parties cannot agree as to the identity of the fdr practitioner, the fdr practitioner shall be as chosen by the mother from the father's list of three. the children live with the father and the mother on a "week about" basis with changeovers to occur at school each monday, with the parent whose time is concluding to drop the children to school at the beginning of the school day, and the parent whose time is commencing to collect the children at the end of the school day. the "week about" arrangement in order 3 4 shall continue throughout the end of term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays.   neither party be permitted to authorise the children or any of them attending upon a psychologist or psychiatrist for assessment or treatment without first obtaining the written consent of the other, (c) neither party be permitted to authorise the children or any of them receiving any irreversible medical treatment and/or undergoing any operation without first obtaining the written consent of the other, and (d) neither party be permitted to facilitate the children or any of them participating in any religious ceremony which confers upon that child a religious position, right or sacrament (for example — baptism, first holy communion, confirmation, anointing ceremony) without first obtaining the written consent of the other and inviting the other to attend such event including details as to the time and date of the event. if the parties are unable to reach agreement as to how to exercise parental responsibility jointly, the following process shall apply: (a) the father shall provide the mother with a written outline as to his preference in respect of the decision to be made including the basis upon which his preference has been arrived at ("the father's preference"), (b) within 7 days of receiving the father's preference, the mother shall provide the father with a written outline as to her preference in respect of the decision to be made including the basis upon which her preference has been arrived at ("the mother's preference"), and (c) if after the exchange of preferences the parties cannot reach agreement within a further 7 days, the parties attend at their equal and shared expense upon an agreed fdr practitioner for the purpose of receiving assistance in negotiating an outcome for the children, and (d) if the parties cannot agree as to the identity of the fdr practitioner, the fdr practitioner shall be as chosen by the mother from the father's list of three. the children live with the father and the mother on a "week about" basis with changeovers to occur at school each monday, with the parent whose time is concluding to drop the children to school at the beginning of the school day, and the parent whose time is commencing to collect the children at the end of the school day. the "week about" arrangement in order 3 4 shall continue throughout the end of term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays.   neither party be permitted to authorise the children or any of them receiving any irreversible medical treatment and/or undergoing any operation without first obtaining the written consent of the other, and (d) neither party be permitted to facilitate the children or any of them participating in any religious ceremony which confers upon that child a religious position, right or sacrament (for example — baptism, first holy communion, confirmation, anointing ceremony) without first obtaining the written consent of the other and inviting the other to attend such event including details as to the time and date of the event. if the parties are unable to reach agreement as to how to exercise parental responsibility jointly, the following process shall apply: (a) the father shall provide the mother with a written outline as to his preference in respect of the decision to be made including the basis upon which his preference has been arrived at ("the father's preference"), (b) within 7 days of receiving the father's preference, the mother shall provide the father with a written outline as to her preference in respect of the decision to be made including the basis upon which her preference has been arrived at ("the mother's preference"), and (c) if after the exchange of preferences the parties cannot reach agreement within a further 7 days, the parties attend at their equal and shared expense upon an agreed fdr practitioner for the purpose of receiving assistance in negotiating an outcome for the children, and (d) if the parties cannot agree as to the identity of the fdr practitioner, the fdr practitioner shall be as chosen by the mother from the father's list of three. the children live with the father and the mother on a "week about" basis with changeovers to occur at school each monday, with the parent whose time is concluding to drop the children to school at the beginning of the school day, and the parent whose time is commencing to collect the children at the end of the school day. the "week about" arrangement in order 3 4 shall continue throughout the end of term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays.   the father shall provide the mother with a written outline as to his preference in respect of the decision to be made including the basis upon which his preference has been arrived at ("the father's preference"), (b) within 7 days of receiving the father's preference, the mother shall provide the father with a written outline as to her preference in respect of the decision to be made including the basis upon which her preference has been arrived at ("the mother's preference"), and (c) if after the exchange of preferences the parties cannot reach agreement within a further 7 days, the parties attend at their equal and shared expense upon an agreed fdr practitioner for the purpose of receiving assistance in negotiating an outcome for the children, and (d) if the parties cannot agree as to the identity of the fdr practitioner, the fdr practitioner shall be as chosen by the mother from the father's list of three.   within 7 days of receiving the father's preference, the mother shall provide the father with a written outline as to her preference in respect of the decision to be made including the basis upon which her preference has been arrived at ("the mother's preference"), and (c) if after the exchange of preferences the parties cannot reach agreement within a further 7 days, the parties attend at their equal and shared expense upon an agreed fdr practitioner for the purpose of receiving assistance in negotiating an outcome for the children, and (d) if the parties cannot agree as to the identity of the fdr practitioner, the fdr practitioner shall be as chosen by the mother from the father's list of three.   if after the exchange of preferences the parties cannot reach agreement within a further 7 days, the parties attend at their equal and shared expense upon an agreed fdr practitioner for the purpose of receiving assistance in negotiating an outcome for the children, and (d) if the parties cannot agree as to the identity of the fdr practitioner, the fdr practitioner shall be as chosen by the mother from the father's list of three.   if the parties cannot agree as to the identity of the fdr practitioner, the fdr practitioner shall be as chosen by the mother from the father's list of three.
long summer holidays notwithstanding any other order, the children spend time with the parents during the long summer holidays as follows: (a) in 2022/23 and each alternate year thereafter, with the mother from after school on the last day of school term until 9 am on 9 january, and with the father from 9 am on 9 january until the start of school at the beginning of term. (b) in 2023/24 and each alternate year thereafter, with the father from after school on the last day of school term until 9 am on 9 january, and with the mother from 9 am on 9 january until the start of school at the beginning of term. for the avoidance of doubt, following the long summer holidays, the children will commence spending time with the mother pursuant to order 3 4 from after school on the first day of term 1 in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter and will commence spending time with the father pursuant to order 3 4 from after school on the first day of term 1 in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter. when one or more of the children have a longer summer holiday than the other children, the school holidays are deemed to commence on the latest day any of the children ends school for the year and conclude on the first date any of the children start school the following year. special occasion time notwithstanding any other order, the children shall always spend time: (a) with the father on father's day, from 9 am until the commencement of school the following day. (b) with the mother on mother's day, from 9 am until the commencement of school the following day. (c) with the father on the father's birthday, from after school (or 3 pm) on the father's birthday until before school (or 9 am) the next day. (d) with the mother on the mother's birthday, from after school (or 3 pm) on the mother's birthday until before school (or 9 am) the next day. communication the children shall have telephone or video-call communication with the parent they are not living or spending time with at all reasonable times requested by the children, with the parent the children are living or spending time with to assist the children (if necessary) to place a call to the other parent. both parties are hereby restrained from recording the children's communication with the other parent. each parent, when engaging in written communication regarding the children to third parties, such as schools, medical practitioners, extra-curricular activity providers or any other third party excluding lawyers, must do so wherever possible in electronic form and copy in the other parent on each communication. changeover should the usual monday changeover day during school terms and term school holidays be a public holiday or other non-school day, changeover will occur at 3 pm. changeovers shall always occur at the children's school/s, but where changeovers occur on a day where the children or any of them are not attending school, changeovers shall occur outside [[b school]] ... until 31 december 2027. from 1 january 2028, where changeovers occur on a day where the children or any of them are not attending school, changeovers shall occur outside the agreed high school the children will be attending. medical each party shall notify the other immediately of any serious injury or illness requiring the children, or any of them, to attend a hospital, and the detail of which hospital the children or child is attending. each party shall notify the other by telephone as soon as practicable (and always within 24 hours) of any other illness or injury the children or any of them may suffer in their respective care and the detail of any medical practitioner that the child has attended upon and do all such acts and things to authorise the other parent to discuss the children/s diagnosis, prognosis and treatment with his or her treating health practitioner. each party will be at liberty to attend any specialist or allied health medical appointment for the children or any of them and attend at any hospital where the children or any of them are in the emergency department or have been admitted. each party must communicate with the other party before 12 noon if the children or any of them are not attending school due to illness. should the children or any of them fall unwell at school on a changeover day, the parent due to commence spending time with that child/ren that afternoon shall be entitled to and responsible for collecting the child/ren from school upon the request of the school for the child/ren to leave early. should the children or any of them fall unwell prior to attending school on a changeover day, the child/ren shall remain with the parent he or she was already spending time with until 3 pm that afternoon. schooling each of the children shall remain at [[b school]] until the completion of their primary schooling at the end of year 6. each of the children shall be enrolled at a high school to be agreed for the entirety of their high schooling from years 7 to 12. travel each party will be at liberty to take the children out of australia for holiday during the children's time with them, provided: (a) the children are not taken to an overseas destination where the australian government warning for that destination is 'reconsider travel' or do not travel'   in 2022/23 and each alternate year thereafter, with the mother from after school on the last day of school term until 9 am on 9 january, and with the father from 9 am on 9 january until the start of school at the beginning of term. (b) in 2023/24 and each alternate year thereafter, with the father from after school on the last day of school term until 9 am on 9 january, and with the mother from 9 am on 9 january until the start of school at the beginning of term.   in 2023/24 and each alternate year thereafter, with the father from after school on the last day of school term until 9 am on 9 january, and with the mother from 9 am on 9 january until the start of school at the beginning of term.   with the father on father's day, from 9 am until the commencement of school the following day. (b) with the mother on mother's day, from 9 am until the commencement of school the following day. (c) with the father on the father's birthday, from after school (or 3 pm) on the father's birthday until before school (or 9 am) the next day. (d) with the mother on the mother's birthday, from after school (or 3 pm) on the mother's birthday until before school (or 9 am) the next day.   with the mother on mother's day, from 9 am until the commencement of school the following day. (c) with the father on the father's birthday, from after school (or 3 pm) on the father's birthday until before school (or 9 am) the next day. (d) with the mother on the mother's birthday, from after school (or 3 pm) on the mother's birthday until before school (or 9 am) the next day.   with the father on the father's birthday, from after school (or 3 pm) on the father's birthday until before school (or 9 am) the next day. (d) with the mother on the mother's birthday, from after school (or 3 pm) on the mother's birthday until before school (or 9 am) the next day.   with the mother on the mother's birthday, from after school (or 3 pm) on the mother's birthday until before school (or 9 am) the next day.   the children are not taken to an overseas destination where the australian government warning for that destination is 'reconsider travel' or do not travel'
or equivalent warning. (b) the party taking the children overseas (travelling parent) provides the other party with no less than 30 days' written notice of the planned travel. (c) the travelling parent provides the other party with a detailed travel itinerary and contact details for the children while they are overseas, including flight numbers, dates and times for all airline travel and the towns/cities in which the children will be staying on each day of the holiday. (d) the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas. in addition, each party will be at liberty to take the children out of australia for holiday for a four week block period on a maximum of one occasion each year, on the following conditions: (a) the parent proposing the travel must provide the other parent with no less than 56 days' written notice of their intention to travel. (b) the proposed travel period must include a school holiday period the children would have spent with the parent proposing the travel. (c) the children will spend make-up time with the non-travelling parent for all time missed in the four weeks before or the four weeks after the travel period. (d) the conditions in orders 22(a), 22(c) and 22(d) of these orders are also met. in addition, each party will be at liberty to take the children out of australia in the case of the serious illness or imminent death or funeral of a family member (including family members of the parties' partners) who lives overseas, for the purpose of visiting the family member and/or attending the funeral, with the following to apply: (a) the parent proposing the travel must provide as much notice as possible to the other parent of the intention to travel. (b) the non-travelling parent must not unreasonably withhold the children from travelling as proposed. (c) should the travel be occurring with the father, the mother must provide the children's passports to the father forthwith after being advised of the intention to travel. (d) the children will spend make-up time with the non-travelling parent for all time missed in the four weeks after the travel period. (e) the travelling parent provides the other party with a detailed travel itinerary and contact details for the children while they are overseas, including flight numbers, dates and times for all airline travel and the towns/cities in which the children will be staying on each day of the holiday. (f) the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas. each party will do all things as may be required to obtain and renew australian passports for the children, with the following process to apply: (a) either parent may initiate the passport renewal process. (b) when the other parent receives a partially completed passport renewal form/s for the children from the renewing parent, the other parent must finalise completion of their required section and return the form/s to the renewing parent within 14 days of receipt. (c) the renewing parent must lodge the renewal forms and pay the cost of renewal within 14 days of receipt of the fully completed documents. (d) the renewing parent must provide a copy of the receipt for the cost of the renewals to the other parent within 28 days of obtaining the new passports, as well as their bank details to receive reimbursement. (e) the other parent must reimburse half the cost to the renewing parent within 14 days of receiving the receipt, via direct bank deposit. when the children are not travelling overseas, the mother will hold the children's passports provided that she will make the passports available to the father at least 30 days prior to any planned overseas travel by the father with the children, and for the purpose of the father obtaining any visas for the children to travel, and the father will return the passports to the mother within 7 days of the children returning from overseas travel. the mother shall obtain and provide to the father a photocopy of the children's passports within 7 days of receiving new or renewed passports of the children.   the party taking the children overseas (travelling parent) provides the other party with no less than 30 days' written notice of the planned travel. (c) the travelling parent provides the other party with a detailed travel itinerary and contact details for the children while they are overseas, including flight numbers, dates and times for all airline travel and the towns/cities in which the children will be staying on each day of the holiday. (d) the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas.   the travelling parent provides the other party with a detailed travel itinerary and contact details for the children while they are overseas, including flight numbers, dates and times for all airline travel and the towns/cities in which the children will be staying on each day of the holiday. (d) the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas.   the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas.   the parent proposing the travel must provide the other parent with no less than 56 days' written notice of their intention to travel. (b) the proposed travel period must include a school holiday period the children would have spent with the parent proposing the travel. (c) the children will spend make-up time with the non-travelling parent for all time missed in the four weeks before or the four weeks after the travel period. (d) the conditions in orders 22(a), 22(c) and 22(d) of these orders are also met.   the proposed travel period must include a school holiday period the children would have spent with the parent proposing the travel. (c) the children will spend make-up time with the non-travelling parent for all time missed in the four weeks before or the four weeks after the travel period. (d) the conditions in orders 22(a), 22(c) and 22(d) of these orders are also met.   the children will spend make-up time with the non-travelling parent for all time missed in the four weeks before or the four weeks after the travel period. (d) the conditions in orders 22(a), 22(c) and 22(d) of these orders are also met.   the conditions in orders 22(a), 22(c) and 22(d) of these orders are also met.   the parent proposing the travel must provide as much notice as possible to the other parent of the intention to travel. (b) the non-travelling parent must not unreasonably withhold the children from travelling as proposed. (c) should the travel be occurring with the father, the mother must provide the children's passports to the father forthwith after being advised of the intention to travel. (d) the children will spend make-up time with the non-travelling parent for all time missed in the four weeks after the travel period. (e) the travelling parent provides the other party with a detailed travel itinerary and contact details for the children while they are overseas, including flight numbers, dates and times for all airline travel and the towns/cities in which the children will be staying on each day of the holiday. (f) the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas.   the non-travelling parent must not unreasonably withhold the children from travelling as proposed. (c) should the travel be occurring with the father, the mother must provide the children's passports to the father forthwith after being advised of the intention to travel. (d) the children will spend make-up time with the non-travelling parent for all time missed in the four weeks after the travel period. (e) the travelling parent provides the other party with a detailed travel itinerary and contact details for the children while they are overseas, including flight numbers, dates and times for all airline travel and the towns/cities in which the children will be staying on each day of the holiday. (f) the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas.   should the travel be occurring with the father, the mother must provide the children's passports to the father forthwith after being advised of the intention to travel. (d) the children will spend make-up time with the non-travelling parent for all time missed in the four weeks after the travel period. (e) the travelling parent provides the other party with a detailed travel itinerary and contact details for the children while they are overseas, including flight numbers, dates and times for all airline travel and the towns/cities in which the children will be staying on each day of the holiday. (f) the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas.   the children will spend make-up time with the non-travelling parent for all time missed in the four weeks after the travel period. (e) the travelling parent provides the other party with a detailed travel itinerary and contact details for the children while they are overseas, including flight numbers, dates and times for all airline travel and the towns/cities in which the children will be staying on each day of the holiday. (f) the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas.   the travelling parent provides the other party with a detailed travel itinerary and contact details for the children while they are overseas, including flight numbers, dates and times for all airline travel and the towns/cities in which the children will be staying on each day of the holiday. (f) the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas.   the travelling parent facilitates communication between the children and the other parent while the children are overseas.   when the other parent receives a partially completed passport renewal form/s for the children from the renewing parent, the other parent must finalise completion of their required section and return the form/s to the renewing parent within 14 days of receipt. (c) the renewing parent must lodge the renewal forms and pay the cost of renewal within 14 days of receipt of the fully completed documents. (d) the renewing parent must provide a copy of the receipt for the cost of the renewals to the other parent within 28 days of obtaining the new passports, as well as their bank details to receive reimbursement. (e) the other parent must reimburse half the cost to the renewing parent within 14 days of receiving the receipt, via direct bank deposit.   the renewing parent must lodge the renewal forms and pay the cost of renewal within 14 days of receipt of the fully completed documents. (d) the renewing parent must provide a copy of the receipt for the cost of the renewals to the other parent within 28 days of obtaining the new passports, as well as their bank details to receive reimbursement. (e) the other parent must reimburse half the cost to the renewing parent within 14 days of receiving the receipt, via direct bank deposit.   the renewing parent must provide a copy of the receipt for the cost of the renewals to the other parent within 28 days of obtaining the new passports, as well as their bank details to receive reimbursement. (e) the other parent must reimburse half the cost to the renewing parent within 14 days of receiving the receipt, via direct bank deposit.   the other parent must reimburse half the cost to the renewing parent within 14 days of receiving the receipt, via direct bank deposit.
ancillary orders each party shall keep the other advised of their current residential address, contact telephone number and email address. without admission of the necessity for same, the parties be and are hereby restrained from: (a) denigrating one another or any other member of the children's family within the presence or hearing of the children, or permitting any other person to do so. (b) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so. (c) committing any form of family violence against or inflicting physical discipline upon the children or permitting any other person to do so. each party will be entitled to receive all school newsletters, notices, reports, photograph order forms and other documents for the children that are ordinarily provided to parents and to the extent it may be necessary, each party will authorise the children's school/s to provide such documents to the other party. each party will be at liberty to attend school events to which parents are ordinarily invited, regardless of whether the children are in their care during the event. neither party may enrol the children in any extra-curricular activities requiring the attendance of the children during the time the children are in the care of the other party, without the other party's written consent. each party will be at liberty to attend the children's extra-curricular events, such as sporting competitions, concerts, etc. regardless of whether the children are in their care during the event. for the purpose of receiving information about the children's extra-curricular activities: (a) the parties shall utilise the email address [email address 1], to which both will have full access, to be given to all providers to receive all information, invoices, draws and other necessary correspondence about the activity/ies. (b) neither parent shall be permitted to delete any received email or sent email from the email address, without the written consent of the other parent. (c) should a provider utilise an app or opt-in service to provide information about the activity, each parent shall do all things necessary to ensure that the other parent is provided with their own separate log on to the app (if available) or provide the relevant password to the app if only one log on is available. each party will be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to any child care or school the children attend, or any medical practitioner treating the children, and these orders are authority for any of those organisations or persons to communicate with both parents in relation to the children. each party will ensure that the other parent is listed as the first emergency contact and next of kin with any organisation that requires an emergency contact or next of kin, before listing any other person as an emergency contact or next of kin. on any occasion the parties agree or are required to equally contribute to the cost of an item or service for the children, they agree that the following process shall apply: (a) the parent paying the cost at first instance (paying parent) will pay the full cost. (b) the paying parent must provide a copy of the receipt for the cost to the other parent within 28 days of paying the cost, as well as their bank details to receive reimbursement. (c) the other parent must reimburse half the cost to the paying parent within 14 days of receiving the receipt, via direct bank deposit.   denigrating one another or any other member of the children's family within the presence or hearing of the children, or permitting any other person to do so. (b) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so. (c) committing any form of family violence against or inflicting physical discipline upon the children or permitting any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so. (c) committing any form of family violence against or inflicting physical discipline upon the children or permitting any other person to do so.   committing any form of family violence against or inflicting physical discipline upon the children or permitting any other person to do so.   the parties shall utilise the email address [email address 1], to which both will have full access, to be given to all providers to receive all information, invoices, draws and other necessary correspondence about the activity/ies. (b) neither parent shall be permitted to delete any received email or sent email from the email address, without the written consent of the other parent. (c) should a provider utilise an app or opt-in service to provide information about the activity, each parent shall do all things necessary to ensure that the other parent is provided with their own separate log on to the app (if available) or provide the relevant password to the app if only one log on is available.   neither parent shall be permitted to delete any received email or sent email from the email address, without the written consent of the other parent. (c) should a provider utilise an app or opt-in service to provide information about the activity, each parent shall do all things necessary to ensure that the other parent is provided with their own separate log on to the app (if available) or provide the relevant password to the app if only one log on is available.   should a provider utilise an app or opt-in service to provide information about the activity, each parent shall do all things necessary to ensure that the other parent is provided with their own separate log on to the app (if available) or provide the relevant password to the app if only one log on is available.   the parent paying the cost at first instance (paying parent) will pay the full cost. (b) the paying parent must provide a copy of the receipt for the cost to the other parent within 28 days of paying the cost, as well as their bank details to receive reimbursement. (c) the other parent must reimburse half the cost to the paying parent within 14 days of receiving the receipt, via direct bank deposit.   the paying parent must provide a copy of the receipt for the cost to the other parent within 28 days of paying the cost, as well as their bank details to receive reimbursement. (c) the other parent must reimburse half the cost to the paying parent within 14 days of receiving the receipt, via direct bank deposit.   the other parent must reimburse half the cost to the paying parent within 14 days of receiving the receipt, via direct bank deposit.
... this is in relation to a parenting plan the wife drew up herself which is controlling and dictatorial and has been the catalyst for me issuing these proceedings. ... decisions regarding the children are not jointly made, but made unilaterally by the wife. i am rarely informed when the children are taken to the doctor or when they are ill and i had not involvement or discussion with the wife about [child 1’s] primary school enrolment. the wife threatens and tries to intimidate and blackmail me into agreeing with her demands when things do not go her way. the wife is a compulsive liar and her messages about the children can also be inconsistent. ... an example of her lying, was when she told me on thursday, 13 october 2016 that she could not attend one of the meetings we had organised because our daughter [child 1] had been suspended from daycare and she was looking after her. as i was concerned as to why [child 1] had been suspended, i contacted the daycare and asked why [child 1] had been suspended? i was told that she had not been suspended and was in attendance that day. i then went to the daycare to see [child 1] and to speak to her. i sent the wife a photograph via text message of [child 1] at daycare to show her that i knew she had lied to me.
application of the law
change of circumstances
...the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it is based.
likelihood of orders being varied
...whether there is a likelihood of the orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing.
the nature of the likely changes weighed against detriment
interim application
associate: dated: 19 july 2022
dated: 19 july 2022