last updated: 11 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
manzo & tripodi [2022] fedcfamc2f 785
orders
the court orders that:  to commence on 12 june 2022, every second sunday from 9am – 1pm for 3 months with a paternal grandparent or sibling of the father present. (b) thereafter, (i) for three (3) months, every second sunday from 9am to 1pm without supervision and then, (ii) for six (6) months, every alternate weekend from 9am on saturday to 5pm on sunday and then, (iii) from 7pm friday to 7pm sunday, every alternate weekend thereafter.   thereafter, (i) for three (3) months, every second sunday from 9am to 1pm without supervision and then, (ii) for six (6) months, every alternate weekend from 9am on saturday to 5pm on sunday and then, (iii) from 7pm friday to 7pm sunday, every alternate weekend thereafter.   for three (3) months, every second sunday from 9am to 1pm without supervision and then, (ii) for six (6) months, every alternate weekend from 9am on saturday to 5pm on sunday and then, (iii) from 7pm friday to 7pm sunday, every alternate weekend thereafter.  ) for six (6) months, every alternate weekend from 9am on saturday to 5pm on sunday and then, (iii) from 7pm friday to 7pm sunday, every alternate weekend thereafter.  i) from 7pm friday to 7pm sunday, every alternate weekend thereafter.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other party and, (b) discussing these proceedings or the content of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the child or any of them, and from permitting any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings or the content of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the child or any of them, and from permitting any other person to do so.   inform the other party fourteen (14) days before the travel is to take place.
reasons for judgment
judge street:
introduction
if the respondent mother fails to comply with the court’s orders, the matter may proceed on the next occasion as an undefended hearing, where the court may make orders regarding the children.
the evidence
the law
the findings
associate: dated: 21 june 2022
dated: 21 june 2022