last updated: 11 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia  ision 2)
spence & spence [2022] fedcfamc2f 802
orders
the court orders that:  the marriage is proved, (b) the husband was at all material times an australian citizen and domiciled in australia, and (c) the ground for the application for divorce order, namely that the marriage has broken down irretrievably is proved.   the husband was at all material times an australian citizen and domiciled in australia, and (c) the ground for the application for divorce order, namely that the marriage has broken down irretrievably is proved.   the ground for the application for divorce order, namely that the marriage has broken down irretrievably is proved.
the court declares that:
reasons for judgment
judge blake:
introduction
principles
48 divorce   an application under this act for a divorce order in relation to a marriage shall be based on the ground that the marriage has broken down irretrievably. (2) subject to subsection (3), in a proceeding instituted by such an application, the ground shall be held to have been established, and the divorce order shall be made, if, and only if, the court is satisfied that the parties separated and thereafter lived separately and apart for a continuous period of not less than 12 months immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for the divorce order. (3) a divorce order shall not be made if the court is satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood of cohabitation being resumed.   subject to subsection (3), in a proceeding instituted by such an application, the ground shall be held to have been established, and the divorce order shall be made, if, and only if, the court is satisfied that the parties separated and thereafter lived separately and apart for a continuous period of not less than 12 months immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for the divorce order. (3) a divorce order shall not be made if the court is satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood of cohabitation being resumed.   a divorce order shall not be made if the court is satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood of cohabitation being resumed.
is there jurisdiction to make the order?
is the marriage proved?
has the marriage broken down irretriveably?
are there children of the marriage?
conclusion
associate: dated: 21 june 2022
dated: 21 june 2022