last updated: 7 october 2021
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
beckstead & beckstead [2021] fedcfamc2f 136
orders
the court orders that:
1. it is declared that the financial agreement signed by the husband and the wife on or about 24 june 2006 is not binding within the meaning of s 90g of the family law act 1975 (cth).
2. the proceeding is adjourned for directions hearing on 16 november 2021 at 9.45am.
it is noted that publication of this judgment under the pseudonym beckstead & beckstead is approved pursuant to s.121(9)(g) of the family law act 1975 (cth).
reasons for judgmentjudge harland:
introduction
1 on 17 july 2019, mr beckstead, (“the husband”) filed an initiating application seeking a declaration that the financial agreement the parties entered into on 24 june 2006 is a binding financial agreement (“bfa”). by response filed on 12 september 2019, ms beckstead, (“the wife”) seeks a declaration that the financial agreement is not binding.
2 the husband unsuccessfully sought to join ms b, the wife’s former lawyer, to the proceedings prior to the preliminary hearing to determine whether or not the financial agreement should be declared binding or not. my reasons dated 25 march 2021 with respect to that application and my reasons dated 28 june 2021 with respect to the resulting costs application should be read with these for background.
3 for the purpose of this hearing the parties agreed that the wife is the applicant as she seeks to set aside the financial agreement.
background
4 the wife was born 1954 in d city, country e and arrived in australia in 1967. she is now a permanent resident. the wife has been employed as a full-time office worker for 13 and a half years, currently earning approximately $56,200 gross per annum.
5 the husband was born 1958 and is self-employed as the sole director of f pty ltd (“f pty ltd”). the husband described his education and vocational experience in his affidavit which include developing a business now known as f pty ltd with his business partner ms g in july 1999.
6 the parties met in june 2000, shortly following the establishment of f pty ltd. the wife purchased h court, suburb i (“the suburb i property”) in approximately december 2000.
7 the parties commenced cohabitation in mid-2001 and were married in 2006. the parties separated in may 2017 and there were no children of the marriage. both parties have adult children from their previous marriage. the parties divorced in january 2019.
cohabitation agreement of 2002
8 the parties signed a cohabitation agreement on 26 june 2002 with the husband’s business partner, ms b, as the witness. the cohabitation agreement was prepared by ms b after she had suggested to the husband that the parties enter into an agreement for the purpose of agreeing to not make a claim against the other party’s pre-existing assets, which includes the husband’s business, if they were to separate. the husband said he showed the cohabitation agreement to the wife and she was happy to sign the document.
9 the cohabitation agreement outlines that the parties have agreed to live in a de facto relationship and they both agree that all assets owned by each party as at 9 february 2002 together with all assets accumulated by either party by whatever means after that date, shall remain the assets of the party concerned. further, it states that all income derived by either party shall remain the income of the person who earns the income and that both parties as agreed shall pay day to day living expenses incurred collectively by the parties. the cohabitation agreement says that in the event both parties acquire an asset jointly then both parties have agreed to either liquidate the asset or offer each other the option to buy out the other party. further, if a dispute arises, they agree to appoint an independent arbitrator.
10 the parties agree this agreement is not enforceable. the husband relies on it to refute any suggestion that the wife was pressured into entering into the bfa.
the terms of the bfa
11 in summary, the bfa provides for each of the parties to retain property they owned individually prior to the marriage. the husband’s business and corporate entities are specifically mentioned. the parties will also keep any property they acquire individually during the relationship. the bfa identifies the real estate each party owns at the date of signing the financial agreement. the bfa records the fact that the parties have an interest in the suburb i property owned by the wife. they intend to continue living at the suburb i property and the wife will be solely responsible for the mortgage, rates and repairs. they agree to otherwise equally share their living expenses. the parties may buy property together in the future. if they do purchase property together, upon the breakdown of the marriage, the agreement provides for them to divide that property equally.
12 the certificates of independent legal advice, signed by ms b for the wife and signed by mr c of k lawyers for the husband, are annexed to the agreement and the parties acknowledge receiving that advice at recital s. the wife concedes that the certificate of advice by mr c is prima facie evidence that the husband received the requisite legal advice.
13 both counsel refer to the comments in hoult & hoult [2013] famcafc 109, (2013) 50 fam lr 260 (“hoult & hoult”) with respect to the evidentiary onus. the wording in s 90g(1) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”) clearly refers to an agreement being binding “if and only if” the requirements of that section have been complied with. accordingly, as the husband seeks to establish the financial agreement is binding he has the onus of establishing those matters. however, as the inference drawn from the certificates of independent legal advice is that the requisite advice was given, the wife bears the forensic obligation to “disprove, or at least throw into doubt the inference or conclusion to be drawn from the certificate”[1]. the wife submits she has met this criteria.
14 the husband submits that the wife was given independent legal advice and alternatively if she did not, the bfa should still be declared binding pursuant to s 90g(1a)(c) of the act.
the wife’s case
15 the wife relied upon the following documents: response to initiating application filed on 12 september 2019, contentions of fact and law filed on 6 november 2020, financial statement of the wife filed on 25 may 2021, trial affidavit of the wife filed on 25 may 2021, affidavit in reply of the wife filed on 17 june 2021, contentions of fact and law filed on 18 june 2021, contentions of fact and law in reply filed on 2 july 2021, case outline of the wife filed on 2 july 2021.
16 the wife seeks to set aside the agreement on a number of grounds being: she did not receive the requisite independent legal advice s 90g(1)(b) of the act. she challenges both its independence and that she received the required advice, (b) the agreement contains several errors which cannot be cured by rectification, (c) the agreement is void for uncertainty under s 90k(1)(b) of the act. she identifies several clauses which she says are vague and uncertain, (d) the agreement should be set aside due to fraud or material non-disclosure by the husband under s 90ka(1)(a) of the act, (e) the agreement should be set aside due to the husband’s unconscionable conduct under s 90ka(1)(e) of the act.
17 the last two points can be quickly disposed of as the evidence falls far short of what is required in order to run such an argument and this was acknowledged by the wife’s counsel, ms fisken. having heard the evidence and having the benefit of seeing the parties give evidence, i am not satisfied that any case for fraud, material non-material disclosure or unconscionability has been made out. the evidence does not support the wife’s contention that the dynamic of the relationship between the husband and wife was such that she was meek and mild and the husband was a dominant, sophisticated businessman. ms fisken says the husband is familiar with family law processes as a result of his separation from his former wife and his business background. in this regard and in her closing submissions, counsel properly conceded that the evidence did not support a case for unconscionability. ms fisken submitted there was a certain dynamic within the relationship and that it was obvious from the way the parties presented in the witness box and also the way is appears to have occurred at the interview of the engagement of ms b. counsel for the wife properly agreed in closing submissions that it was “a bridge too far” to suggest the wife was under duress or undue influence in signing the financial agreement. i do not accept that the parties presented in such a way in the evidence to suggest a relationship dynamic that has any relevance to the issues i must determine.
18 in any event, considerably more evidence would be required in order to meet the threshold to satisfy the court that the agreement should be set aside under ss 90ka(1)(a) or 90ka(1)(e) of the act.
19 the wife’s case is also largely based on who ms b acted for. ms fisken indicated that whilst it is ms b’s signature on the certificate of independent legal advice on behalf of the wife, the evidence suggests that the husband engaged ms b after selecting her firm from a list of practitioners, the husband had the initial meeting with ms b and that his own evidence suggests he believed she was acting on his behalf. ms fisken went further and submitted that upon the recent production of documents from ms b’s files, there is evidence that lists the husband’s contact details and not the wife’s and also that any communication ms b had in relation to the financial agreement was with the husband and not the wife.
20 ms fisken submitted that there is evidence before the court of the meeting on 24 june 2006 and specifically that the evidence is in the form of an undated handwritten file note of ms b. the file note is marked exhibit 11. counsel for the wife submitted that it is not clear from reading the file note that the advice given was real and meaningful as discussed by alstergren cj in kaimal & kaimal [2020] famca 971 (“kaimal & kaimal”).
21 counsel for the wife submitted that her position is that if it is found the wife did not receive the requisite independent legal advice, then it becomes a question of whether or not the financial agreement can be saved. she argues that it should not be saved.
the husband’s case
22 the husband relied upon the following documents: contentions of fact and law filed on 28 june 2021, initiating application of the husband filed on 17 july 2019, affidavit and annexures of the husband filed on 7 june 2021, financial statement of the husband filed on 3 june 2021, application in a case of the husband filed on 28 june 2021, affidavit of husband in support of application in a case annexing affidavit of ms l filed on 17 june 2021.
23 the husband argues that the financial agreement is binding. he says they both received independent legal advice as evidenced by the certificates. the bfa is not vague and uncertain and the errors can be rectified. he further argues that in the event the court is satisfied that s 90g(1)(b) has not been complied with, the court should find that it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding and relies on s 90g(1a). he argues that both parties acted consistently with the terms of the bfa.
24 the parties entered into the cohabitation agreement in 2002 and signed the financial agreement in 2006. ms costello qc says the husband’s evidence is that the wife agreed to sign both and whilst there is no contention that the cohabitation agreement was not binding, rather simply, that it was evidence of intention at the time of signing that agreement. the husband argues that it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement is not enforced as they have acted consistently in accordance with the terms of the bfa for many years.
25 the husband relied on the affidavit of mr c, the solicitor he attended upon to receive advice with respect to the bfa. mr c confirms that it was his signature on the certificate of independent legal advice, which is prima facie evidence that the advice was received. he was not required for cross-examination. the issue with respect to legal advice is concerned with the advice the wife received.
26 ms b, the solicitor who prepared the agreement and gave the wife advice was subpoenaed to give evidence and was cross-examined.
27 ms costello qc commenced her opening submissions for the husband by stating that the husband relied upon his wife’s entry into the cohabitation and bfa and also that ms b explained the process to him. based on this, he assumed that the financial agreement was binding.
28 senior counsel for the husband acknowledged that whilst the cohabitation agreement is not binding, in the context of the husband’s evidence, it demonstrates evidence of intention to enter into such agreement by both parties. ms costello qc went on to submit that the main issue in this case is whether independent legal advice regarding the requisite matters was given and if the court finds it was not, then the agreement should still be enforced. this would require rectification of the reference to the sections, being s 90b to s 90c of the act.
29 ms costello qc submitted the husband’s case is that he contacted ms b to enquire as to whether she could provide the services required, being wills, powers of attorney and a financial agreement. she submits the bartercard aspect has not been reported in case law and she describes it as being not the most lucrative file for a lawyer.
30 ms costello qc submitted that ultimately the file was opened in the name “ms beckstead” being the wife and that whilst correspondence was sent to the wife via the husband, this was done so in circumstances where they were in the “happy stage” of their relationship. senior counsel submits that the intention of parliament is that a bfa can be saved and the court can uphold it despite non-compliance with the independent legal advice.
31 ms costello qc put forward that looking at the wife’s case, there is a lack of evidence regarding time pressure for her to enter into such agreement. further, senior counsel submitted that what this case presents is the wife “having buyer’s remorse over the financial agreement” because the husband’s business ultimately succeeded. at the time of the parties’ entering into the cohabitation agreement and the financial agreement, the husband’s business was still in its relative infancy. there is merit in this submission.
32 ms costello qc submitted that the wife has not presented any witnesses to support her case whereas the husband has the evidence of ms l, his daughter. she submits that this evidence is significant with respect to the fact that the wife said they entered into an arrangement whereby the parties’ kept their finances separate. ms costello qc submits that ms l paid rent to the wife. counsel further submits that the fact ms l paid rent to the wife is evidence that corroborates the fact the parties entered into an arrangement in which they kept their finances separate.
33 senior counsel for the husband referred to page four of the bfa stating that they rely on their personal knowledge of the financial affairs of each other in making the agreement. ms costello qc submits that the wife’s case is that, although she was unaware of the husband’s financial circumstances at the time of signing, the parties were open and transparent about their financial affairs. the husband’s case is that it was the wife who was disinterested as to his financial circumstances, rather than his lack of disclosure. on that basis however, counsel submits that the financial agreement was prepared based on instructions given by the husband in front of the wife.
34 in the event the court finds that the wife did not receive independent legal advice, the husband submits that the agreement should still be declared binding for reasons which i discuss in detail later.
the engagement of ms b and her evidence
the bartercard referral service
35 the husband found ms b through the bartercard referral service as he sought to engage a lawyer who would accept bartercard payments for their legal services.
36 in his affidavit, the husband explains the bartercard system. businesses can join bartercard for a membership fee and in exchange, bartercard provides a referral service to the members who will accept bartercard payments for goods and services. his business joined bartercard in june 1999. the husband’s business receives significant referrals through the bartercard system and bartercard currency cannot be converted into cash. the husband uses the bartercard currency at places where it is accepted.
37 before the first appointment, the husband called ms b’s office to enquire as to whether or not she would accept bartercard payments for her legal services.
38 it was in his trial affidavit, the husband claims for the first time that he telephoned ms b and had a substantive conversation with her prior to their initial meeting. he says he asked her three questions, namely: could she prepare a financial agreement for both the wife and him? (2) would she accept payment through the bartercard system? (3) how much would it cost?
39 ms b has no recollection of speaking to the husband prior to the initial appointment with both parties. she said that if a potential client telephoned her enquiring about a bfa she would not have both parties attend the meeting and this would have been communicated during the call. with respect to matters paid through bartercard, ms b said that usually a client would contact the firm to enquire as to whether or not the firm accepts fees being paid using bartercard.
40 ms b has some independent recollection of the initial meeting with the husband and the wife because of it being an enquiry through bartercard and recalls becoming aware the parties were seeking a bfa at that first appointment. she also recalls her concerns about the husband and wife attending the first appointment together. ms b said it was very unusual for two clients to attend a first appointment seeking a bfa. she commented that she could not recall it occurring previously.
ms b’s file
41 ms b produced her files in answer to a subpoena that was issued on 22 october 2019. ms b produced further documents she found in 2021 shortly before the trial including two manila folders, one labelled “ms beckstead” and another labelled “mr beckstead”. the husband’s folder contained documents regarding his will, although did not include an initial instruction sheet.
42 given the importance of the file to the issue of the independence of the advice and whether the requisite advice was given, i will set out the following chronology from the file:
date
description
31 january 2006
the husband and wife attend at ms b’s office for a first appointment.
20 march 2006
ms b forwards a letter to the wife, care of the husband addressed to “ms beckstead” and “mr beckstead”. the letter encloses an account in the sum of $1,197.90 for work completed to date.
3 april 2006
ms b forwards a letter to ms beckstead, care of mr beckstead addressed to “ms beckstead” and “mr beckstead”. the letter requests instructions be provided with respect to the bfa and makes reference to the account forwarded on 20 march 2006.
12 april 2006
ms b emails mr beckstead advising that the final draft of the bfa will be forwarded by no later than tomorrow, then express posted to mr beckstead’s lawyer. ms b suggests to mr beckstead that he make an appointment with his lawyer later in the week and that an appointment can be made with ms beckstead after hours for the purposes of signing the agreement.
15 april 2006
ms b emails mr beckstead, addressing both ms beckstead and mr beckstead, enclosing the final draft bfa and asking for clarification with respect to the spelling of a trust name in one of the clauses.
22 may 2006
ms b forwards a letter to ms beckstead, care of mr beckstead addressed to “ms beckstead” and “mr beckstead”. ms b indicates her firm is still awaiting confirmation as to where to forward the final draft of the bfa so that mr beckstead can have the same signed in front of his solicitor. she further refers to a conversation with ms m from her office about providing a bartercard customer number. she further advises that the payment has now been authorised and asks for the enclosed voucher to be signed and returned.
12 june 2006
mr beckstead emails ms b advising he has a copy of the bfa signed and asking for an appointment to be made for ms beckstead to have the bfa explained to her.
30 june 2006
ms m emails mr beckstead, addressing ms beckstead and mr beckstead enclosing drafts of wills and power of attorneys advising mr beckstead’s will be amended and ms b will call him on monday to discuss them – this is around the time of the bfa being drafted.
28 july 2006
ms b emails mr beckstead, addressing only mr beckstead attaching a draft will and advising he might prefer to have another trustee with his brother.
17 august 2006
mr beckstead emails ms b requesting an update with respect to the progress of the wills.
18 august 2006
ms b emails mr beckstead, addressing ms beckstead and mr beckstead advising that the wills are complicated and that they should check them again.
19 august 2006
ms b emails mr beckstead, addressing ms beckstead and mr beckstead about their wills and her concern that one clause in each of their wills was uncertain.
30 august 2006
ms b emails mr beckstead, addressing only mr beckstead, with respect to the re-drafted wills and also payment via bartercard for the invoice in march 2006. ms b refers to the voucher that she enclosed in a letter sent on 22 may 2006.
9 october 2006
mr beckstead emails ms b asking for a quote to undertake conveyancing for the purchase of the suburb i property.
10 october 2006
ms b emails mr beckstead, addressing only mr beckstead with respect to the conveyancing query and payment via bartercard.
5 february 2007
ms b emails mr beckstead, addressing only mr beckstead, with respect to ms beckstead’s will noting amendments to clauses and that she can attend their home to sign. she asks mr beckstead questions about corporate entities referred to in the bfa, asking mr beckstead to provide responses.
mr beckstead emails ms b in response to her queries about the corporate entities.
18 may 2007
ms beckstead’s will is signed.
43 ms b produced her account ledger which lists entries for work completed on the file. it appears from ms b’s notes and her accounts ledger that she did not open separate files for the work undertaken with respect to the wills and powers of attorney. ms b indicated at the time her firm charged hourly rates of $100 for a clerk and $180 for the solicitor. ms b did not record the time spent preparing the wills and powers of attorney because she charged a fixed fee for this work. the accounting program she used at the time showed only her initials recorded and not her clerk’s initials. she said it was likely that it was her clerk who entered the fees when they recorded the clerk’s rate.
44 as part of the file, ms b was questioned about the handwriting on the initial instruction sheet and said she wrote in red “mr beckstead” and the remainder of the handwriting was not hers. she said it was presumably her assistant’s handwriting. it was her practice for her assistant to open a new file for new clients upon attending the first appointment and prepare the initial instruction sheet. the family law file was opened in ms beckstead’s name.
45 ms b does not recall speaking to the husband on the telephone prior to the initial appointment. i accept that it is likely the husband spoke to either ms b or her assistant prior to the initial appointment to make a general enquiry and to enquire about paying by bartercard. however i reject the husband’s evidence that he asked ms b if she could prepare a bfa for them prior to that appointment. i prefer ms b’s evidence in this regard, being that because she knew the clients were referred through bartercard, she assumed that it was a business matter or debt collection. as far as she can recall she only became aware that the husband and wife wanted a bfa at the initial meeting. ms b explained during cross-examination that after the husband and wife identified the type of agreement to be drafted and executed, she advised both of them that she could only act for one of them and the other would need to obtain independent legal advice. it is likely that if ms b was aware that the parties wanted a bfa prior to the initial appointment she would have informed them both that she would only meet with one of them.
46 exhibit 9 includes ms b’s handwritten file note from the initial appointment which is five pages long. she notes that the parties seek a financial agreement, enduring powers of attorney and wills and refers to the parties having lived together for about four and a half years and are getting married in 2006.
47 the file note includes several references to the husband’s business, corporate entities and structures. ms b notes that the business including the companies are to remain the husband’s sole property and that each of them will keep property they owned solely. she also made some notes referring to the parties’ wills. it is clear from this file note that ms b took instructions with respect to the bfa and wills together. there is nothing to indicate that the wife had been identified as the client with respect to the bfa at this point.
48 the initial instruction sheet template includes a checklist list. the checklist provides for a costs letter to be sent to the client within 7 days of the first appointment along with a letter of specific advice within 10 days of receiving initial instructions. there is no evidence from the file produced that a costs letter or retainer agreement was prepared and provided to the client at any stage. reference is made to ms beckstead under the section “our client” care of mr beckstead. it is an agreed fact that the contact details provided on the initial instruction sheet are in fact the husband’s business address, his work phone and mobile numbers and not the wife’s contact details. the husband’s work email was included by hand on the initial instruction sheet. the information for the other party was not typed into the document and the only information appearing in the column for other party is handwritten reference to “mr beckstead” on the first line and “ms beckstead” on the second. it is unclear, based on the initial instruction sheet, how the wife could be both the client and the opposing party. it is unfortunate that this did not cause ms b to identify a potential conflict of interest. no contact information is completed on this side of the form. as such, the only way to contact the wife was through the husband.
49 ms costello qc said that the account had to be addressed to the husband as the payment was by bartercard. this may well be the case, although could have been avoided by having separate contact details or a different file for billing and for the client. it is even more important to be clear as to who the client is and who is not when someone other than the client is responsible for payment. the fact that the husband paid ms b’s bill, arranged the first appointment and took the wife to the second appointment, in and of itself, does not raise the concern about ms b not being independent.
50 ms b’s evidence is that she only issued one invoice during the course of the engagement, on 20 march 2006. much work was never billed. the covering letter is addressed to both the husband and wife and refers to work completed with respect to a binding financial agreement, wills and power of attorney.
who was ms b’s client?
51 ms costello qc asked ms b who she thought was her client with respect to the bfa and ms b responded, “it was my belief that i was acting for ms beckstead.” further, ms b said she was unable to recall the specifics as to how it was decided she would act for the wife and not the husband. nothing turns on whether it was the husband’s suggestion or ms b’s.
52 ms fisken suggested the reference to “our client” in the file note of the initial appointment was in the context of a reference to the n family trust, which in turn, would have been referring to the husband. ms b again said she did not know. she confirmed that reference to “o/c” is a reference to “our client”.
53 an exchange took place between ms costello qc and ms b with respect to her accounts ledger being paid by bartercard and that it does not affect how she records her time. the exchange is set out as follows:
ms costello qc: where you have used the words “our client”, can you tell her honour who you understand that to – to mean?‑‑‑ ms b: i understood that to mean ms beckstead. at the time, ms beckstead, who then married and became ms beckstead beckstead. ms costello qc: did you act for mr mr beckstead in any capacity in 2006? ms b: there was a conveyance, but i don’t know if that was the start – if that happened in – there was a conveyance between mr beckstead and ms beckstead after this file we’re looking at now, and i’m not sure if that started in october of ’06 or 2007. ms costello qc: in respect of wills? ms b: yes. ms costello qc: whose wills did you prepare? ms b: i did prepare wills for both of them. ms costello qc: and in relation to the wills, who were – who was your client? ms b: it was done on the ms beckstead file. so i still considered ms beckstead to be the client. it was done after the binding financial agreement, and my understanding, they were for all intents and purposes sort of mirror wills to reflect the binding financial agreement.
54 reviewing the transcript above the question and answer regarding who her client was with respect to the wills reflects the very problem at issue here. it would be highly artificial and disingenuous to suggest that the husband was the opposing party and not the client with respect to his will. the file contains several drafts of the bfa and both wills which were not mirror wills. ms b obtained instructions for the wills during the initial appointment with both parties present. it is clear from the file and the ledger that these documents were worked on for several months. the work on the wills continued for several months after the bfa was signed and executed. it is incorrect to describe the wills as being incidental to the bfa. clause 4 of the bfa simply provides that either party may make future provision for the other in their wills. it further provides that the bfa will be binding on their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns subject to such a provision for the other being made in their will. there is no obligation on either of them to make a will.
55 even if ms b had obtained instructions with respect to the wills after the bfa was finalised, it would not resolve the conflict arising from acting against former clients as well. it is nonsense to suggest that only the wife was her client with respect to the wills. what this highlights to me is the failure to think critically about who the client is and the scope of the engagement of the client. my impression from the evidence, both oral and written, is that ms b failed to clearly identify the separate interests of the wife. this in turn raises doubt as to whether ms b gave the wife legal advice tailored to her separate interests.
56 unsurprisingly, given it was some 15 years ago, ms b does not have any personal recollection of meeting with the wife to advise her about the bfa and signing the certificate of advice. she gave evidence as to her usual practice. her usual practice being that she signed and dated the certificate of independent legal advice before the client signed the agreement. ms b produced a handwritten file note which she had the wife sign. the file note is one page, undated and does not refer to the length of the conference. the file note refers to ms b advising the wife, as her client, that if the marriage was to break down, the wife will have to claim future needs against the husband. it further includes reference to the agreement being set aside for misrepresentation, undue influence, duress or mistake. also apparent from the file note is ms b writing that she cannot advise on the financial benefit and disadvantage of the agreement. further, that ms b believes the wife is making the agreement freely and understands its terms.
57 the exchange with respect to this is set out as follows:
ms costello qc: ms b, could you tell her honour what your usual practice is in terms of providing independent legal advice to a client who is about to sign, or who has expressed an intention to sign a financial agreement? ms b: okay. so usually, i – i would give them a letter of advice first and have them sign off on that, and then in the meeting, i would go through the financial agreement with the person so they understood what it was they’re not entitled to in the agreement and what they are entitled to. i would outline specifically some agreements in the past people have said, “we rely on each other’s knowledge of what we both own for this agreement,” and if that’s the case, i would make the – the client very aware of that point in the agreement. so – and then explain that they’re entitled to be – have disclosure of all the financial aspects of both parties. i would then as per the certificate go through the advantages and disadvantages, so i would explain that they’re contacting out of part xiii of the family law act and i would explain in layman’s terms what the property settlement would look like if they didn’t have the contract, such as looking at – in layman’s terms, talking about their contributions, financial and non-financial, and their future needs, and i would say that the disadvantage of the agreement is if they contribute something to an asset that they’re not going to get in the agreement, then they’re waiving their right to get part of that asset back, so to speak, and i would then talk about – the most important part i would talk about was the future needs part, and that they’re waiving their rights to have an adjustment for future needs because they’re contracting out of what would be the usual property settlement if they didn’t have the agreement. will i continue? ms costello qc: yes, please? ms b: i would then – i would then talk about on what grounds the contract – sorry, the binding financial agreement. i would explain it in layperson’s terms that it’s like a contract, but there’s certain grounds upon which it can be set aside, and that it’s – and so – so they have got to be aware that it’s likely – it – it can be upheld other than those reasons for being set aside. and so the disadvantages are that they’re contracting out of the part xiii of the family law act, which – well, i – i wouldn’t say part xiii to the – to the client. i would say they’re contracting out of what’s the normal procedure for property settlement without the agreement, and then i would say that the advantages are that you have got certainty and that obviously it’s potentially reducing your costs at the end if you were to separate. but i would also say to them that i can’t advise as to the financial advantages or disadvantages as to the agreement. and i would also sort of gauge as to whether they’re – they’re – firstly, that they understand what they’re signing, and that they’re not under any undue influence or feeling threatened or uncomfortable about signing it, but i would make sure they are signing it freely. ms costello qc: how would [you] gauge that, ms b? ms b: i would just – i suppose through just asking, “do you understand what you are signing? are you okay with signing it? do you understand what i’m saying, that you’re contracting out of the normal sections of property settlement under the family law act?” that’s how i would gauge it. ms costello qc: okay. if you could look at page 27 of the – actually, i will go to the court book version. the financial agreement is at 106 of volume 1 of the court book. i have taken you there before. at recital q on page 109? ms b: yes. ms costello qc: do you see it says:
the parties otherwise rely on their personal knowledge of the financial affairs of each other in making this agreement.
ms b: yes. ms costello qc: can you recall why you put that clause in the agreement?‑‑‑ ms b: i – well, not – i can’t – i can’t recall drafting this agreement but i can only go off my normal practice. ms costello qc: so what would be your usual practice then? ms b: yes. yes. so the normal practice would be that – i mean, they both came in together initially on 31 january, and they both told me – based on a file note that i have looked at previous that’s probably in these documents here, gave me a rough idea as to what they wanted for the binding financial agreement. so based on that, the – it was my understanding they were relying on – on their – each of their knowledge of each other’s financial situation for making the agreement. so that’s why i would have put that – that recital in there, because there was no annexure attached to this one listing their assets and liabilities. ms costello qc: okay. when you have got a recital such as that in a financial agreement, what’s your usual practice in terms of the independent legal advice you give? ms b: so definitely to highlight that to the client before they sign, just so that they’re – they have got to be aware that they’re – that that – the person signing the agreement, my client, is aware that she’s – he or she is relying on their personal knowledge of the other party’s affairs, but that under the family law act, they’re entitled to receive full disclosure. financial disclosure, i should say. ms costello qc: no further questions.
58 ms fisken confirmed with ms b that it is uncontroversial that the address on the initial instruction sheet was the husband’s work address, the phone number was the husband’s work phone number and the mobile number was the husband’s mobile number. it was an established fact that the fax number and the email address belonged to the husband. ms fisken proposed to ms b that considering these non-contentions facts, it could be inferred the husband was her client. ms b disagreed with this proposition and said, “except for that was – they were the contact details. i was given for ms beckstead.”
59 given the contact details provided are only the husband’s and the fact ms b did not know the husband and wife prior to her engagement as solicitor, ms fisken suggested “the only way you can communicate with the person who you considered to be your client is by the other party to the financial agreement?” ms b replied. “it would – if those contact details are as – as you say, then yes, that would be correct.”
60 ms fisken referred to the husband’s evidence that he spoke to ms b by phone on a couple of occasions between january 2006 and the date the agreement was signed is 24 june 2006. in response, ms b said she did not recall having telephone conversations with either of them. further, ms b said it would not necessarily be the case that she would usually communicate with her clients about a financial agreement rather than the other party. she further said that according to the ledger it took some time for the husband to be legally represented and so during that period he was self-represented.
61 counsel for the wife made reference to a file note and a discussion with the husband and ms b on or around 12 june 2006 where she says “well, i am going to send it to your solicitor”. ms fisken submits that given ms b knew the husband had engaged his own solicitor at this point, it was inappropriate that she continued to have discussions with him. there is nothing on the file to indicate that ms b ever communicated with the husband’s lawyer about the bfa. ms fisken submitted that if the husband was, at that time legally represented, then ms b should have been communicating with the solicitor. ms fisken submitted that the husband’s evidence was that he had several conversations with ms b about his business structure, however she says that the file note indicates this particular conversation noted what happens in the event of the termination of the relationship or marriage.
62 ms fisken suggested that the only communication she had with the wife, apart from the initial appointment, was her attendance on 24 june 2006 when the agreement was executed. ms b confirmed that she did not have any different recollection. i am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that these are the only direct interactions the wife had with ms b.
63 from ms b’s evidence there were several aspects that were not in accordance with her usual practice. she was cross-examined about a file note in her handwriting referring to the husband’s business structures. ms b said her usual practice involved recording the person who she was speaking to and also to make a note of whether it was a phone call or personal attendance. she noted this at the top of the file however, it is clear in this instance that she did not adhere to her usual practices as such details have been omitted.
64 given the content of the file note, it is likely that it was some sort of attendance upon the husband most likely by telephone rather than being a review of the file as the note records new information.
65 correspondence in the form of letters and emails were produced as part of the subpoena and it is evident the correspondence was sent to the wife, care of the husband. ms b was reliant on the husband providing information she forwarded to him, to the wife. there is nothing to suggest that the husband failed to do this. the wife also conceded during cross-examination that she was unable to check personal emails during work hours so it was convenient for communication to be sent to the husband for him to forward them onto her. however it is important to record that this does not relieve ms b of her obligations to her client.
66 the letter dated 22 may 2006 to the wife, care of the husband, is as follows:
dear ms beckstead and mr beckstead, re: reminder for your binding financial agreement we confirm we are still holding your binding financial agreement. we await confirmation from you as to where to forward the final draft so that mr beckstead may have the same signed in front of his solicitor. hence, please provide your further instructions as soon as possible. we refer to your conversation with ms m from our office and thank you for your barter card customer number. the payment of our account has now been authorised. however, for completeness we now enclose the voucher for you to sign and return to our office. we thank you for your payment and enclose a receipt. we await your further instructions. yours faithfully, ms b
67 the first half of the letter appears to be addressed to the wife as it refers to the husband and asking for her to provide instructions with respect to forwarding the final draft of the bfa. the second half of the letter is presumably addressing the husband as he had an account with bartercard through his business. the wife did not.
68 in comparison, the email on 30 august 2006 from ms b to the husband appears to be addressing only the husband, and she refers to the voucher payment of the invoice sent in march 2006.
69 there was some confusion with respect to the client account ledger and settlement sheet. however, ultimately as only one invoice was rendered which is dated 20 march 2006, what is annexed to the husband’s affidavit as b-8 is an itemised ledger. ms b’s itemised ledger for the period 31 january 2006 to 5 february 2007 includes an entry with a description “phoned our client regarding the binding financial agreement” on 18 april 2006. i am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that this was a phone call to the husband, not the wife. the itemised ledger also reflects her enquiring if the husband had made an appointment with his solicitor. the itemised ledger shows a time entry where her assistant called to ask the husband to arrange for the wife to make an appointment. ms b claims that the reference to our client in the itemised ledger with respect to the attendance on the husband would have been entered by her assistant in error, as she always understood that the wife was her client.
70 whilst it is apparent that there are some errors and omissions on the itemised ledger, i am not satisfied that any reference to the husband as the client is in error, as it is clear from examining the documents produced and ms b’s evidence that she failed to clearly identify who the client was and the scope of her retainer. this is a fundamental obligation of a lawyer.
71 ms b was reluctant to concede the fact that all communication to the wife was via the husband and attempted to justify this by referring back to the details provided to her on the initial instruction sheet. she said she did not know if the parties had access to each other’s emails. she conceded that the email address was clearly the husband’s work email address. ms b’s comment that she did not know if they had access to each other’s emails underscores the whole problem where it is evident that ms b did not clearly identify her client and how she could communicate and advise the wife separately and independently. there is nothing on the file to indicate that she made any attempt to communicate with the wife separately and independently of the husband about the bfa or her will. where communication was formally addressed to the wife care of the husband, in the circumstances, one would expect a family lawyer to be particularly cognisant of the need to ensure that the client is clearly identified and that the appropriate authorities are in place for who can give instructions. on that note, family lawyers should also be mindful given the particular nature of family law. in family law matters, it is not unusual for parties to be living under the one roof and as such it is important to ask questions, clarify who has access to information such as postal addresses, email addresses and so forth. the lawyer must ensure they have direct contact details for their client that the other party is not privy to. this is so even if the client is content for the material to go through the other party as they would not necessarily appreciate the importance of legal professional privilege. whilst ms b was keen to stress that the emails and letters were addressed to the wife that does not assist her, because in practical terms, all the reliance is on the husband and on him passing that information on to the wife.
72 ms b conceded that the only reason her assistant would call the husband to arrange an appointment for the wife would be if she could not find the wife’s contact details on the file.
73 the time entry recorded for the attendance on the wife to give advice and execute the agreement reflects an attendance of three units, being 18 minutes. ms b confirmed that and again said she has no independent recollection. this is a short attendance to include reading the agreement and giving advice about the agreement.[2] when this was put to ms b she said that time entry could have been incorrect.
74 ms b conceded that whilst it was her usual practice to provide a letter of advice prior to the agreement being signed she did not appear to have done so in this case. there is nothing in the accounts ledger or the file to indicate that she prepared and provided the letter of advice. ms b agreed that this would be a significant departure from her usual practice.
75 ms b said that because the agreement refers to the parties relying on their own knowledge of the others financial position, she would have advised the wife that a disadvantage of entering into the agreement was that she had not received the benefit of full and frank disclosure, and that she was contracting out of entitlements she may have under the act. there is nothing on the file that indicates ms b raised the issue of disclosure with the wife separately to the joint initial appointment. ms b was also cross-examined about the typed file note signed by the wife which reflects the fact that initially ms b thought there was an error that needed correcting.
76 ms b did not concede that her handwritten file note accurately recorded the advice she gave as she said it was a brief file note. she confirmed that she did not have any independent recollection. she said the file note recorded some advice but again, it was not consistent with her usual practice. it is difficult to see how it would have been possible to properly review the agreement, provide the wife with the requisite independent legal advice and address any errors in the agreement within 18 minutes.
77 it appears that neither ms b nor the parties paid due care and attention to the terms of the bfa. there are errors throughout the document including references to the agreement being entered into prior to the parties being married. clause 8 refers to the parties intending to marry in 2006, which was a couple of months before the parties and their lawyers signed the agreement. ms b agreed that the file note did not include any reference to or suggested that she gave the wife advice about the difference between ss 90b and 90c financial agreements. several of the husband’s entities are misidentified.
78 during re-examination, ms costello qc took ms b through an email dated 12 april 2006 from her assistant, ms m. this email was addressed and sent to the husband referring to his lawyer receiving a hard copy of the documents and a further email from the husband to ms b advising her that he has signed his copy of the agreement and asking to make an appointment for the wife so that ms b could explain her side of the agreement to her. i certainly accept that there are, at times references in the file and correspondence that is consistent with an understanding of the wife being the client and not the husband. however, that appears to me to be superficial and does not negate the difficulties that i have referred to elsewhere.
independent legal advice and the conflict of interest
79 section 90g(1)(b) of the act provides requirements that must be satisfied in order for a financial agreement to be considered binding:
when financial agreements are binding (1) subject to subsection (1a), a financial agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement if, and only if: the agreement is signed by all parties, and (b) before signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party and about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to that party of making the agreement, and (c) either before or after signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that the advice referred to in paragraph (b) was provided to that party (whether or not the statement is annexed to the agreement), and (ca) a copy of the statement referred to in paragraph (c) that was provided to a spouse party is given to the other spouse party or to a legal practitioner for the other spouse party, and (d) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.
note: for the manner in which the contents of a financial agreement may be proved, see section 48 of the evidence act 1995. (1a) a financial agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement if: the agreement is signed by all parties, and (b) one or more of paragraphs (1)(b), (c) and (ca) are not satisfied in relation to the agreement, and (c) a court is satisfied that it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties to the agreement (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made), and (d) the court makes an order under subsection (1b) declaring that the agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement, and (e) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.  for the purposes of paragraph (1a)(d), a court may make an order declaring that a financial agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement, upon application (the enforcement application ) by a spouse party seeking to enforce the agreement. (1c) to avoid doubt, section 90ka applies in relation to the enforcement application. (2) a court may make such orders for the enforcement of a financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the agreement as it thinks necessary.
80 the real difficulty is the conflict of interest in acting for the wife with respect to the bfa whilst at the same time acting for both of them for their wills and powers of attorney. lawyers owe a duty of loyalty to their client to avoid potential conflicts between two or more clients.
81 the legal profession uniform law australian solicitors’ conduct rules 2015 (“the conduct rules”) address conflicts of interest, which can arise in a variety of contexts. rule 11 of the conduct rules deals with conflicts of duties concerning current clients and states the following:
11. conflict of duties concerning current clients 11.1 a solicitor and a law practice must avoid conflicts between the duties owed to two or more current clients, except where permitted by this rule. 11.2 if a solicitor or a law practice seeks to act for two or more clients in the same or related matters where the clients’ interests are adverse and there is a conflict or potential conflict of the duties to act in the best interests of each client, the solicitor or law practice must not act, except where permitted by rule 11.3. 11.3 where a solicitor or law practice seeks to act in the circumstances specified in rule 11.2, the solicitor or law practice may, subject always to each solicitor discharging their duty to act in the best interests of their client, only act if each client: 11.3.1 is aware that the solicitor or law practice is also acting for another client, and 11.3.2 has given informed consent to the solicitor or law practice so acting. 11.4 in addition to the requirements of rule 11.3, where a solicitor or law practice is in possession of information which is confidential to a client (the first client) which might reasonably be concluded to be material to another client’s current matter and detrimental to the interests of the first client if disclosed, there is a conflict of duties and the solicitor and the solicitor’s law practice must not act for the other client, except as follows: 11.4.1 a solicitor may act where there is a conflict of duties arising from the possession of confidential information, where each client has given informed consent to the solicitor acting for another client, and 11.4.2 a law practice (and the solicitors concerned) may act where there is a conflict of duties arising from the possession of confidential information where an effective information barrier has been established. 11.5 if a solicitor or a law practice acts for more than one client in a matter and, during the course of the conduct of that matter, an actual conflict arises between the duties owed to two or more of those clients, the solicitor or law practice may only continue to act for one of the clients (or a group of clients between whom there is no conflict) provided the duty of confidentiality to other client(s) is not put at risk and the parties have given informed consent.
82 the position with respect to parties entering into a financial agreement and receiving independent legal advice was discussed recently by alstergren cj in kaimal & kaimal. his honour considered the requirement for independent legal advice and stated at [16]-[24]:
the requirement for legal advice is an important legislative safeguard. an effective binding financial agreement ousts the court’s jurisdiction to make orders under part viii of the act, allowing parties to deal with their assets without interference from the court. accordingly, the legal advice must be real and meaningful to satisfy s 90g(1)(b). section 90g(1)(b) evinces an unambiguous legislative requirement that, in order for an executed agreement to be binding, each party to a financial agreement must be given clear, independent legal advice specifically in respect to each of the matters mentioned therein. this is evidenced from its wording “the effect of the agreement on the rights of the party and the advantages and disadvantages to the party of entering into the agreement at the time the advice was provided”. importantly, s 90g(1)(b) contains a requirement for independent legal advice separately to the requirement of a signed statement of legal advice, which is found in s 90g(1)(c). accordingly, evidence of the latter cannot have been intended to constitute determinative evidence of the former. if that were the case, the inclusion of a separate provision for each would be redundant. the court’s task in this case is to determine whether the wife received legal advice and, if so, whether it meets the requirements of s 90g(1)(b). it is clear that, in order to be able to advise a party of the advantages and disadvantages of entering into a financial agreement and of how that financial agreement will affect their rights, it is necessary that those advantages, disadvantages and rights are first identified[3]. dr barnett, counsel for the wife, referred to the statement of ryan and aldridge jj in piper v mueller that “an assessment of whether the provisions of an agreement were fair and reasonable, necessarily involves a consideration of the advantages and disadvantages of those provisions”. i concur with that statement. in the decision of wallace & stelzer and anor [2013] famcafc 199, the full court at [103] cited with approval the earlier decisions of logan & logan [2013] famcafc 151 and hoult & hoult [2013] famcafc 109 (“hoult”) in which the full court held that “the only enquiry necessary is as to whether advice was given, and not as to the content of that advice.” in the recent decision of this court daily & daily [2020] famca 486, berman j considered whether the wife, in that case, was given adequate advice as to the effect of the financial agreement in question on her rights and the advantages and disadvantages of entering into the agreement in the context of handwritten amendments having been made to the agreement. his honour stated at [154]:
i consider that whilst the correctness of the advice may not be a relevant inquiry, if the evidence supported a finding that notwithstanding a certificate, there had either not been any advice given or that it was so cursory or only tangentially related to the agreement, that may well allow a finding that no advice was given.
these statements are consistent with the authority of hoult which both parties relied upon in the case before me. as explained below, i disagree with the interpretation of hoult advanced by the husband. (footnotes omitted)
83 professor dal pont in his textbook, lawyers professional responsibility, 7th edition, november 2020 at [3.35] discusses the importance of identifying the client as soon as practicable. it is a fundamental obligation of a solicitor to clearly identify who their client is and who has authority to give instructions on behalf of that client. in the case of joint clients the lawyer should clearly document in writing any authority the clients give for one of them to give instructions on behalf of the other. the lawyer must ensure that this authority represents the joint will of the clients and is expressed so that each client is bound by the instructions the other gives. clearly identifying the client is also vital as it affects the lawyer’s legal obligations and liabilities. this is particularly so in this case where there was no retainer agreement signed by the client.
84 there is a fundamental conflict in acting for both parties to draft their wills, whilst at the same time purporting to act for one of them with respect to the bfa. i do not think the conflict could have been cured by opening separate files for both clients for the wills and the financial agreement. however, it may have triggered some consideration as to who the clients were and whether or not there was any conflict.
85 it appears that at times ms b was mindful of the wife being her client but other times was treating them as joint clients at best. solicitors have a fiduciary duty of loyalty. the importance of being alert to concurrent conflicts of duty is set out in rule 11 of the conduct rules. dal pont observes at [7.20] to [7.40] that a concurrent conflict can result in potentially extensive legal liability for a lawyer for breach of fiduciary duty and/or negligence not exercising the expected standard of skill and care. a solicitor cannot rely on client perceptions and assume that the client is in a position to be aware of the existence or the prospect of conflict. the harm is not limited to misuse of confidential information. rule 11 of the conduct rules explicitly acknowledges that there are instances where there will be no conflict in acting for both clients. that is not the situation here. it is also not the situation where the clients have given informed consent for the solicitor to act for both of them in spite of this conflict. dal pont observes that the rules with respect to concurrent conflict of duties applies to both contentious and non-contentious matters.
86 the law council of australia released the best practice guide for legal practitioners in relation to elder financial abuse in september 2020[3]. this document is in response to the 2017 report “elder abuse: a national legal response”[4]. this is particularly relevant with respect to wills and other estate planning documents but also has general applicability to the issues in this case. if the lawyer fails to identify who the client is the lawyer is unable to exclude direct or indirect influences. the law council of australia noted that ideally a lawyer should see a client alone or if the client needs a support person that person be someone who has no interest in the legal transaction. the lawyer should not take joint instructions with respect to wills where each client is the beneficiary of the other, but should take instructions on their own. having another person present does not necessarily amount to undue influence, but it could undermine the instructions and it is important that clients are informed individually that they are free to make wills in whatever terms they want, provided they have not entered into mutual wills subject to contractual obligations. examples of lawyers failing their conduct obligations in the context wills and estate include legal services commissioner and lawson [2002] qcat 100, vernon and watson [2002] nswsc 600 and legal profession conduct commissioner and brook [2015] sascfc 128. these cases involved lawyers taking instructions for wills through intermediaries and not verifying the instructions were the testator’s.
87 craig birtles & richard neal, hutley’s australian wills and precedents (lexisnexis, 9th edition, 2016) refers to the importance of interviewing testators personally and separately and not accepting instructions from intermediaries. the authors also address the issue of drawing wills for spouses and the importance of making sure that a solicitor talks to each spouse alone. for example in the case of being asked to draw wills, especially where they leave everything to the other, it is important to take instructions about the parties’ individual circumstances and provide them with advice. an example is one of them may hold significant wealth and assets and the other very little. questions arise relating to whether there are any concerns about differing life expectancies or other issues.
88 it is clear from the initial instruction sheet and her file note, ms b did not turn her mind to any conflict or potential conflict of a solicitor’s duty to act in a client’s best interests in acting for both clients in preparing their wills and powers of attorney whilst simultaneously acting for one of them with respect to the binding financial agreement. i reject ms b’s characterisation of the wills as being ancillary to the bfa. it is clear that ms b did not turn her mind to the conflict issue. whilst wills are non-contentious matters, a conflict or potential conflict can arise when acting for the husband and wife in preparation of their wills and powers of attorneys. this could be so even in circumstances where they are not also entering into a financial agreement. whilst typically solicitors charge fairly modest fees for drafting wills, wills are important documents that have lasting consequences for clients and their estates.
89 in this case, the lack of independence of ms b also raises doubt about whether or not she took instructions from the wife directly. in particular, whether she took instructions without the husband present, whether instructions were taken as to the wife’s own assets and liabilities, the wife’s understanding of the husband’s position and any concerns she may have had about the agreement.
90 acting for both parties with respect to their wills and power of attorney, whilst at the same time acting for one of them with respect to the bfa is highly problematic. it is not uncommon for solicitors to act for both parties in non-contentious matters such as drafting wills and purchasing or selling properties. even in those matters the lawyer must be careful to ensure that the interests of the clients do not differ. inevitably with respect to something like a financial agreement the parties’ interests differ, and whilst ms b identified that she could not advise both of them and that one would need to secure independent legal advice, her file shows a blurring of these lines.
91 the provision of independent legal advice is a fundamental protection provided to those entering into financial agreements which ousts the court’s jurisdiction. the lack of independence causes one to wonder whether ms b turned her mind to where the parties’ interests differed. this would impact on whether or not the requisite advice was given. it is clear from the authorities that in order to provide the requisite advice about the financial agreement more must be done than simply explaining the terms of the agreement. in the written contentions of fact and law, senior counsel for the husband argues that the terms of the agreement are clear and that “the advantage of a financial agreement is to avoid litigation. the disadvantage is that the court might award more than the financial agreement provides for a period. these rather obvious advantages and disadvantages would have been clear to both parties, it is inevitable that ms b conveyed them to the wife.” this comment vastly oversimplifies the task of providing advice with respect to a bfa. the advice required to be given by s 90g(1) of the act is not limited to explaining the meaning of the terms of the agreement. in order to advise the client about the advantages and disadvantages of entering into the agreement, it is necessary to take instructions and consider the client’s individual circumstances. drafting and advising cohabitation pre-nuptial agreements which deal with all the parties’ properties are particularly challenging for lawyers because there are so many unknowns. for example, whether or not the parties have children of the relationship, if one of them were to become seriously unwell or disabled, a business may be unsuccessful or become very successful. some advantages and disadvantages are less tangible than others, particularly agreements that are in the nature of prenuptial agreements and agreements made during cohabitation whilst the relationship is intact. necessarily, part of the advice about the advantages and disadvantages of entering into such an agreement would be to address the fact that the bfa provides certainty based on the factual situation at the time of entering into the agreement. of course, there are many vicissitudes of life that can occur which could impact the entitlements that would otherwise be provided for under the act, including for example, english being their second language or one of them being severely disabled. i do accept ms costello qc’s submissions that the enquiry is only as to whether or not the advice was given and not the content or quality of that advice. i note the comments of aldridge j in abrum & abrum [2013] famca 897, particularly with respect to legal advice at paragraphs [36]-[43].
a binding financial agreement deals with the parties’ rights in relation to the property or financial resources of the parties in a way that ousts the jurisdiction of the court to make orders in relation to that property or financial resource. those rights thus ousted must be the rights that the parties had under s 79 of the act to seek an order for the adjustment of the parties’ property rights. when making such an order the court takes into account the matters set out in s 79(4) of the act (the parties financial and non-financial contributions to the property of the parties and their contributions to the welfare of the family) and the various matters set out in s 75(2) of the act. the parties’ rights to obtain a property settlement thus depend on those factors. it is true to say that a party does not have a “right” to a property settlement, or a “right” to a particular property settlement, because under s 79 the court is not giving effect to existing rights but rather is altering property interests in a manner that it considers is just and equitable and thus creates new rights. in doing so it evaluates and weighs many factors. it is necessarily an imprecise exercise. nonetheless, when s 90g(1)(b) speaks of “rights” it must be speaking of the entitlement to bring a case under s 79 and the factors that weigh in favour of that person’s case under ss 79(4) and 75(2) otherwise it would have limited meaning. in order to give advice about the effect of an agreement on the rights of a party, that is their rights under the act in relation to property, a legal practitioner must establish what those rights are at the time the advice is provided. this is because s 90g(1)(b) requires advice to be given on the effects of the agreement upon the rights of that party and the advantages and disadvantages of the agreement. if their rights are not known then it is impossible to advise as to the effect of the agreement on them. it is unhelpful to advise a person that a financial agreement might adversely affect his or her rights if those rights are not identified. a party must know more than some unknown or undefined right is being given up. he or she must have some idea, at least in general, of his or her present entitlements or rights (to use the words of the section) with which he or she may compare the provisions of the proposed financial agreement. it is only in that way that there can be actual advice about the effect of the agreement on those present rights. it is quite clear that a person may choose to enter into an agreement where he or she may very well be much worse off than if he or she were left to rely on their rights under s 79 of the act. thus, there is a requirement for specific legal advice to be given. that is the safeguard the legislature imposes when it permits the parties to deal with their property by agreement and without possible interference from a court. accordingly, the advice must be real and meaningful. it must be directed to the parties’ circumstances and their present rights. proper identification of a parties’ rights can only be done by identifying the property of the parties then held and a consideration of the parties contributions (financial and non-financial) to the acquisition of that property and to the welfare of the children. any other relevant factors under s 79(4), including s 75(2), would then need to be considered. only by doing so can advice be given that complies with the terms of s 90g(1)(b).
92 i also reject ms fisken’s submissions with respect to ms b’s file note referring to not advising as to the financial advantages and disadvantages means that she did not advise about the advantages and disadvantages. the reference to financial advantages and disadvantages could have been referring to being unable to give financial advice as an earlier version of s90g required lawyers to advise on additional matters including whether it was financially prudent to enter into the agreement.
93 entering into a bfa provides certainty and avoids the costs and stress of litigation in the future. the ability of parties to contract out of part viii, part viiia and part viiab of the act is a significant departure from the position at common law. provided s 90g is complied with, binding financial agreements do not need to be just and equitable. as such, these factors, particularly the requirements for the parties to receive independent legal advice, are an important safeguard. the wife outlines several problems with the bfa which she says mitigate against the court finding the agreement should be declared binding. in her contentions of fact and law she outlines a number of errors in the agreement and complains about the husband not disclosing his financial position and the agreement not containing a schedule of the parties’ assets and liabilities and making no reference to their superannuation entitlements.
94 ms fisken submitted that much reliance is thereafter placed on what ms b’s usual or customary practice might be. from this, counsel for the wife submitted that it is clear at the very least, ms b departed significantly from her usual practice because the usual practice would not be having only the other party’s contact details as the client’s own contact details. as i have indicated in earlier discussions, i am satisfied that ms b failed to identify the conflict issue and did not turn her mind to the issue of who she was acting for with respect to the bfa.
95 ms fisken submitted that the only time the wife had a one-on-one conversation with ms b was during the attendance on 24 june 2006. this was approximately 15 minutes by recollection of the wife, or 3 units, which is 18 minutes as indicated by the invoice. on this day, there was time spent making a correction prior to execution of the agreement and the wife and ms b initialled a file note reflecting the correction. this was not ms b’s customary practice. ms fisken says that to the extent the wife had the benefit of the first meeting so she could understand the financial circumstances of the parties is at most, including the business f pty ltd, that there was a unit trust, which was erroneously referred to as a family trust and there was an investment vehicle.
96 counsel for the husband prepared written closing submissions. ms costello qc submitted that the advice given to the wife by ms b was in compliance with section 90g(1)(b) of the act in that the wife was ms b’s client and that she acted for the wife thereafter explaining she was able to act for only one of them. in the contentions of fact and law she relied on vance & vance [2012] fmcafam 599, balzia & covich [2009] famca 1357 and abrum & abrum [2013] famca 897 in support of her submission that the fact the husband made and attended the first appointment and paid the legal fees does not mean ms b was not independent. i accept that would be so if they were the only concerns raised about her being independent.
97 ms costello qc made submissions in relation to the fact ms b spoke with the husband between the first appointment on 31 january 2006 and 24 june 2006. senior counsel makes various submissions in respect of this including the fact that the husband gave evidence of ms b asking for the wife’s phone number and the entries on the settlement statement having been inaccurate as to time and description as well as being incomplete.
98 senior counsel further submits it was the wife’s evidence in cross-examination that she was unable to access personal emails during work hours unless she obtained permission from her manager. as such, the couple tended to arrange matters so that the husband received emails on the wife’s behalf and ms costello qc submitted that the fact that ms b’s emails and letters went to the husband to pass on to the wife did not mean he hid them from her.
99 ms costello qc submitted that the wife could not recall signing ms b’s file note of independent legal advice until cross-examination and in her affidavit, denied receiving any legal advice. counsel further submitted that the wife’s affidavit said that the agreement was read out to her before she signed the agreement, however whilst under cross-examination, the wife changed her evidence about this. counsel submitted this goes to the wife having selective memory and her evidence being self-serving. at paragraph 28 of her trial affidavit the wife describes she and the husband going to the second appointment together. she refers to ms b reading through the agreement with them both and then ms b asked the husband to leave the room while ms b gave her advice and she signed the agreement. the wife was not challenged about her evidence that ms b read the agreement out to both of them. examining the transcript of the cross-examination of the parties and ms b i am satisfied that ms b read the agreement out to both of them before speaking the wife alone and giving her advice. there is no reason to read the agreement out to both parties. that may well have resulted in the wife not speaking up even if she was inclined to. it is another indication of a failure to clearly identify the client and her separate interests.
100 in the alternative, ms costello qc’s written submissions provide for where the agreement is saved under section 90g(1a) of the act. on this basis, senior counsel submits that the wife under cross-examination said she understood the meaning of the financial agreement and that the wife was under no misapprehension about the document she was signing. ms costello qc submits there was no duress on the wife’s part to sign the agreement. ms costello qc further submitted the wife did not say to the husband during the relationship that she disagreed with the financial agreement. counsel also submitted the wife knew ms b was her lawyer and mr c was the husband’s lawyer.
101 alstergren cj in kaimal & kaimal, discussed the errors that consolidated the finding that the wife did not receive the required legal advice by reference to the number of errors found in the financial agreement. having regard to the fundamental aspects of the bfa, where errors were found regarding the proportions of the parties’ entitlements and also where it was internally inconsistent with respect to those entitlements, his honour found it was impossible to give the requisite advice. the errors raised here are quite different and not so fundamental and are more be amenable to rectification. due to the other conclusions i have reached it is not necessary for me to determine this issue.
102 i respectfully adopt alstergren cj’s comments in kaimal and kaimal set out earlier. i accept that the court does not need to enquire as to the quality of the advice and whether or not the advice given was correct. a client who is able to establish that they were given incorrect advice is able to pursue a cause of action against that solicitor. i am satisfied that the wife did not receive independent legal advice. there was a conflict that ms b failed to turn her mind to. conflicts of interest can arise in a variety of circumstances.
103 ms fisken referred to the case authorities in her closing submissions, particularly kaimal & kaimal and stated that the court does need to be satisfied that the advice given was meaningful. ms fisken made reference to the legislative safeguards as intended by parliament and that it in essence allows parties to contract out of the act but only if certain requirements are met. the legislative amendments following black v black [2008] famcafc 7, (2008) flc 93-357 provides a pathway for how binding financial agreements can be saved. the amendments to the act made by the federal justice system amendment (efficiency measures) act (no. 1) 2009 (cth) are discussed in senior & anderson [2011] famcafc 129, (2011) flc 93-470 and senior & anderson [2011] famca 802. it is also useful to refer to the supplementary explanatory memorandum to the federal justice system amendment (efficiency measures) bill (no. 1) 2008. in particular i draw attention to the comments made in the general outline which includes the following statement:
the government amendments proposed to the bill will address issues that have arisen in submissions to the inquiry of the senate standing committee on legal and constitutional affairs into the provisions of the bill and following consultation with key stakeholders. the proposed government amendments will:
104 it is clear that the parliamentary intention was to avoid the problems of agreements being declared non-binding because of technical deficiencies. however the substantive requirement that the parties each receive independent legal advice before entering into bfas remains an important safeguard. in the circumstances of this case i am satisfied that the wife did not receive independent legal advice and that the wife has established that there is doubt that she was given the requisite advice as this is linked to the failure to properly identify the wife’s interests. whilst it is clear the advice does not need to be correct it does need to go beyond the legal interpretation of the terms of the agreement and address the practical implications for entering into the agreement.[5]
errors in the agreement
105 the wife identifies various defects with respect to the financial agreement including: references being made to the incorrect section of the act, (2) references being made with respect to family trusts and corporate structures and entities that do not exist,  n pty ltd was erroneously referred to as o pty ltd, (b) p pty ltd was erroneously referred to as q pty ltd, (c) beckstead family trust was erroneously expressed as the n family trust (n pty ltd was and remains the corporate trustee for the beckstead family trust), (d) r trust was erroneously referred to as s trust, the legal advice differs under sections 90b and 90c of the a
106 both parties agree that the financial agreement erroneously refers to s 90b instead of s 90c of the act. the husband argues that the reference to the incorrect section can be rectified as it was clearly the parties’ common intention to contract out of the act and the reference to the wrong section does not reflect their common intention. in support of this submission he relies on the full court’s decision of graham & squibb [2019] famcafc 33 and senior & anderson [2011] famcafc 129.
107 if it was simply a matter of correcting technical errors, then that discretion may be easily exercised, particularly in circumstances where the husband did not take advantage and acted unconscionably.
108 the wife complains about the fact that throughout the agreement she is referred to as [ms beackstead] when she adopted her husband’s surname when they married. the reference to the wife as [ms beackstead] than ms beckstead is consistent with a s 90b agreement rather than a 90c agreement. the wife says it cannot be rectified because the content of the required advice is different under each section. the text of the two sections are similar.
109 as the law stands currently, many of the provisions governing property entitlements of parties to a de facto relationship and to a marriage are largely the same. therefore, when considering the nature of the advice that is required to be given, under ss 90b and 90c of the act, there may be little difference. however, at the time the parties entered into the agreement in 2006, the parties’ entitlements based on whether they were in a de facto relationship or married were significantly different, as de facto relationships were governed by state legislation. the de facto powers were not referred to the commonwealth until 2009, and the family law act was then amended to include to financial provisions for de facto relationships, pursuant to schedule 5 of the federal justice system amendment (efficiency measures) act (no.1) 2009 (cth). therefore, at that time, the advice required to be provided differed under state law for de facto relationships and federal law for marriages. this was not specifically raised before me during the proceedings.
110 the wife’s counsel conceded that if it was an obvious error to simply refer to the wrong section, then that could be rectified. however, the issue goes beyond that and goes to the content of the advice. i stress that it is not the quality of the advice or that the advice was correct that needs to be established, it is whether or not the requisite advice was given.
is it unjust and inequitable to declare the agreement non-binding?
111 in the event of my being satisfied that s 90g(1)(b) of the act has not been complied with, the husband urges me to exercise my discretion and find that it would be unjust and inequitable not to uphold the agreement. ms costello qc advances a number of reasons as to why it would be unjust and inequitable to declare the agreement non-binding, including: that both parties had been previously married, each owning property and having adult children. (b) there was no pressure or rush to enter into the bfa. (c) the bfa was consistent with the intentions of the parties as set out in the cohabitation agreement they signed in 2002. (d) at the beginning of the relationship, the husband’s business was a fledging one. (e) the unchallenged evidence of ms l supports the husband’s contention that the wife was aware of the terms of the bfa and in particular, was aware she would have no claim on the husband’s business. she provided an example about the period ms l stayed with the parties, she paid rent to the wife as the property is the wife’s solely. (f) the parties acted consistently with the terms of the bfa during their relationship as evidenced by the wife reimbursing the husband with respect to the air-conditioner for the suburb t property (purchased in the wife’s sole name after she sold the suburb i property). (g) the wife paid the husband $12,000 for the purchase of his car. (h) the fact that the husband was generous at times and placed money in the wife’s offset account to reduce the interest she had to pay on her mortgage does not detract from the parties acting consistently with the agreement. further, that the husband shared his income with the wife by paying the vast majority of living expenses also not being a departure from the agreement as the agreement provides for the assets to remain separate. (i) on the point of there being no material non-disclosure, the fact that the wife was present at the time the husband described his finances to ms b demonstrates the husband did not hide his finances. further, that the husband copied the wife into emails regarding the potential sale of his business in 2016 and also that the wife has been unable to prove any material non-disclosure. (j) any deficiencies in the independence and adequacy of the advice given is not due to any misconduct by the husband and was outside his control. (k) the husband has suffered significant detriment due to the wife failing to raise any concern about the financial agreement until 11 and a half years later (which is one and a half years after they separated).
112 there is considerable merit in the ms costello qc’s submissions that really, the wife seeking to have the agreement is declared non-binding is because of “buyer’s remorse”, noting that the business of the husband which was a fledgling one when the parties were first together has now become a substantial one. i also accept her submission that any deficiencies in the independence and adequacy of the advice given is not due to any misconduct by the husband and was outside his control.
113 i granted leave to the husband to rely on the affidavit of ms l, the husband’s daughter, sworn 17 june 2021 and filed late in the proceedings. ms l lived with the parties at the wife’s house in suburb i during 2003 and december 2008. in 2003, ms l deposes paying rent to the wife in the sum of $50 per week. she states that she arranged for her employer to automatically deduct funds from her salary and pay rent directly into the wife’s bank account. ms l referred to a conversation the wife had with ms l after separating from her husband in 2009. she says at [7]:
ms beckstead said to me words to the effect that: “when your dad and i got married we made an agreement that if we ever separate - my house will remain my house and your dad’s house and business will remain his property”.
114 ms l goes on to say at [8]:
ms beckstead explained to me that my father’s business partner had been concerned that her interest in the business could be affected if ms beckstead and my father ever broke up. ms beckstead told me that she would never make a claim against my father’s business because it belonged to my father and ‘the other ms beckstead’ (being ms g).
115 in her affidavit, ms l says the way in which the wife explained the situation regarding the financial agreement was not in a way that indicated to her that she had an issue with the financial agreement.
116 at paragraphs 108 to 110 of his trial affidavit, the husband refers to the parties’ separation, which occurred on 30 april 2017 and the subsequent discussions the parties had directly and via their lawyers. the husband claims that a few weeks after the parties separated. the wife handed him his copy of the bfa and talked about selling the suburb i property. the husband says he engaged u lawyers to assist him to formalise the financial separation agreement. the husband annexes to his trial affidavit from his lawyers to the wife’s lawyers dated 2 february 2018 and a letter from the wife’s lawyers to him dated 18 january 2019.
117 during the course of the trial i made a ruling with respect to an application by ms fisken to tender a letter from the wife’s lawyers to the husband dated 29 january 2018. the letter contained an offer pursuant to s 131(2)(g) of the evidence act 1995 (cth).
118 after i determined that issue, the parties tendered the letter with references to an offer being redacted. ms fisken sought to tender this letter to refute the husband’s argument that the wife delayed disclosing to the husband her contention that the bfa was not binding. the letter refers to the fact that the parties had been engaged in direct discussions with respect to their property settlement and summarises a recent settlement proposal from husband, which is redacted. the letter from the wife’s lawyers does not make any reference to the financial agreement and contains the typical request for financial disclosure as part of the pre-action procedures before commencing family court proceedings.
119 it is not apparent from the letter as to whether or not the wife’s lawyers were aware of the financial agreement at the time it was sent. i do not think the wife can rely on this letter as evidence she notified the husband that she sought to challenge the bfa. the husband’s then lawyers u lawyers wrote to the wife’s lawyers on 2 february 2018. this letter encloses a copy of the bfa, noting that the wife’s letter did not refer to the bfa.
120 in considering the evidence before the court, it appears that neither party took action, at least through their lawyers for several months. on 18 january 2019, the wife’s lawyers wrote to the husband directly (noting that the wife advised that the husband was acting for himself at that stage) referring to the letter they sent on 29 january 2019 and enclosing a further copy of it. despite the address being correct, one explanation could be that the letter was simply not received and this is why it was not responded to. the wife’s lawyers indicate clearly that the wife considers the bfa to be defective and non-binding in the letter dated 18 january 2019.
121 the husband complains that the wife delayed communicating by her lawyers until 18 january 2019. he says that in the 11 months prior to that letter being sent, the wife was silent and took no action.
122 in my view, the relevant period with respect to the husband’s complaints about the delay and the resulting detriment that he has suffered is after the parties separated, particularly given the fact that the wife did not receive independent legal advice about the bfa. i do not think it is reasonable to expect her to have raised the issue whilst their relationship is intact, as she would have had no reason to seek her own legal advice.
123 i also accept that this discretion in favour of saving an agreement is not limited to matters where the breaches are only technical ones. it is a matter of fact and degree. in considering whether or not to exercise its discretion the court is not concerned with the fairness or otherwise of the agreement. in hoult & hoult strickland and ainslee-wallace jj stated at paragraphs [305]-[307]:
we are firmly of the view that the content of the bargain has no relevance to the exercise of discretion under s 90g(1a)(c) and we base that on the plain words of the paragraph. that is also consistent with what strickland j said at first instance in parker (for example, in [108] of his honour’s reasons for judgment), and neither of the judges who formed the majority in the full court in parker found otherwise. we do not accept that because the inquiry in para (c) is as to injustice and inequity, the content of the bargain must have some relevance. the issue of injustice and inequity can far more easily be seen as directed to whether, given the nature and extent of the noncompliance with the s 90g(1) requirements, it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement was not binding. we have referred to the fact that his honour in [57] provided a range of factors that it would be appropriate to consider when exercising the discretion. the only factor that we suggest is not available is the last one, but if there is to be a list of factors identified we would prefer the following, all of which are to be found in his honour’s reasons: the terms of the section, the nature of a financial agreement as a creature of the act, and the place of pt viiia within the overall scheme of the act. the nature and extent of the non-compliance with the requirements of s 90g(1). the facts and circumstances surrounding the making of the agreement including, in particular, if one of the parties has complied with all of the mandatory requirements necessary to render the agreement binding. how the parties have acted subsequently in relation to the agreement (bearing in mind that changes of circumstances cannot be considered).
124 certainly in light of my findings about the lack of independent legal advice, i am not satisfied that the wife was given a real opportunity to consider whether or not to ask for financial disclosure.
125 the wife argued that in reality after signing the bfa they merged their lives and did not act consistently with the bfa. the wife sold her suburb i property and bought the property situate at v street, suburb t (“the suburb t property”) property which the parties lived in until the husband moved out after they separated. in her trial affidavit, she refers to the discussions, the parties had with respect to the sale and purchase and says the presence of a home office for the husband and the suburb t property was important because of the long hours he worked in business. in support of this argument she relies on exhibits 1 to 7 which show that the husband was heavily involved in practical aspects of the sale and purchase including dealing with the bank, conveyancers and movers. this is consist with the parties’ practice with respect to the bfa. ms fisken submitted that the husband paid sums of money into the wife’s offset account which was secured over the title to the suburb t property and now the husband wants those funds returned to him. she said there is evidence that they were acting and intermingling their finances. particularly, there were distributions made to the wife from the beckstead family trust of which she was a beneficiary and such distributions are found in the tax returns of 2011 and 2012.
126 the wife also refers to the purchase of the suburb w property in queensland in 2004, which they bought as an investment together with the husband’s brother and his wife. she refers to solely contributing to present husband’s share of the deposit by increasing her mortgage on the suburb i property, and says that she made the mortgage repayments on the suburb w property, despite it being a joint investment. this was after the cohabitation agreement but before the bfa.
127 senior counsel for the husband dismisses the wife’s complaint about being made to sign the document using her maiden name rather than her married name as being irrelevant. however, it goes to the issue of the defects in the agreement. as this is another matter when raised by the wife, which should have alerted ms b to the fact that s 90b of the act no longer applied and 90c did.
128 the wife says she did not give ms b instructions to amend her will and did not receive the email attaching a draft will. the wife believes the husband signed his will in 2006 and notes the unsigned copy provides for her to receive a payment of $350,000 from his estate. she refers to her 2007 will giving the husband life interest in the suburb i property. the wife argues their wills are not consistent with the bfa.
conclusion and future directions
129 i have carefully considered the parties arguments. there are some factors that support the husband’s argument with respect to the circumstances surrounding entering into the agreement and the parties’ actions afterwards that would support exercising the discretion in favour of declaring the bfa binding.
130 the case comes down to fundamental propositions that being satisfied the wife did not receive independent legal advice, should the court nonetheless, save the agreement? my concern with respect to ms b’s lack of independence is not based on the husband paying for her services and nor is it based on the husband having made the initial enquiry. the lack of independence and consequent failure to clearly identify the parties’ separate interests also raises doubt that ms b gave the wife the requisite advice. in my view, the parties receiving independent legal advice before contracting out of the act is so fundamental to the legislation and the protections and safeguards put in place that it would not be appropriate to exercise my discretion to declare it inequitable and unjust for the agreement to be non-binding. for these reasons i will declare the binding financial agreement signed by the parties on 24 june 2006 as not binding within the meaning of s 90g of the act.
131 the parties have incurred considerable costs to date and will incur further costs given my findings. the matter will be listed for directions before a registrar on 16 november 2021 at 9.45am which will give the parties’ time to consider the next steps. the husband will need to file an amended application setting out the final orders he seeks. the wife will need to amend her response to particularise the final orders she seeks.
associate: dated: 6 october 2021
[1] hoult & hoult [2013] famcafc 109; (2013) 50 fam lr 260 [62]. [2] see thackary cj’s discussion at paragraphs 127 to 129 in hoult and hoult.[3] best practice guide for legal practitioners in relation to elder financial abuse - law council of australia, 22 september 2020. [4] australian law reform commission, elder abuse: a national legal response (report no 131, 14 june 2017).[5] see the discussion in piper & mueller [2015] famcafc 241