last updated: 4 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gladwell & gladwell [2022] fedcfamc2f 985
orders
the court orders that:  spend the first week of the school holidays commencing 4 july 2022 with the father, and (b) spend the second week of the school holidays with the mother.   spend the second week of the school holidays with the mother.
consent orders
file and serve material
appointment of an independent children’s lawyer
section 69zw – department of communities and justice and nsw police  any notification to the agency of suspected abuse of or by the following: (i) mr gladwell born 1975 (father), (ii) ms gladwell, who may also be recorded by the surname gladwell, born 1974 (mother), and (iii) master x born 2012 (subject child) (b) any notification of suspected family violence affecting the above persons or any of them, (c) any assessment by the agency of investigations into a notification of suspected abuse or family violence and/or the findings and outcomes of those investigations, and (d) any reports commissioned by the agency in the course of investigating a notification. and provided that no document need be provided which identifies directly, indirectly or by reference the identity of any notifier or witness (unless a party to the proceedings or a police officer) and to achieve compliance with this order and with section 69zw(3) the entirety of documents in the possession or control of the agency are to be produced to the court and prior to production any names of notifiers or any material that would infer, suggest or disclose the identity of a notifier or witness is to be blanked out or otherwise removed or obliterated from the document/s so produced.   mr gladwell born 1975 (father), (ii) ms gladwell, who may also be recorded by the surname gladwell, born 1974 (mother), and (iii) master x born 2012 (subject child)  ) ms gladwell, who may also be recorded by the surname gladwell, born 1974 (mother), and (iii) master x born 2012 (subject child)  i) master x born 2012 (subject child)   any notification of suspected family violence affecting the above persons or any of them, (c) any assessment by the agency of investigations into a notification of suspected abuse or family violence and/or the findings and outcomes of those investigations, and (d) any reports commissioned by the agency in the course of investigating a notification. and provided that no document need be provided which identifies directly, indirectly or by reference the identity of any notifier or witness (unless a party to the proceedings or a police officer) and to achieve compliance with this order and with section 69zw(3) the entirety of documents in the possession or control of the agency are to be produced to the court and prior to production any names of notifiers or any material that would infer, suggest or disclose the identity of a notifier or witness is to be blanked out or otherwise removed or obliterated from the document/s so produced.   any assessment by the agency of investigations into a notification of suspected abuse or family violence and/or the findings and outcomes of those investigations, and (d) any reports commissioned by the agency in the course of investigating a notification. and provided that no document need be provided which identifies directly, indirectly or by reference the identity of any notifier or witness (unless a party to the proceedings or a police officer) and to achieve compliance with this order and with section 69zw(3) the entirety of documents in the possession or control of the agency are to be produced to the court and prior to production any names of notifiers or any material that would infer, suggest or disclose the identity of a notifier or witness is to be blanked out or otherwise removed or obliterated from the document/s so produced.   any reports commissioned by the agency in the course of investigating a notification. and provided that no document need be provided which identifies directly, indirectly or by reference the identity of any notifier or witness (unless a party to the proceedings or a police officer) and to achieve compliance with this order and with section 69zw(3) the entirety of documents in the possession or control of the agency are to be produced to the court and prior to production any names of notifiers or any material that would infer, suggest or disclose the identity of a notifier or witness is to be blanked out or otherwise removed or obliterated from the document/s so produced.
and provided that no document need be provided which identifies directly, indirectly or by reference the identity of any notifier or witness (unless a party to the proceedings or a police officer) and to achieve compliance with this order and with section 69zw(3) the entirety of documents in the possession or control of the agency are to be produced to the court and prior to production any names of notifiers or any material that would infer, suggest or disclose the identity of a notifier or witness is to be blanked out or otherwise removed or obliterated from the document/s so produced.
section 245d – nsw police  a list of cops events that relate to the safety, welfare and wellbeing of the subject child listed below, (b) the corresponding event reports or cases, and (c) their criminal history/bail report.   the corresponding event reports or cases, and (c) their criminal history/bail report.   their criminal history/bail report.   mr gladwell born 1975 (father) (b) ms gladwell, who may also be recorded by the surname gladwell, born 1974 (mother) (c) master x born 2012 (subject child)   ms gladwell, who may also be recorded by the surname gladwell, born 1974 (mother) (c) master x born 2012 (subject child)   master x born 2012 (subject child)
dismissal of applications
transfer of proceedings
the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge eldershaw:  order 30: except in the case of an emergency, the mother is hereby restrained from presenting x to police or to welfare authorities for interview without the father’s written consent, (b) order 31: the mother is hereby restrained from making a complaint to police about the father in the presence or hearing of x, or causing x to attend or be present at a police station or otherwise be cared for by a police officer at any time at which she makes such complaint, and (c) order 32: that except in the case of an emergency, the mother is hereby restrained from facilitating x’s attendance upon a medical or allied health practitioner without the father’s prior written consent.   order 31: the mother is hereby restrained from making a complaint to police about the father in the presence or hearing of x, or causing x to attend or be present at a police station or otherwise be cared for by a police officer at any time at which she makes such complaint, and (c) order 32: that except in the case of an emergency, the mother is hereby restrained from facilitating x’s attendance upon a medical or allied health practitioner without the father’s prior written consent.   order 32: that except in the case of an emergency, the mother is hereby restrained from facilitating x’s attendance upon a medical or allied health practitioner without the father’s prior written consent.
the evidence
the procedure for making interim parenting orders will continue to be an abridged process where the scope of the enquiry is “significantly curtailed”. where the court cannot make findings of fact it should not be drawn into issues of fact or matters relating to the merits of the substantive case where findings are not possible. the court also looks to the less contentious matters, such as the agreed facts and issues not in dispute and would have regard to the care arrangements prior to separation, the current circumstances of the parties and their children, and the parties’ respective proposals for the future.
background
he [[x]] wanted it “documented” that he is tired because you are giving him the medicine he’s not supposed to have. he also said he was scared to go home with you so i reminded him that he was going up with mum today. i said i would talk about it with you. he said he has also missed a tele appointment with his doctor? i had a bit of a chat with him about the role that mum and dad play when there is a breakup and i explained to him that parents may disagree.
and it goes on, with ms ff saying at the end:
i hope [x] is continuing to have psychological support outside the family.
there are ongoing disputes between the person reporting (pr) and the person named (pn) in relation to the care of their son [x]. the person named, the father, has custody of the child, with the person reporting, the mother, having him five nights per fortnight.
police believe that the mother has dropped the child to [suburb c] station to report the incident so to use the incident for custody issues.
and then, further and lastly:
police believe that she is making the child report an incident when there is no incident, to get custody. the event rejected. no further action is required.
the report provided to police suggests the presence of doxylamine and doxepin in the hair sample [dr rr] confirmed that doxylamine is a short term sedative that is available over the counter and doxepin is a tricyclic antidepressant commonly used to treat insomnia and is only available by prescription.
he [x] appeared upset and said, “i don’t want to live with my dad, i want to stay with my mum”.
i [ms w] spoke with the mother about my role. i recorded some notes –
again, the same notes that are not annexed to her affidavit, nor before me.
i introduced myself to sergeant [yy] as [x’s] advocate and explained that i was an experienced domestic violence investigator.
she goes on at paragraph 14 that she:
...has since been informed that there was no event created.
then at paragraph 15, on 19 march 2022:
i [ms w] followed up my concerns with the supervisor at [suburb zz] police station.
and then at paragraph 16:
i [ms w] made it very clear that i was [x’s] advocate for the dcj interview and that i held independent concerns for his safety.
i [ms w] appreciate your perspective that these allegations of assault have not been reported to or investigated by police.
and detective vv said:
if you can send through the court orders, that would help me.
then, at paragraph 22, ms w goes on and says that:
on 24 march 2022, [x] called me using the respondent’s phone.
again, no context:
and he [[x]] told me that police had come to speak to him on 22 march.
then, no context.
he [[x]] said that they introduced themselves and asked if they could speak to him, but [x] said he was scared to speak to the police directly, but they had not done anything to help him in the past and asked me to be there when he did.
i told them, i don’t want to speak to you [the police] unless my advocate [ms y] is here.   said the police immediately turned off the video camera and they responded:
okay, we will contact her.   then added:
the police then spoke to the assistant principal at my school. the police told him they would contact me and organise to talk to me then they left.   sounded very upset [says ms w] and says:
they are not going to believe me, [ms y]. no‑one believes me. if dad finds out he will kill me.
i was disappointed to hear that the police attended [x’s] school without contacting me first, but understand and have given the benefit of the doubt that it was for the purpose of a welfare check.
she goes on:
as i have indicated, there are grave concerns for [x’s] health and wellbeing and i hope that you would attend to this matter as soon as possible. i have not been advised of the date for the interview with the child abuse unit and would like to reiterate that [x] has asked that i be present as his advocate in accordance with his child and human rights.
considerations
conclusion
associate: dated: 28 june 2022
dated: 28 june 2022