last updated: 18 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mcclain & heath [2022] fedcfamc2f 868
orders
the court orders that:
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge betts:
introduction
short chronology
pre-relationship: the husband
pre-relationship: the wife
2008: parties meet & commence a casual relationship
2010: parties commence cohabiting in a de facto relationship
first separation
relationship resumes
summary of the de facto relationship
2016: husband inherits suburb e property from his father
these proceedings  her case outline document filed 27 november 2019, (b) her trial affidavit filed 28 july 2021, (c) her financial statement filed 28 july 2021.   her trial affidavit filed 28 july 2021, (c) her financial statement filed 28 july 2021.   her financial statement filed 28 july 2021.   his outline of case document filed 24 august 2021, (b) his trial affidavit filed 28 july 2021, (c) his financial statement filed 28 july 2021.   his trial affidavit filed 28 july 2021, (c) his financial statement filed 28 july 2021.   his financial statement filed 28 july 2021.   she had wilfully delayed in complying with the husband’s requests – and this court’s orders – that she provide a copy of her centrelink file to the husband, [1] (b) the reasons for her delay were obvious once she did produce the centrelink file. it was immediately apparent that she had misrepresented her living circumstances to them over a lengthy period, [2] (c) acutely aware of her centrelink issues, the wife had deposed in a generic way that her son mr d was living with the parties in a caravan at the suburb e property. [3] in truth he lived at city b and was only at suburb e for the last few months of the relationship. (d) the wife failed to provide full and frank disclosure of her bank statements: (i) the bank statements she did disclose were incomplete in that the wife had personally redacted relevant and discoverable information, [4] (ii) bank statements were missing, particularly for the timeframe of the first separation. the wife claimed that she had given the bank statements to her former solicitor who was refusing to release them to her, asserting a lien for unpaid fees. but this is implausible. if her previous solicitors in fact held the missing bank statements then they ought to have been disclosed much earlier – for instance during the first tranche of the hearing when they were still acting. (e) the wife’s affidavit had deposed that during the relationship she earned approximately $800 per week on average as a customer service officer, in addition to a carer’s pension for mr d of between $100 and $800 per fortnight depending on the hours she had worked. in the witness box she conceded that this was wrong, she meant to say that she earned an average income of $800 per week from both sources combined.   the reasons for her delay were obvious once she did produce the centrelink file. it was immediately apparent that she had misrepresented her living circumstances to them over a lengthy period, [2] (c) acutely aware of her centrelink issues, the wife had deposed in a generic way that her son mr d was living with the parties in a caravan at the suburb e property. [3] in truth he lived at city b and was only at suburb e for the last few months of the relationship. (d) the wife failed to provide full and frank disclosure of her bank statements: (i) the bank statements she did disclose were incomplete in that the wife had personally redacted relevant and discoverable information, [4] (ii) bank statements were missing, particularly for the timeframe of the first separation. the wife claimed that she had given the bank statements to her former solicitor who was refusing to release them to her, asserting a lien for unpaid fees. but this is implausible. if her previous solicitors in fact held the missing bank statements then they ought to have been disclosed much earlier – for instance during the first tranche of the hearing when they were still acting. (e) the wife’s affidavit had deposed that during the relationship she earned approximately $800 per week on average as a customer service officer, in addition to a carer’s pension for mr d of between $100 and $800 per fortnight depending on the hours she had worked. in the witness box she conceded that this was wrong, she meant to say that she earned an average income of $800 per week from both sources combined.   acutely aware of her centrelink issues, the wife had deposed in a generic way that her son mr d was living with the parties in a caravan at the suburb e property. [3] in truth he lived at city b and was only at suburb e for the last few months of the relationship. (d) the wife failed to provide full and frank disclosure of her bank statements: (i) the bank statements she did disclose were incomplete in that the wife had personally redacted relevant and discoverable information, [4] (ii) bank statements were missing, particularly for the timeframe of the first separation. the wife claimed that she had given the bank statements to her former solicitor who was refusing to release them to her, asserting a lien for unpaid fees. but this is implausible. if her previous solicitors in fact held the missing bank statements then they ought to have been disclosed much earlier – for instance during the first tranche of the hearing when they were still acting. (e) the wife’s affidavit had deposed that during the relationship she earned approximately $800 per week on average as a customer service officer, in addition to a carer’s pension for mr d of between $100 and $800 per fortnight depending on the hours she had worked. in the witness box she conceded that this was wrong, she meant to say that she earned an average income of $800 per week from both sources combined.   the wife failed to provide full and frank disclosure of her bank statements: (i) the bank statements she did disclose were incomplete in that the wife had personally redacted relevant and discoverable information, [4] (ii) bank statements were missing, particularly for the timeframe of the first separation. the wife claimed that she had given the bank statements to her former solicitor who was refusing to release them to her, asserting a lien for unpaid fees. but this is implausible. if her previous solicitors in fact held the missing bank statements then they ought to have been disclosed much earlier – for instance during the first tranche of the hearing when they were still acting. (e) the wife’s affidavit had deposed that during the relationship she earned approximately $800 per week on average as a customer service officer, in addition to a carer’s pension for mr d of between $100 and $800 per fortnight depending on the hours she had worked. in the witness box she conceded that this was wrong, she meant to say that she earned an average income of $800 per week from both sources combined.   the bank statements she did disclose were incomplete in that the wife had personally redacted relevant and discoverable information, [4] (ii) bank statements were missing, particularly for the timeframe of the first separation. the wife claimed that she had given the bank statements to her former solicitor who was refusing to release them to her, asserting a lien for unpaid fees. but this is implausible. if her previous solicitors in fact held the missing bank statements then they ought to have been disclosed much earlier – for instance during the first tranche of the hearing when they were still acting. (e) the wife’s affidavit had deposed that during the relationship she earned approximately $800 per week on average as a customer service officer, in addition to a carer’s pension for mr d of between $100 and $800 per fortnight depending on the hours she had worked. in the witness box she conceded that this was wrong, she meant to say that she earned an average income of $800 per week from both sources combined.  ) bank statements were missing, particularly for the timeframe of the first separation. the wife claimed that she had given the bank statements to her former solicitor who was refusing to release them to her, asserting a lien for unpaid fees. but this is implausible. if her previous solicitors in fact held the missing bank statements then they ought to have been disclosed much earlier – for instance during the first tranche of the hearing when they were still acting. (e) the wife’s affidavit had deposed that during the relationship she earned approximately $800 per week on average as a customer service officer, in addition to a carer’s pension for mr d of between $100 and $800 per fortnight depending on the hours she had worked. in the witness box she conceded that this was wrong, she meant to say that she earned an average income of $800 per week from both sources combined.   the wife’s affidavit had deposed that during the relationship she earned approximately $800 per week on average as a customer service officer, in addition to a carer’s pension for mr d of between $100 and $800 per fortnight depending on the hours she had worked. in the witness box she conceded that this was wrong, she meant to say that she earned an average income of $800 per week from both sources combined.
but even that concession was grossly exaggerated. her income tax documents revealed a combined income from employment and the carer’s pension of $8,476 in fy 2011 (averaging $163 per week), $14,128 in fy 2012 ($271 per week), $19,873 in fy 2013 ($382 per week), $16,350 in fy 2014 ($314 per week), $28,319 in fy 2015 ($544 per week) and $38,633 in fy 2016 ($742 per week),   on 28 july 2021, the wife filed an updated financial statement for the purposes of the trial. but it was not “updated” at all, it was no more than a line-by-line copy of her financial statement filed on 21 october 2019. the dollar figures were identical to the cent. despite claiming that her expenses exceeded her income by $109 each week, her bank account balance was unchanged at $850 in both documents. her son was aged 31 in both documents. confronted with this rather obvious copying, the wife stubbornly denied it and instead claimed that her updated financial statement was truly an update and that her son’s age in the updated document was a “typo”, (g) the wife categorically denied the husband’s allegation that she had come into the relationship with a $9,000 debt. yet at the hearing the husband was able to produce a letter to the wife from victims services nsw dated 30 august 2011 confirming a debt to them of $9,250 as at that date. faced with that letter, the wife admitted the debt although denied having ever received the letter in question.   the wife categorically denied the husband’s allegation that she had come into the relationship with a $9,000 debt. yet at the hearing the husband was able to produce a letter to the wife from victims services nsw dated 30 august 2011 confirming a debt to them of $9,250 as at that date. faced with that letter, the wife admitted the debt although denied having ever received the letter in question.
given her modest financial position at the start of the relationship, i do not accept that the wife ever forgot about that debt. but even if she had, the husband’s earlier affidavit had referred to her being in debt and this ought to have refreshed her memory. moreover i do not accept that the wife never received the letter in question. it had been posted to her po box at city b, a mailing address she had used for some twenty (20) years.
part viiiab of the family law act
section 90sm alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate:   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or (b) ... including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring: (i) either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or (ii) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any), to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines. (2) ... (3) the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) ...   the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) ... (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme... and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) ...   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and   the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) ... (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) ... (o) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under this part in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) ..., and (p) ... (q) ... (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   identify and value the assets, liabilities and financial resources of the parties (“the balance sheet”), (ii) identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards their net property pursuant to section 90sm(4) of the act, (iii) consider relevant “future factors” prescribed in s 90sm(4)(e) and s 90sf(3) of the act, as well as the matters set out in section s 90sm(4)(d) and s 90sm(4)(f), (iv) address the “just and equitable” requirement in s 90sm(3). [5]  ) identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards their net property pursuant to section 90sm(4) of the act, (iii) consider relevant “future factors” prescribed in s 90sm(4)(e) and s 90sf(3) of the act, as well as the matters set out in section s 90sm(4)(d) and s 90sm(4)(f), (iv) address the “just and equitable” requirement in s 90sm(3). [5]  i) consider relevant “future factors” prescribed in s 90sm(4)(e) and s 90sf(3) of the act, as well as the matters set out in section s 90sm(4)(d) and s 90sm(4)(f), (iv) address the “just and equitable” requirement in s 90sm(3). [5]  ) address the “just and equitable” requirement in s 90sm(3). [5]
the balance sheet
assessing the contributions of the parties
initial contributions:
contributions during the relationship:
the care provided by the wife to the husband’s father during the relationship:
post-separation:
conclusion as to contributions:
consideration of the “future factors”
is it just & equitable to make a property settlement order in this case? if so, then what order would be just & equitable?  first, it is necessary to begin consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, in accordance with ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. so much follows from the text of the section itself, which refers to altering the interests of the parties in the property. the question posed by [s 90sm(3)] is whether, having regard to those existing interests, it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order, (ii) secondly, although the discretion conferred by the section is a broad one, it is not to be exercised in an unprincipled way but rather in accordance with legal principles, including those which the act itself lays down. it is not to be assumed that the parties’ rights to or interests in property are or should be different from those that then exist. marriage does not give rise to “community of ownership” of property at common law, (iii) third, whether making a property settlement order is just and equitable is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has a right to an order fixed by reference to the matters set out in [s 90sm(4)]. to conclude that making an order is just and equitable only by reference to the matters in [s 90sm(4)], without a separate consideration of [s 90sm(3)], is to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the act.  ) secondly, although the discretion conferred by the section is a broad one, it is not to be exercised in an unprincipled way but rather in accordance with legal principles, including those which the act itself lays down. it is not to be assumed that the parties’ rights to or interests in property are or should be different from those that then exist. marriage does not give rise to “community of ownership” of property at common law, (iii) third, whether making a property settlement order is just and equitable is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has a right to an order fixed by reference to the matters set out in [s 90sm(4)]. to conclude that making an order is just and equitable only by reference to the matters in [s 90sm(4)], without a separate consideration of [s 90sm(3)], is to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the act.  i) third, whether making a property settlement order is just and equitable is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has a right to an order fixed by reference to the matters set out in [s 90sm(4)]. to conclude that making an order is just and equitable only by reference to the matters in [s 90sm(4)], without a separate consideration of [s 90sm(3)], is to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the act.
why it would not be just & equitable to make any order
conclusion
associate:
dated: 4 july 2022
[1] order 2 of 01/09/20, order 2 of 28/07/21[2] there are numerous instances contained in exhibit 1. for instance on 02/02/11 she falsely failed to declare that she was living in a de facto relationship with the husband at suburb e; in april 2011, october 2011 and may/june 2015 she falsely asserted that she was still living with mr d at city b[3] wife’s affidavit, paragraph 35[4] redactions included her address; the amounts (and account numbers) in respect of various transactions; the identity of the landlord to whom she paid rent in city b[5] this pathway is based upon the full court’s decision in hickey v hickey & attorney general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395; (2003) flc 93-143 adapted by me to take into account the high court’s decision in stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) flc 93-518[6] i do not accept that she spent $200 per week on food as she claims[7] wife’s affidavit, paragraph 40[8] see paragraph [17] of these reasons[9] the purchase itself would constitute a financial contribution but it is convenient to deal with it here[10] wife’s affidavit, paragraph 32. [11] her medical condition is misspelled in paragraph 89 of her affidavit[12] or hypothetically if the wife had care of a child of the de facto relationship[13] see paragraphs 36 – 40 (inclusive) of the plurality judgment at pp. 86,640 - 86,641. although their honours were specifically dealing with part viii of the act, i have substituted the corresponding provisions of part viiiab [14] these matters were relevant to a finding that it would not be just and equitable to make any order in chancellor & mccoy [2016] fcca 53 (her honour judge turner), affirmed on appeal by the full court (bryant cj, thackray & strickland jj) in chancellor & mccoy [2016] famcafc 256