last updated: 18 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
flynn & hadley [2022] fedcfamc2f 892
orders
the court orders that:  seventy-five percent to the wife, and (b) the balance to the husband.   the balance to the husband.
reasons for judgmentjudge campbell
background
competing proposals of each party
the relevant law in relation to the division of assets.  the age and state of health of each of the parties, (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account.   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account.   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account.
issues  when did the de facto relationship commence? (b) what are the existing rights, entitlements, and liabilities of the parties? (c) what were the contributions of each party pursuant to s 90sm(4) of the act, and what weight should be given to them? (d) what are the future needs of the parties pursuant to s 90sf(3) of the act, and what weight should be given to them?   what are the existing rights, entitlements, and liabilities of the parties? (c) what were the contributions of each party pursuant to s 90sm(4) of the act, and what weight should be given to them? (d) what are the future needs of the parties pursuant to s 90sf(3) of the act, and what weight should be given to them?   what were the contributions of each party pursuant to s 90sm(4) of the act, and what weight should be given to them? (d) what are the future needs of the parties pursuant to s 90sf(3) of the act, and what weight should be given to them?   what are the future needs of the parties pursuant to s 90sf(3) of the act, and what weight should be given to them?   has the husband failed to provide full and frank disclosure and, if so, what effect should that have? (b) has the husband deliberately hidden or fabricated evidence in relation to certain motor vehicles, in an attempt to exclude them from the nett asset pool or reduce their value and, so, what effect should that have?   has the husband deliberately hidden or fabricated evidence in relation to certain motor vehicles, in an attempt to exclude them from the nett asset pool or reduce their value and, so, what effect should that have?
when did the de facto relationship commence?
meaning of de facto relationship (1) a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if: (a) the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and   having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   those circumstances may include any or all of the following:   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them,   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship,   no particular finding in relation to any circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have a de facto relationship. (4) a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case.   a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case.
our relationship became stronger we became publicly a couple [...] and after discussing it with ms flynn and because the relationship was going well and i loved her, we agreed to move in together.
what are the existing rights, entitlements and liabilities of the parties?
the wife’s company g shares.
the motor vehicle 2
ownership
me: “if you can’t afford to pay the mortgage, sell your motor vehicle 2 or your shares.” mr hadley: “i can’t do that, they’re part of my estate.” neither mr hadley nor his son, mr j ever advised me that mr hadley had gifted the motor vehicle 2 to him. the motor vehicle 2 was purchased unregistered and has not been registered throughout the relationship. the motor vehicle 2 was insured in mr hadley’s name with k insurance throughout the relationship.
me: ''what do you think it is worth?" mr hadley: "it's my superannuation. it's worth about $80,000.00." i recall sighting the motor vehicle 2 on 16 april 2019. i was assisting with laying concrete in the laundry room of mr hadley and ms flynn's home on that day. ms m and i went away for a trip in the second half of july in 2019 and it was during this time that the motor vehicle 2 was removed from the garage and mr hadley moved out of the house. (emphasis added)
counsel for the husband: and you give some evidence about the motor vehicle 2 that – the car? mr l: yes. counsel for the husband: you’ve seen that car? mr l: on numerous occasions. counsel for the husband: do you recall when it first arrived? mr l: no. as i said in my affidavit, it wasn’t – he didn’t bring that as soon as he moved in but, as i said in my affidavit, it was there for the majority of time that he lived there in b street, suburb c. counsel for the husband: and you don’t recall the exact date that it left, either, then, i take it? mr l: i was away, as it shows in my affidavit. we went away in the second half of july 2019, and both mr hadley and the car had gone when we got back. counsel for the husband: is it possible that it had gone before that date? mr l: no, because, in a lot of the work we were doing on the house, it was a real painful exercise to get round it in the garage.  phasis added)
counsel for the husband: it’s the case that you lived at the residence where ms flynn and mr hadley lived for two periods of time, two distinct periods of time? mr n: that’s correct. counsel for the husband: that’s correct? mr n: yes. counsel for the husband: and then the second period of time, had the motor vehicle 2 moved and not been at the residence? mr n: sorry. i wasn’t sure...during which period the motor vehicle 2 came to ms flynn’s – ms flynn’s residence. it was either the first or second period that i resided there when the motor vehicle 2 appeared in the garage. counsel for the husband: okay. and by the end of the second period of time, had it left? mr n: no. it was still in the garage. his honour: what date do you mean by the end of the second period, mr lo schiavo? counsel for the husband: may 2018. would that be the end of the second period when you resided there mr n? mr n: correct. counsel for the husband: and when you say it was in the garage, it was in parts in the garage, to put it...? mr n: sorry. could you please repeat that? counsel for the husband: it was in – it was in parts. it wasn’t complete. like, the engine wasn’t there, no wheels on it or – you know, it wasn’t a complete car, was it? mr n: there was a – a period where mr hadley was working on the car doing, you know, various things, and that would be taking various parts off or putting them back on. i remember being wheels there that you have mentioned. there were wheels on the car. there were engine parts underneath the bonnet. i don’t know whether it was a complete engine. i – i never heard the engine actually turn over, but i did see various parts of the car put together, but due to that constant changing state of the vehicle, i couldn’t be sure whether it was ever in a complete state or not. counsel for the husband: and you say that you assisted mr hadley with his work on the car at occasions, so... and he would say, “can you hand me a wrench”, or something like that? mr n: yes (emphasis added)
7. the vehicle has been valued and i do believe it was valued at $20,000.00.
counsel for the wife: right. and you give evidence that the [motor vehicle 2] vehicle was insured through k insurance in your father’s name? mr e: that’s correct. counsel for the wife: say, in 2014 how much was it costing for insurance? mr e: i don’t know. it wasn’t my premium to pay. counsel for the wife: in 2016 how much was it costing in insurance? mr e: once again, i don’t know. it wasn’t my premium to pay. counsel for the wife: in 2018 how much was it costing you in insurance? mr e: once again, don’t know. it wasn’t my premium to pay. counsel for the wife: in 2019 how much was it costing in insurance? mr e: once again, it wasn’t my premium to pay. counsel for the wife: how much is it costing in insurance now? mr e: don’t know. it’s not my premium to pay. his honour: sir, can you assist me to understand what you mean when you say it’s not your premium to pay? mr e: the car is currently insured under my father’s name through k insurance, not my name or my brother’s name, because it was insured that way in the beginning when my dad first got the car and we never changed it over at this point in time because we just never see the need to change it over. it was cheaper to be in my dad’s name with the insurance premium, so we just kept it that way.
7(a) i give to my son mr j the right to buy from my trustee my motor vehicle 2 motor vehicle at 75% of the market value determined by a person with knowledge of the value of restored motor vehicle 2s. (b) if mr j wishes to exercise his right under this clause he shall inform my trustee in writing within eight weeks of the date of my death. (c) if mr j exercises his right under this clause then the proceeds from the sale received by my estate shall be divided equally between my sons mr e , mr q and my daughter ms r. (d) if mr j does not exercise his right under this clause in the motor vehicle 2 shall form part of my residuary estate.
value
counsel for the husband: and this vehicle doesn’t have an engine, that’s correct? the wife: no, it doesn’t have an – well, it has an engine, yes, it does, but that wasn’t in the car. counsel for the husband: where – and where do you say the engine was kept? the wife: the engine was kept in the garage, but it wasn’t in the car. counsel for the husband: is it an engine that you’re referring to, or a box of spare parts? the wife: it was an engine and a gearbox and boxes of spare parts. counsel for the husband: do you hold any mechanical qualification? the wife: no, i’m not a mechanic. counsel for the husband: the engine that you’re referring to, how do you know that it is an engine that would fit that car? the wife: because mr hadley told me and i was with him when he bought it in melbourne. (emphasis added)
counsel for the husband: okay. in fairness to you, ms flynn, i have to put a particular proposition to you so i can say i’ve put it to you. the engine was never in that garage, would you accept that or reject that? the wife: mr hadley told me it was there and i believed what i saw was there. counsel for the husband: so your – it could be another engine was there and not the engine for that car? the wife: he had car parts everywhere but i know there was an engine to that car. counsel for the husband: so, in fairness, i will put that again. it’s possible that what you thought was the engine for the motor vehicle 2, in fact, wasn’t the engine for the motor vehicle 2, that’s possible? the wife: it’s possible. i did see the engine when he bought the car in melbourne. counsel for the husband: and it wasn’t in the car at that time, was it? the wife: no. counsel for the husband: and you saw the engine then. do you say it was the engine – you recognised it then as being the engine that was in the garage? the wife: well, we are talking about a long time ago. i would have thought it was the same engine. counsel for the husband: but it’s possible it wasn’t? the wife: it’s possible.
counsel for the wife: it’s the case, isn’t it, that when this car was made available to the valuer, the valuer was not shown the engine and the transmission? the husband: yes. counsel for the wife: and the valuer was left with the impression that there was not an engine and transmission? the husband: well, there was none there. counsel for the wife: so where was the engine and transmission at the time of that report? the husband: melbourne. counsel for the wife: why? the husband: been sitting for 40 years, so it needed an overhaul. counsel for the wife: it was sent to melbourne for some work to be done? the husband: yes. it needed an overhaul because it had been sitting for 40 years without rotating. (emphasis added)
counsel for the wife: when your honour goes through the insurance documents, your honour will see – clearly see that the property – that the car, the motor vehicle 2, has an agreed value of $80,000. your honour will see that in multiple insurance documents. his honour: 80? counsel for the wife: yes, 80. counsel for the husband: i was told 40. your honour, there’s 40 – your honour can – there is – it depends which year in – there is one that, i think a multiple of maybe two, that says 80. the vast majority of them say 40. it’s – they’re – all of the documents are before the court. (emphasis added)
counsel for the husband: your honour would see that it’s repeatedly, over a number of years, valued at 45,000 not the 80,000 but if it’s ‑ ‑ (emphasis added )
this court has pointed out in a line of cases leading up to the recent decision of the full court in black and kellner [1992] famca 2, (1992) flc 92-287, that it is the duty of a party involved in property proceedings in this jurisdiction to make a full disclosure of their financial affairs. see also giunti and giunti [1986] famca 15, (1986) flc 91-759, and mezzacappa and mezzacappa [1987] famca 20, (1987) 11 fam lr 957, (1987) flc 91-853. [...] it seems to us that once it has been established that there has been a deliberate non-disclosure, which follows from his honour's findings in this case, then the court should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the innocent party. to do otherwise might be thought to provide a charter for fraud in proceedings of this nature.
it does not matter what the principle might be seen to be, a court has to do the best it can. it does the best it can, having regard to the evidence that is adduced, and if the parties are not frank then naturally there is going to be a measure of imprecision about any findings that the court can make.
the husband’s cars – other than the motor vehicle 2
27. [...] when i left the relationship in may 2019, i had one motor vehicle 3 valued at $1,000. attached and marked “8” is a copy of my transport main roads and maritime services history and insurance documents.
the motor vehicle 3
the motor vehicle 4
the motor vehicle 6
the motor vehicle 7  the motor vehicle 3, (b) the motor vehicle 4, (c) the motor vehicle 6, and (d) the motor vehicle 7.   the motor vehicle 4, (c) the motor vehicle 6, and (d) the motor vehicle 7.   the motor vehicle 6, and (d) the motor vehicle 7.   the motor vehicle 7.
the husband’s superannuation entitlements.
the nett asset pool - conclusion
what were the contributions of each party, and what weight should be given to them?
what contributions were made by the husband?  a motor vehicle 8, (b) a motor vehicle 9 , (c) a motor vehicle 6, and (d) a motor vehicle 10.   a motor vehicle 9 , (c) a motor vehicle 6, and (d) a motor vehicle 10.   a motor vehicle 6, and (d) a motor vehicle 10.   a motor vehicle 10.
a. employment $1,166,483 b. tax refunds $26,725.90
year
gross income
tax payable
nett income
2011/12 (at 75%)
98,231
29,160
69,071
2012/13
148,575
45,720
102,855
2013/14
158,315
49,961
108,354
2014/15
195,571
48,402
147,169
2015/16
nil
2016/17
56,202
10,779
45,423
2017/18
61,056
12,526
48,530
2018/19
total
717,950
196,548
521,402   monies obtained from pre-cohabitation savings, sale of shares and superannuation entitlements with an unknown value, (b) payment in the amount of $1,244.43 for the transfer of the b street, suburb c house from mr flynn into the joint ownership of the parties, (c) payment of almost all of the instalments for repayment of the mortgage debt in relation to the b street, suburb c house up to the date he left that property, (d) payment of some household living expenses and renovation expenses with an unknown value, (e) providing motor vehicles to, or for the use of, the wife and her family, and (f) the provision of discounted flights and accommodation with an unknown value.   payment in the amount of $1,244.43 for the transfer of the b street, suburb c house from mr flynn into the joint ownership of the parties, (c) payment of almost all of the instalments for repayment of the mortgage debt in relation to the b street, suburb c house up to the date he left that property, (d) payment of some household living expenses and renovation expenses with an unknown value, (e) providing motor vehicles to, or for the use of, the wife and her family, and (f) the provision of discounted flights and accommodation with an unknown value.   payment of almost all of the instalments for repayment of the mortgage debt in relation to the b street, suburb c house up to the date he left that property, (d) payment of some household living expenses and renovation expenses with an unknown value, (e) providing motor vehicles to, or for the use of, the wife and her family, and (f) the provision of discounted flights and accommodation with an unknown value.   payment of some household living expenses and renovation expenses with an unknown value, (e) providing motor vehicles to, or for the use of, the wife and her family, and (f) the provision of discounted flights and accommodation with an unknown value.   providing motor vehicles to, or for the use of, the wife and her family, and (f) the provision of discounted flights and accommodation with an unknown value.   the provision of discounted flights and accommodation with an unknown value.
what contributions were made by the wife?  an unencumbered one half share in the b street, suburb c house, (b) $115,000 in savings, (c) a motor vehicle 12 of unknown value, and (d) superannuation entitlements worth $300.   $115,000 in savings, (c) a motor vehicle 12 of unknown value, and (d) superannuation entitlements worth $300.   a motor vehicle 12 of unknown value, and (d) superannuation entitlements worth $300.   superannuation entitlements worth $300.   a direct financial contribution of assets brought into the relationship by the wife, including an unencumbered half share in the b street, suburb c house, with a total value $607,500, (b) an indirect financial contribution from her nett wages over the course of the relationship toward household expenses in an unknown amount, (c) contributions as homemaker, substantially greater over the course of the relationship than the contributions of the husband in that regard, (d) a direct financial contribution toward the restoration and repair of the b street, suburb c house in the sum of approximately $60,000, (e) a direct non-financial contribution toward the restoration and repair of the b street, suburb c house by organising and managing that work, and undertaking some of the work herself.   an indirect financial contribution from her nett wages over the course of the relationship toward household expenses in an unknown amount, (c) contributions as homemaker, substantially greater over the course of the relationship than the contributions of the husband in that regard, (d) a direct financial contribution toward the restoration and repair of the b street, suburb c house in the sum of approximately $60,000, (e) a direct non-financial contribution toward the restoration and repair of the b street, suburb c house by organising and managing that work, and undertaking some of the work herself.   contributions as homemaker, substantially greater over the course of the relationship than the contributions of the husband in that regard, (d) a direct financial contribution toward the restoration and repair of the b street, suburb c house in the sum of approximately $60,000, (e) a direct non-financial contribution toward the restoration and repair of the b street, suburb c house by organising and managing that work, and undertaking some of the work herself.   a direct financial contribution toward the restoration and repair of the b street, suburb c house in the sum of approximately $60,000, (e) a direct non-financial contribution toward the restoration and repair of the b street, suburb c house by organising and managing that work, and undertaking some of the work herself.   a direct non-financial contribution toward the restoration and repair of the b street, suburb c house by organising and managing that work, and undertaking some of the work herself.
what weight should be given to the respective contributions of each party?
what are the future needs of the parties, and what weight should be given to them?  the age and state of health of each of the parties,   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account.
the age and state of health of each of the parties
the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment
any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account.
decision
associate: dated: 7 july 2022
dated: 7 july 2022