last updated: 18 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
eden & eden [2022] fedcfamc2f 891
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
the proceedings
86 de facto relationships that broke down before commencement (1) subject to item 86a, parts viiiab and viiib, and subsection 114(2a), of the new act do not apply in relation to a de facto relationship that broke down before commencement.   parties to a de facto relationship that broke down before 1 march 2009 may choose to bring their property settlement proceedings under the family law act 1975 (cth),[1] (2) such choice can be made if the choice is: (a) unconditional,[2] and (b) in writing and signed by both parties to the de facto relationship,[3] and (c) each of the parties was provided, before the choice was signed by him or her, with: (i) independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of making the choice,[4] and (ii) a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that this advice was given to the party.[5]   such choice can be made if the choice is: (a) unconditional,[2] and (b) in writing and signed by both parties to the de facto relationship,[3] and (c) each of the parties was provided, before the choice was signed by him or her, with: (i) independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of making the choice,[4] and (ii) a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that this advice was given to the party.[5]   unconditional,[2] and (b) in writing and signed by both parties to the de facto relationship,[3] and (c) each of the parties was provided, before the choice was signed by him or her, with: (i) independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of making the choice,[4] and (ii) a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that this advice was given to the party.[5]   in writing and signed by both parties to the de facto relationship,[3] and (c) each of the parties was provided, before the choice was signed by him or her, with: (i) independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of making the choice,[4] and (ii) a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that this advice was given to the party.[5]   each of the parties was provided, before the choice was signed by him or her, with: (i) independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of making the choice,[4] and (ii) a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that this advice was given to the party.[5]   independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of making the choice,[4] and (ii) a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that this advice was given to the party.[5]  ) a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that this advice was given to the party.[5]
we refer to your letter of 20 february 2018 with respect to the dismissal of the jurisdictional argument. as detailed in our letter of 16 february 2018, our client has made an economic decision to not press the jurisdictional argument in light of the significant costs that have and will continue to be incurred in respect of the hearing on 20 april 2018. our client will shortly provide a financial statement for your client’s review. we are instructed that our client asserts that separation occurred shortly after the legislative amendments in relation to de facto relationships, that is, shortly after march 2009. ...
by consent: 1. that the respondent’s application on the discrete issue of jurisdiction listed for hearing on 20 april, 2018 be dismissed. 2. that the respondent pay the sum of $3,000 on account of the applicant’s costs, be paid from the respondent’s share of entitlements to be received upon conclusion of these proceedings. ...   the respondent was restrained from selling, transferring, or further encumbering the property at b street, town c (‘the b street, town c property’) without first giving the applicant through her solicitors at least 14 days written notice of his intention to do so, and (2) the applicant was restrained from selling, transferring, or further encumbering the property at d street, city e, country f and two other vacant lots (‘the country f properties’) without first giving the respondent at least 14 days written notice of her intention to do so.   the applicant was restrained from selling, transferring, or further encumbering the property at d street, city e, country f and two other vacant lots (‘the country f properties’) without first giving the respondent at least 14 days written notice of her intention to do so.
18 application of amendments (1) the amendments of section 44 of the family law act 1975 made by this part apply in relation to applications made after this item commences. ...
i think section 44 only comes into play if the court has got jurisdiction on the face of it because the separation was on or after 1 march 2009 or the parties have complied with section 86a of the amending act.
mr eden’s sworn evidence is separation november 2007. ... ms eden asserts there was a separation in september 2007 – september or november 2007 but there was – she says it was a reconciliation thereafter.
mr eden, you say, well, you will take separation as of 1 march 2009, but your sworn evidence is to the contrary and what you do there is setup a conflict between two pieces of your own evidence. do you see what i mean?
on legal advice, i had been advised to say 1 march 2009 and that was put in a letter by solicitors then, newnhams, to mr di lizio so that we could proceed and not have to fight a jurisdiction battle.
i can proceed, i suppose, and hear the whole thing and regard it as two decisions that have to be made: first of all, is there jurisdiction by a finding that separation occurred on or after the day or – and if it find that it did, then go onto the property settlement. but if i find that it didn’t, as asserted by mr eden, then that would be the end of it...
see, mr eden, if you counter you evidence as already given under your oath in your affidavit that as far as you’re concerned you separated on a final basis in november 2007 – if you counter that by other sworn evidence, as i say, you give me conflicting evidence.
well, i can’t lie to the court, your honour.
i think we will do the hearing and i will decide, as a first question, “when did the parties separate?” but the risk is, if i decide the parties separated prior to 1 march 2009, then, that’s as far as i go... we will go ahead with the hearing on the basis that i will hear the whole of the case but i will decide – i will have to decide jurisdiction but, in the meantime, i might be given a document under section 86a of the family law amendment (de facto financial matters and other measures) act 2008 (cth). ...but other than that, we will go ahead.  ] section 4aa(1)(c) identifies the relationship which is the concern of the act: “a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis”. the existence of such a relationship is determined having regard to “all the circumstances” of a relationship, significantly, those “circumstances” include any or all of the circumstances listed in s 4aa(2), and, by reason of s 4aa(3), no particular finding about any circumstance is necessary for there to be a de facto relationship. consistently with the reality that human relationships are infinitely mutable, in determining whether a de facto relationship exists a court is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate (family law act 1975 (cth), s 4aa(4)). [29] a de facto relationship will have broken down when, having regard to all the circumstances, the parties no longer “have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis”. such a conclusion is not precluded by the presence of an ongoing relationship of some sort. that is not the inquiry. the question is whether a de facto relationship exists or has broken down. [30] in the context of a human relationship, “breakdown” refers to the “end” or “breakup” of what had been an enduring emotional bond. it is the “breakdown” or “end” of a de facto relationship that is the trigger point for the federal circuit and family court to be seized of jurisdiction to make a property settlement order under s 90sm of the act. it would make no sense for such a jurisdiction to arise before a de facto relationship had ended. the appellant's submission finds no support in statutory context, in history, or in any extrinsic material referred to the court's attention. [31] other provisions in the act support the view that “breakdown” refers to the “end” of a de facto relationship. for example, s 44(5) addresses the timing of when, amongst other things, a proceeding under s 90sm may commence. it relevantly provides that a party to a de facto relationship may apply for an order under s 90sm if the application is made “2 years after the end of the de facto relationship” (family law act 1975 (cth), s 44(5)(a)(i)). the phrase “after the breakdown” in s 90sm(1), when considered in this context, must refer to what is described in s 44(5) as “the end of the de facto relationship”. the temporal fixing of “breakdown” with the “end” of a relationship is reinforced by each of ss 90ub, 90uc and 90ud, which respectively deal with financial agreements made before, during or after the breakdown of a de facto relationship. in that respect, s 90uc(1)(a) is especially instructive. that section refers to parties “while in a de facto relationship” making a “written agreement” about the distribution of their property “in the event of the breakdown of the de facto relationship”. the juxtaposition of a continuing de facto relationship, denoted by the phrase “while in”, with the word “breakdown” strongly supports the conclusion that “breakdown” refers to the end of a relationship (the respondent also referred to ss 90rc, 90se, 90sl.).[10]
4aa de facto relationships meaning of de facto relationship (1) a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if: (a) the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis. paragraph (c) has effect subject to subsection (5). working out if persons have a relationship as a couple (2) those circumstances may include any or all of the following: (a) the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship. (3) no particular finding in relation to any circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have a de facto relationship. (4) a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case. (5) for the purposes of this act: (a) a de facto relationship can exist between 2 persons of different sexes and between 2 persons of the same sex, and (b) a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship. when 2 persons are related by family (6) for the purposes of subsection (1), 2 persons are related by family if: (a) one is the child (including an adopted child) of the other, or (b) one is another descendant of the other (even if the relationship between them is traced through an adoptive parent), or (c) they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them). for this purpose, disregard whether an adoption is declared void or has ceased to have effect.  ] the language of s 4aa of the act and its reference to “living together” requires no different approach to determining whether a relationship exists of the kind defined. “living together”, consistently with authority, should be construed as meaning sharing life as a couple. section 4aa does not prescribe any way by which a couple may share life together. its language is sufficiently broad to accommodate the great variety of ways a de facto relationship may exist (cf fo v haf [2006] qca 555, [2007] 2 qd r 138 at 149 [26] per keane ja (white j agreeing). that conclusion is supported by the varied factors listed in s 4aa(2). in a given case, some of the factors listed in s 4aa(2) may be relevant and some may be irrelevant, inevitably some may have greater prominence than others. a conclusion that a de facto relationship has ended may also arise because of factors not listed in s 4aa(2). such a conclusion is mandated by s 4aa(3) and (4). in particular, s 4aa(4) is a statutory recognition that what may constitute a genuine de facto relationship is not be determined in the same way in every case by reference to rigid criteria that must always be satisfied. in that respect, the language of s 4aa(2)(b) does not assume that every de facto relationship must have a “common residence” to some “extent” and of some “nature”. such a construction is entirely denied by s 4aa(3).
the evidence   for the applicant – her assertion that the parties resumed their de facto relationship in october 2008 and continued until december 2013, and (2) for the respondent – his case that though the parties recommenced living under the one roof at suburb g in october 2008, they never resumed their de facto relationship but lived separately and apart under the one roof until sometime in the 12 months following the sale of the suburb g property in december 2012.   for the respondent – his case that though the parties recommenced living under the one roof at suburb g in october 2008, they never resumed their de facto relationship but lived separately and apart under the one roof until sometime in the 12 months following the sale of the suburb g property in december 2012.
the applicant’s evidence
...cooked for him and the children, i did his washing and made his bed at the time he slept in the front bedroom. after about two weeks, the respondent then resumed sleeping together with me in our old bedroom. initially there was little intimacy when we resumed sleeping in the same bed. subsequently, our relations improved and we engaged in sexual intercourse on a few occasions. this was not different than the level of intimacy in the last few years before our separation in 2007.
...cared for him and nursed him. for example, i made sure he took his medications, massaged him each night and generally cared for him.
... would usually prepare his lunch, and in the evenings i would cook for him and the children ... i had done all the washing and ironing for the respondent since he had returned home. in the morning before he left for work, i prepared his breakfast. when he left for work, we would kiss goodbye.
... our life had returned to normal in the way we lived, in that we resumed our way of life as before the separation. on one occasion, in about october 2009, we discussed the fact that i had made an application for child support to the child support agency. at that time the respondent said to me words to the following effect: “we will let the child support collect the payments. that way you can be sure i will contribute for the children”.
...went out ... about once a fortnight for dinner at a restaurant. sometimes friends would join us at such dinners. sometimes we went to dinner by ourselves.
whereas: a. [ms eden] and [mr eden] (collectively referred to as “the parties’) lived together since 1998. b. [ms eden] and [mr eden] separated on 22 november 2007 when [mr eden] left the home at [o street, suburb g], nsw, where the parties resided prior to separation. c. [mr eden] returned to reside at [o street, suburb g], nsw, on 6 october 2008, and the parties agree to reside together whilst separated until the provisions of this agreement are effected. d. this agreement shall only apply if the parties separate on a final basis and the parties’ assets and liabilities are significantly in the same position as at the date of this agreement. ... j. it is the intention of the parties, to promote harmony and reduce the possibility of resorting to litigation, to enter into this agreement, which they intend to be legally binding on each of them during their relationship and on and for all times after its termination, as to their respective rights and obligations between themselves arising during and out of their relationship.
by the way, this agreement may need to be updated, as the law on de facto break-ups changed on 1 march 2009. i’ll attend to this, but in the meantime, have you and [ms eden] made a decision on whether you have finally separated or no?   eden] and i have decided currently not to finally separate. this domestic relationship agreement is only valid if one or other of us does decide to finally separate.   eden] (30 per cent of balance), $16,055.10 [ms eden] (70 per cent of balance), $37,461.91
...continued to cook, clean and care for the respondent and [y]. our other child, [x], had moved out by then and was living in separate premises. in about december 2013, i moved into the [b street, town c] property with [y], and the respondent found another home to live in in sydney. the respondent would at times come to stay at [b street, town c], but we slept in separate bedrooms.[14]
sometime in 2013, after the respondent and i moved to the property at [b street, town c], the respondent and i had a conversation ...
on the balance of the applicant’s evidence, it would seem that at no time was there a circumstance of the parties living separated under the one roof at the b street, town c property following december 2013.
on any of those trips shown – on any of those trips ... did yourself and [mr eden] travel together?
now, do you recognise any those trips as having been taken by yourself and [mr eden] together?
so, then we go on to the next question that was asked. which trips do you recognise as having been taken by the two of you together?
i just remember the [region r], but we did not catch a plane. we travelled – no, not overseas, your honour. sorry.
so, is your answer to the question, “do you recognise any of those trips as having been taken by both of you?”, is the answer to that yes or no?
the student in the house just come and go, and sometimes is just one week, and on this time, as i said, my psychiatric was telling me to kick out all the student.
his honour: remember you had a look earlier today at annexure b to [mr eden’s] affidavit? just have a look at [mr eden’s] affidavit. have you got that? applicant: yes. his honour: page 11 of 79. all right? applicant: yes. his honour: from page 11 through to page 14, that’s the record kept by the child support agency of child support payments made by [mr eden] to you through the agency for the children. do you agree with that? applicant: yes. his honour: and do you see the first date there is 31 july 2008? applicant: yes. his honour: and do you see that the last date of a payment, on page 13, is 28 march 2014? applicant: yes. his honour: all right. so [mr eden] was giving you some money for the children up until 28 march 2014, wasn’t he? applicant: yes, and he was staying there, he was eating the food i have, so – and i cook for him, i do all the washing for him, i do the housework. his honour: yes. no. that’s all right. now, 28 march 2014 was two months before [y] turned 18, wasn’t it? applicant: yes. his honour: and can i just ask you this also, you started receiving child support payments in july 2008? applicant: yes. his honour: and they continued all the way through 2008, 2009, 2010, up until april 2010? applicant: that’s correct. his honour: and then resumed again in june 2011 and went through uninterrupted, as far as i can see, until march 2014. do you agree with that? applicant: yes. his honour: so it would appear that the period of time during which [mr eden] was not giving you child support payments for the children was between 7 april 2010, on which he made a payment, and 22 june 2011. do you agree with that? applicant: yes. his honour: that’s the only time that he stopped making child support payments? applicant: yes. his honour: but at all other times he was making child support payments? applicant: yes. yes. his honour: but you tell me that for all of that time, except for a period of time between november 2007 and some time in late 2008 or early 2009, the two of you were together? applicant: yes. his honour: that you were only separated between november 2007 and some time in late 2008/2009, is that right? applicant: that's correct, yes. his honour: can you tell me why you continued to receive child support payments from [mr eden] through a period of time when you say you were not separated? applicant: that was [mr eden’s] advice, that i just give you this child support so you – you have some money for you, so – that was [mr eden’s] – it was this – his advice to me.
his honour: do you know why there were no payments between april 2010 and june 2011? applicant: no, i don’t know. his honour: all right. you don’t know. thank you. when you applied for child support, you admitted yourself and [mr eden] were separated? applicant: yes. his honour: do you agree that the child support agency would have assumed that you were still separated through 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, ’13, ’14, all the way down to 28 march 2014? applicant: yes.
the respondent’s evidence
... slept on the edge of the king-sized bed occupied by the applicant in the main bedroom. there was a barrier of pillows between us. there was no intimacy, no touching, and no sexual relations. this continued until the house was sold and we moved out.
during the period after i moved back to [o street, suburb g], the applicant and i lived separate lives. we did our own washing, ironing and cleaning. we travelled interstate and overseas separately (refer attachment a). we did not attend social gatherings as a couple to celebrate the children’s birthdays. i did my own cooking, except on occasions when the applicant cooked meals for homestay students. on these occasions, i would also eat the food she prepared.
i paid child support to [ms eden] as i considered that our relationship had ended and we had separated on a final basis. i do not know if the applicant advised the child support agency that we were separated but living under the same roof.
after we separated in november 2007, the applicant began receiving centrelink payments on the basis that we were separated. i believe that when she applied for these payments, she put the date of our separation as november 2007. i was present on a number of occasions up to 2013 where i helped the applicant complete centrelink forms, and on each occasion, she put the date of our separation as november 2007.
... g. the parties lived together since 1988. h. the parties separated in november 2007. i. the parties have continued to live under the same roof at [o street, suburb g], and [ab street, suburb g]. ... q. [mr eden] and [ms eden] desire and intend by this financial agreement to finalise their financial relationship with respect to property and maintenance following the breakdown of their de facto relationship (which de facto relationship has now ended).
mr white: now, your position is that the relationship ended sometime in 2007? respondent: i left the property physically. i went to stay in a rented property in [suburb ac]. i was then joined by a work associate female who entered into a relationship with me and, even though that broke up and i broke up as well with stress, i returned to the [suburb g] house to live separated under one roof, which has been mentioned before. so broke up in november 2017. i think returned to the [suburb g] house in august 2018 and sold the place in about october. his honour: returned to the [suburb g] property in august 2008? respondent: ‘08, yes. this is from memory, and we sold the place in october 2012. mr white: so just to be clear, you said you returned there from 2008 through till october 2012? respondent: yes. mr white: that whole time? respondent: i was there the whole time except for the holidays, of course, that you saw on that list.
mr white: ...even after 2009, i suggest that you would sometimes go on holiday together. you would take a trip by car, for example. is that true? respondent: i don’t have a recollection. there might have been a reason for it. perhaps you could refresh my memory. mr white: i’m asking you now. you say you don’t recall. could you have done that? respondent: if we had have taken the children, yes. it would have been a children thing. mr white: i see. so when you say the “children thing”, that’s – what are you referring to? an event involving the children or ... ? respondent: yes. it might have been, for example, we jointly owned a timeshare facility up on the – in – just north of – north of [city ad]. [suburb ae]. that’s what it’s called. [suburb ae]. we had a joint‑owned – a time share, and i think we took the kids to the time share because it’s by the sea and give them a chance for some fresh air. we might have gone somewhere to celebrate a birthday or something. those sort of events, but with the children. mr white: i see. so after 2009, you’ve moved back in. you think you might have travelled to that time share with my client, but also the children? respondent: yes.
well, i remember distinctly we used to go to [suburb ac] to a [country af] restaurant for birthdays, father’s day and those sort of things, mother’s day, blah blah. so that’s not – yes. that’s only to suburb ac from suburb g.
mr white: now, i suggest to you when you did move out and you had a relationship with [ms ag] and that broke down, you then sent texts to [ms eden] saying that you want to see her again? respondent: i sent the text to her saying i wanted to see her. yes, i did. and we met in a coffee place in the [location ah], i believe. mr white: and that was re‑establish the relationship, wasn’t it? respondent: either that or it was to – when she begged me to pay out her credit card. i can’t ‘remember which one that was. mr white: so you say it could have been to re‑establish the relationship? respondent: it could have been. well, it wasn’t to re‑establish the relationship. it was for me to move back in because there had been a lot of problems with the children trying to commit suicide and self‑harming themselves while i wasn’t there.
his honour: what mr white is putting to you is he’s suggesting to you that when you sent the text message to [ms eden] to meet and you discussed moving back in, it was to resume your de facto relationship with her. that’s what mr white is asserting to you? respondent: i don’t believe so. mr white: and then when you moved back in, to start with you stayed in another room? respondent: when there was a room available. the house was normally full of students. mr white: and then you moved into her bed to sleep? respondent: after that i moved into a very thin mattress in the corner of the main bedroom. i remember lying there saying – feeling like a dog in my own house lying on the hard floor. when i was that age, it was very hard going. ... mr white: and all that time it was [ms eden] who was looking after you, wasn’t it? respondent: the reason i laugh is most of the time [ms eden] is out at the [suburb g] rsl or some other club with her friends, but i do agree that she did help me to some extent. she tried to give me a massage, which i didn’t really want, and i think she gave me some broth or something like that, but she spent most of the time either out shopping or at the rsl. mr white: so you think she should have been looking after you 24 hours a day? respondent: i didn’t want her to look after me. i wanted to be alone. mr white: you say that she gave you broth. she was giving you all your food, wasn’t she? she went and bought it from the shops and she fed you? respondent: well, certainly i wasn’t going out to the shops. mr white: so she was caring for you in that time of severe stress? respondent: i think six to 10 weeks. ... mr white: and [ms eden] contributed to your recovery, providing you care during that time? respondent: well, i suspect if she hadn’t have provided me with food, i probably wouldn’t have eaten. mr white: that’s right. now, you say you slept on the bed, like a dog as you say? respondent: on a very thin mattress, which – it was a very hard floor. mr white: i see, and you slept in her bed as well? respondent: i moved – when i got sick i moved to the edge of the master bed. it wasn’t her bed. it was the master bed in the master room, a king‑size bed. mr white: you moved into the same bed as [ms eden], didn’t you? respondent: absolutely, yes. i’m not hiding that. mr white: well, you moved back in, you were sleeping in the same bed. she was caring for you. you think you might have attended functions or events outside the house together when you were able. did you interact with the neighbours at all? respondent: not very much at all. just – the neighbours was – we interacted with the guy next door when [ms eden] bought the property in city am. i don’t know if you’re aware she bought a property in city am, but he was the bank manager that organised for his brother in city am to lend her the money to buy the [business]. ... mr white: and you would sometimes see friends with [ms eden]. is that true? respondent: occasionally, yes. mr white: mutual friends, that is? respondent: yes. mr white: just as you used to do during the relationship? respondent: similar, only the mutual friends that come to mind is my best mate, [mr k], who lived in [suburb aj], which is how we ended up with the property in [suburb aj]. he lived in [suburb aj], and when we went to stay with him, she slept on the bed and i slept on the floor in their small room. mr white: but that wasn’t another time that you – well, you now remember you made that trip together? respondent: yes, indeed. i think it was probably at christmas with the kids for a [country f] party that happened down there, but the guy was my friend and she befriended his wife. mr white: now, you say that, in your affidavit, that you separated in 2007, but you continued to co‑own the [suburb g] property up until the end of 2012, didn’t you? respondent: absolutely, i wish i could have got her to sell it earlier, but she was very hard to persuade to sell it and after i lost my job i couldn’t afford all the properties that were ... mr white: so you were living together and that main asset of yours was still shared? respondent: absolutely, yes. mr white: and then even after you sold [suburb g], you then purchased another property together? respondent: the [b street, town c] property. mr white: and then you were still living together, and you were still sharing that property. you had common ownership a property? respondent: we weren’t living together in [b street, town c] except on the rare occasions i went up to see my mechanic. mr white: yes, and then – but then when you eventually made it to [b street, town c], you said – you’ve given evidence that you would visit and i’m suggesting to you just that even at that time in 2013 you still chose to purchase property together that you both owned? respondent: i didn’t choose. i had no choice. mr white: i’m suggesting to you that one of the reasons why you owned that property together was because you were still together as a couple? respondent: not true. can i tell you why we ended up buying the property in [b street, town c] together?
mr white: and the reason why you slept in the same bed was because – not because there was not enough beds available. it was simply because you were in a relationship? respondent: not true. mr white: and i suggest the idea that every night you would erect a barrier of pillows between you is a nonsense? respondent: correct. there was a barrier of pillows and we never touched each other at all. i made sure of that and she made sure of that too. she didn’t like me and i didn’t like her. mr white: and there were sexual relations a few times? respondent: absolutely not. no way, no chance. mr white: and the frequency of sexual relations was equivalent to the frequency that had occurred during the period before 2007? respondent: absolutely not. someone is dreaming. mr white: and then after – after you moved back in you would sometimes still give [ms eden] a bit of money. is that true? respondent: when she gave me her sad story. i mentioned before her wonderful skill at making people feel sorry for her. if i had any spare cash apart from the child support i would give her 100 and sometimes she would ask me for money for the – for the food, i think, i seem to remember, when we were in [ab street, suburb g]. she said, “if you’re here, you have to pay me for the food.” ... mr white: i suggest to you that there was still a degree of financial interdependence at that time? respondent: i don’t think so. she’s interdependent on anyone that’s standing around for finance.
mr white: ...in relation to the date of separation, to the extent you’re able to comment, from your children’s perspective they would have seen you living together after 2009 and still being a couple? respondent: children aren’t that stupid. they were already almost grown up. you know, in their teens. they were self – i mean, [x] was self-harming. the school was calling me up saying they think she’s going to commit suicide, all that sort of thing, while i was away because they didn’t get along with their mother. mr white: well, you were both acting as parents, being supportive of those children in that time? respondent: yes, me more than the applicant. mr white: but i suggest that she wasn’t suicidal. this is [y] and - - - respondent: [x]. mr white: [x], sorry, and she certainly didn’t say to you that the problems – that the problems were with the mother? respondent: she wouldn’t say problems with her mother. she’s too polite to say that, but she was suicidal. i was called to the school twice when they wanted to discuss it. i was called because she didn’t want her mother to come along. she was using a screwdriver to self-harm herself on her arm as well. and then she finally ran away from home while i was not there and i promised her when i find her in [suburb z] that i would return home. mr white: now, in fairness, i suggest that that’s not true, and the reason you were living there was because you were in a relationship? respondent: well, we disagree then.
mr white: you did pay child support. i suggest to you that at the start of the period in which you paid child support there was a contemplation that the parties would separate, or you had or you felt as if you had separated. do you agree with that? respondent: the reason i paid child support is because the child support agency approached me because your client had approached them. his honour: the payments commence during a period when both parties assert there was – the parties were separated. respondent: we were separated at the time. yes. mr white: i suggest to you though that when you moved back in you continued to pay just as a means to support the children and despite the fact that you were no longer separated? respondent: that’s not true. mr white: now, before you mentioned that there had been some mental health issues that the children faced. i suggest that at one point one of the girls did have an issue with cutting but that certainly wasn’t the reason that you moved back into the house? respondent: i promised that daughter that i would move back in. i found her boyfriend and her boyfriend was kind enough to tell me which [hotel] she was staying at in [suburb z] when she ran away from home, and i went to see her and i had a meeting with her and my sister was there as well, and we talked with her about her situation. mr white: i’m not contesting that you love your children, but i’m suggesting that you continued to pay that amount because that was a means for you to provide that money for their care, despite the fact that you were together in a relationship. respondent: absolutely not. that’s ridiculous. mr white: did you think that it might be advantageous to continue to pay child support and represent that you were separated? respondent: that’s not my – i’m not that smart.
mr white: [in referring to the email of 18 june 2009 from [ms m], solicitor, to the respondent] you agree that she said to you: “by the way, this agreement may need to be updated as the de facto break-ups changed on 1 march 2009. i will attended to this, but in the meantime, have you and [ms eden] made a decision on whether you have finally separated or no?” respondent: i can read that. yes. mr white: and then you go back to the email that was absolutely spot on. the last paragraph of that says: “[ms eden] and i have decided currently not to finally separate. this domestic relationship agreement is only valid if one or other of us does decide to finally separate”. respondent: that’s correct. mr white: you said that? respondent: yes. mr white: you accepted that you weren’t separated at that time? respondent: i’m referring to physical separation and not relationship separation. mr white: no. no, [mr eden]. you have just told me that email was correct. you understood it was important to be truthful? respondent: absolutely. yes. mr white: and you said you weren’t separated? respondent: yes. we’re not physically – we’re living in the same house. we were living in the same place then. mr white: this email related to the drafting of a potential agreement to separate property, didn’t it? respondent: yes, yes. to separate the property. mr white: and one of the terms of that agreement was that it would become operative if the parties separated. respondent: yes. indeed. mr white: and that didn’t mean - - - respondent: separate. yes. absolutely. mr white: - - - didn’t mean physically separate, did it? respondent: well, sorry, you can’t – if you’re going to be relationship separated, you would expect to be physically separated. but you could be physically separated and not relationship separated. mr white: the agreement was to cover the distribution of property after the separation of a relationship, wasn’t it? respondent: absolutely. and the – the relationship had finished. mr white: so the relevant question she was asking you was whether you had separated as a couple? respondent: well, misinterpreted then. mr white: [mr eden], you’re lying, aren’t you? respondent: no. ... his honour: [mr eden], why did you say in that email, “the domestic relationship agreement is only valid if one or other of us does decide to finally separate”? why did you say that? respondent: i can’t remember. it’s not true, is it? it’s – it’s only valid if both of us sign it. but i think in the – in the actual relationship it – in – in the agreement it says something like it’s only valid if we separate or something. it’s actually in the agreement, from memory. mr white: and that relates to separation of relationship, doesn’t it? respondent: yes.   eden] and [mr eden] separated on 22 november 2017 when [mr eden] left the home at [o street, suburb g] where the parties resided prior to separation.   eden] returned to reside at [o street, suburb g], on 6 october 2008 and the parties agree to reside together whilst separated under the provisions of this agreement are effected.
this agreement shall only apply if the parties separate on a final basis and the parties’ assets and liabilities are significantly the same as at the date of this agreement.   eden] and i have decided currently not to finally separate. this domestic relationship agreement is only valid if one or other of us does decide to finally separate.
may have had some considerable weight on the applicant’s side of the case, but it is affected as to weight by the internal inconsistencies in the wording in the recitals to the draft domestic relationship agreement.
other evidence
in the light of our agreement, we no longer see a need for the conference you have planned for both parties and their legal representatives in parramatta on 23 november.
the proposed conference is postponed to:
time: 10 am, friday. date: 23 november 2012. place: level 1, family court at parramatta, 1 to 3 george street, parramatta.
the point of reference for the settlement discussion is our letter to you dated 9/11/2012, and then an amended balance sheet to be forwarded to you shortly. the issues to be determined to come to a just and equitable agreement and resolution of the distribution of the relationship assets ...
we refer to your letter of 16 february 2018 wherein your client offers to dismiss the application in relation to the jurisdictional issues.
is your client resiling from his previous position as to the date of the final separation being 22 november 2007. if so what is the date that will be alleged by your client as being the date of the final separation?
... as detailed in our letter of 16 february 2018, our client has made an economic decision to not press the jurisdictional argument in light of the significant costs that have and will continue to be incurred in respect of the hearing on 20 april 2018. our client will shortly provide a financial statement for your client’s review. we are instructed that our client asserts that separation occurred shortly after the legislative amendments in relation to de facto relationships, that is, shortly after march 2009.
in light of the admission that your client now makes to the effect that he now: “... asserts the separation occurred shortly after the legislative amendments in relation to de facto relationships, that is, shortly after march 2009.” it would appear that, rather than the issue of costs being the motivation for your client’s proposal to dismiss the application in relation to jurisdiction, such a decision is motivated by the fact that his previous assertions as to the date of separation were incorrect. whilst our client does not accept that the final separation took place “shortly after march 2009” the fact remains that our client has been put to the expense to meet application brought by your client, and that your client now concedes that such application was misconceived.
mr white: the question is, is that a letter sent from your solicitor? respondent: yes. that was after i had had – i spent a bit of money to have a conference with a barrister to get his advice and it cost me $6000 to decide that we weren’t going to go ahead with the jurisdiction. i was upset at the time because i thought newnhams, who have got experience in these matters, could have made that – advise me without having to spend 6000 on a barrister. i remember it very well. mr white: i take it from you, though, that you sought some advice, though, in relation to the issues in this letter and you recognised this letter because it was a letter that was shown to you before it was sent? respondent: yes. mr white: you instructed it to be sent? respondent: yes. we had to advise di lizio that we were going to pursue the jurisdictional thing. mr white: so – yes. the first paragraph says that it’s a letter with respect to the dismissal of this jurisdictional argument? respondent: that’s right. yes. mr white: so, in effect, you were trying to consent to the jurisdiction of this court? respondent: yes. i wanted to get the – i wanted to get this matter finalised. mr white: yes. and then in the second paragraph it says:
as detailed in our letter of 16 february, the client has made an economic decision not to press the jurisdictional argument in light of the costs –
etcetera. but i would like to draw your attention to paragraph number 3:
we are instructed that our client – that separation occurred shortly after the legislative amendments in relation to de facto relationships, that is, shortly after march 2009.
respondent: that’s right. mr white: well, the solicitors there have said that you instructed them that that’s when the relationship? respondent: they told me that’s what i had to say in order to get this court to be able to hear the matter, and i said, “fine. so let’s go ahead”, because i wanted to get it finalised. mr white: so you did instruct him to say that, to admit to that? respondent: i said you – yes, you can – i agreed to this letter. mr white: i suggest that you then – you made an admission there that the relationship did end after march 2009? respondent: yes. well – well, my solicitor did that on my behalf. yes. mr white: and you haven’t put any evidence about this agreeing with the solicitor’s advice, have you? respondent: but that’s what i said when we first started off today or yesterday. mr white: you’ve never sought to withdraw that admission? you haven’t sought the leave of the court to withdraw that admission? respondent: no. i haven’t. mr white: i suggest the reason why you made – you did instruct your solicitor to say that is because it’s true? respondent: you can suggest that all you wish. mr white: well, you’ve admitted in the past that the relationship ended in 2009, haven’t you? respondent: no. mr white: you never .. ? respondent: i have – i have put this – this was specifically put in this letter so the court could continue, but i’ve always maintained – and you look my letters to [ms ak] in 2012 – i’ve always maintained that the relationship finished in november 2007. always. in all those letters. i – i – i have at least five letters and – and also the – documents – the financial agreement says that. the letters that we probably got from there from that go to [ms ak], i’ve always maintained in was november 2007. this is the one letter that says – shortly after march – just so that we could get the court to hear it.   our separation was 22nd november 2007. this is the date agreed in the domestic relationship agreement prepared by [ms eden]’s previous solicitors and revised to final revision 7. i have nominated a different date. (4) i returned to reside at [o street, suburb g] on 6th october 2008. this is the date also agreed in the domestic relationship agreement prepared by [ms eden’s] previous solicitors. (5) i have not engaged in a “marital relationship” as “de facto partners” with [ms eden] since prior to leaving on 22nd november 2007. (6) the bed is king size and definitely not marital. we sleep often at different times and separated by a wall of pillows. the reason i am in this bed is because the other five bedrooms in the house are occupied. since november 2007 [ms eden] has been renting the other bedrooms (three or four of them) to overseas students at $275 a week each. (7) [ms eden] has not declared this income to csa when claiming child support from me for the past four years. this has significantly inflated my contributions. (7) [sic] we have been living as “separated under the same roof” because of financial difficulty, because of a need to support our children through school, and because of an inability to agree about the separation of assets.
rule 15.30 admission if an admission is made by a party, the court may, on the application of another party, make an order to which the party applying is entitled on the admission.
1 [i left my de facto partner of 19 years and two children on 22/11/2007 to live separately. at that time i was forming a relationship with the defendant. we worked in the same company. she asked for financial assistance to payout a court debt to her previous partner for an unpaid loan. $1074][16] ... 3 the defendant told me her cousin was coming from [country q] in may 2009 and she wanted to stay with him. in may i rented a 3 bedroom unit to accommodate myself, the defendant and her cousin ... 4 in september 2009 the defendant rented a two bedroom townhouse and the three of us moved there with the furniture and electrical goods. 5 prior and after moving i was suffering more and more from guilt from leaving my children, financial stress from the global crisis, work stress, and stress from not being able to meet the defendant’s expectations. i left the defendant and returned to my children and previous partner on 6 october 2008. 6 over christmas 2008 i suffered a complete breakdown and was off work for six weeks ...
mr white: now, firstly, do you recognise this document? is this your statement of claim? respondent: yes, it is. mr white: at paragraph 1 you said there, “i left my de facto partner of 19 years and two children on 22.11.2007 to live separately.”? respondent: correct. mr white: continuing: “at that time i was forming a relationship with the defendant.” and then if i take you down to paragraph 5, the last sentence of which says: “i left the defendant and returned to my children and previous partner on 6 october 2008.”? respondent: yes. mr white: well, you resumed the relationship, didn’t you, and you put it there in black and white? respondent: i physically returned. it doesn’t say i returned into a relationship with my partner. where does it say that? mr white: well, i say that the first paragraph says you were in a relationship there and then the last paragraphs say you returned to your children and your previous partner? respondent: it doesn’t say i returned to a relationship at all. you’re just reading that into it. mr white: i suggest to you that paragraph 5 you are admitting that you resumed a relationship on 6 october 2008? respondent: not true. it doesn’t say that.
findings
... has made an economic decision to not press the jurisdictional argument in light of the significant costs that have and will continue to be incurred in respect of the hearing on 2018.
and:
we are instructed that our client asserts that separation occurred shortly after the legislative amendments in relation to de facto relationships, that is shortly after march 2009.
are statements made by the respondent to his solicitors solely upon the basis of seeking to “jump over” the jurisdictional issue and proceed with the settlement hearing and avoid the costs of ‘double hearing’. the respondent has maintained in all of his sworn evidence on hearing and the exhibited documents upon which he relied on in hearing that final separation between the parties occurred on 22 november 2007. i find that exhibit a3, being the domestic relationship agreement prepared by the applicant’s solicitors on her instructions, that never completed between the parties, and the financial agreement pursuant to section 90ud of the family law act prepared by the respondent’s solicitor on his instructions, though never completed between the parties, both evidence a separation between the parties on 22 november 2007 and do not evidence any resumption of a de facto relation between them after that time.[17]
i find that exhibit a3, being the domestic relationship agreement prepared by the applicant’s solicitors on her instructions, that never completed between the parties, and the financial agreement pursuant to section 90ud of the family law act prepared by the respondent’s solicitor on his instructions, though never completed between the parties, both evidence a separation between the parties on 22 november 2007 and do not evidence any resumption of a de facto relation between them after that time.[17]
the parties agree to reside together whilst separated until the provisions of this agreement are effected.
but in the meantime, have you and [ms eden] made a decision on whether you have finally separated or know?
answered by the respondent in his reply email of 18 june 2009 as:   eden] and i have decided currently not to finally separate.
can be interpreted either as:   the respondent affirming that the parties were at that time (june 2009) in a relationship, though what form of relationship is not made clear on either document as they had not “finally separated”, or (2) in line with the draft domestic relationship agreement under discussion in those emails as the respondent confirming that the parties did not intend to divide their assets and “finally separate” by ‘going their separate ways entirely’[18] and intended to keep residing together at the suburb g property as separated in terms of their former de facto relationship and under the same roof.
...a party to proceedings in this court cannot be allowed to have his cake and eat it too. if, during the course of the marriage, the party represents to the commissioner of taxation that his or her spouse is a partner in a business operated by that party, or is a bonafide employee of such a business and is paid a salary as such, that party cannot be heard to say, in subsequent proceedings in this court, that his or her spouse was not, in fact, a partner or was not, in fact, a bonafide employee, as the case may be. that point was made by goldstein j in elias & elias (1977) flc 90-267, drawing upon the authority of such cases as tinker v tinker (1970) 2 wlr 331, gascoigne & gascoigne (1918) 1 kb 223, and in re emery’s investment trusts (1959) ch 410. we think that that is a very sound principle, and its enunciation by goldstein j in elias & elias (supra) was given at least tacit approval by the full court in lee steere & lee steere [1985] famca 57, (1985) flc 91-626 at page 80,078. we are aware that it has received more explicit approval by other judges at first instance in unreported cases.[19]  ] ... in the marriage of jordan [1996] famca 15, (1997) flc 92-736 chisholm j considered the elias principle. writing extra-judicially in an article titled, “exclusion of evidence inconsistent with earlier statement: the rise and fall of the elias principle” chisholm j argued that although such a principal seems to be asserted in a number of family court decisions, it is inconsistent with high court authority [nelson] and does not represent the law.  ] the conclusion reached by chisholm j is compelling. he writes:
if the argument in this paper is accepted, the elias line of authorities is wrong insofar as it suggests that there is a principle [that] apart from estoppel the court may or must prevent a party from leading evidence of a proposition that is inconsistent with an earlier statement made to a third party. it follows that in property cases the court will consider all the evidence and make findings about the property of the parties and about their contributions. earlier inconsistent statements of the kind that feature in the elias cases will of course be relevant to this fact finding exercise. the court will have to consider whether the earlier statement or the later statement is more likely to be true. further, the contradiction will be taken into account in determining what confidence the court will have in that party’s evidence generally. that all of this falls into the ordinary process of fact finding: no evidence would be excluded, and there would be no presumptions that one or other of the inconsistent statements is more likely to be true.
associate: dated: 8 july 2022
dated: 8 july 2022
[1] family law amendment (de facto financial matters and other measures) act 2008 (cth) sch 1 s 86a(1).[2] family law amendment (de facto financial matters and other measures) act 2008 (cth) sch 1 s 86a(2)(a).[3] family law amendment (de facto financial matters and other measures) act 2008 (cth) sch 1 s 86a(5)(a).[4] family law amendment (de facto financial matters and other measures) act 2008 (cth) sch 1 s 86a(5)(b)(i).[5] family law amendment (de facto financial matters and other measures) act 2008 (cth) sch 1 s 86a(5)(b)(ii).[6] family law amendment (de facto financial matters and other measures) act 2008 (cth) sch 1 s 86a(3).[7] family law amendment (de facto financial matters and other measures) act 2008 (cth) sch 1 s 86a(4).[8] in the marriage of grayden [2003] famca 359; (2003) 175 flr 265, [22] (warnick, may, and boland jj), citing hockey v yelland [1984] hca 72; (1984) 157 clr 124, 141.[9] civil law and justice legislation amendment act 2018 (cth) s 2(1) item 8.[10] fairbarin & radecki [2022] hca 18 [28]-[31].[11] respondent’s affidavit, paragraph 40.[12] clause 19.[13] respondent’s affidavit, paragraph 42.[14] applicant’s affidavit, paragraph 67.[15] transcript 4 september 2020, page 130.[16] square brackets in original.[17] respondent’s affidavit, “attachment e”; exhibit 11.[18] this is not a quote and is an idiomatic only.[19] in the marriage of dawes [1989] famca 71; (1989) 98 flr 375, 390.