last updated: 18 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
neal & neal [2022] fedcfamc2f 857
orders
the court orders that:
parenting orders  the enrolment and commencement of the children attending a school in city b nominated by the mother, and (b) the decision or decisions as to which school the children attend in city b, and (c) the mother keep the father properly informed of the matters of 3(a) and 3(b) above.   the decision or decisions as to which school the children attend in city b, and (c) the mother keep the father properly informed of the matters of 3(a) and 3(b) above.   the mother keep the father properly informed of the matters of 3(a) and 3(b) above.   until the mother moves the children's residence to city b, in accordance with the orders of 3 july 2018 and the mother provide no less than 3 days’ notice in advance of the day such move will occur. (b) from when the applicant mother moves the children's residence to city b, each alternative weekend, and (i) provided the father is able to collect the children from school and has provided no less than 14 days’ notice in writing, text message or email to the mother, then from and commencing from as soon as practical from the conclusion of school on the friday, and (ii) otherwise and in default of agreement in writing, text or email, from and commencing at 6:30 pm on friday until the following sunday, or monday if the monday is a non-school day, at 6:30 pm (in daylight saving) australian eastern daylight time (summer) or until 5:30 pm in winter or australian eastern standard time (winter) and in the same rotation of weekends as in place at this day. (c) the june/july 2022 school holidays continue pursuant to the arrangements already in place. (d) for one half of each school term holiday, and in default of agreement in writing text or email, for the second half in the years ending with an even number and the first half years ending in an odd number, and (i) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half to commence from the last day of school at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the middle day at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and (ii) from the end of third term holidays in 2022, in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half to commence from the middle day at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the day before school resumes at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and (e) for one half of each long summer school holiday, and in default of agreement in writing text or email, for the second half where those holidays commence in a year ending in an even number and the first half where those holidays commence in a year ending in an odd number, and (i) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the middle day, and (ii) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the middle day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the day two clear days before the first day of school term with such days to be calculated as being included in the mother's time of half of those holidays, and (f) by electronic face time communication on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call. (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing text message or email, and (h) notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event father’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with him then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before father’s day until 5:30 pm on father’s day and notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event mother’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with her then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before mother’s day until 5:30 pm on mother’s day. (i) on the occasions of school holidays when the children are spending time with the father, the mother have electronic face time communication with the children on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call.   from when the applicant mother moves the children's residence to city b, each alternative weekend, and (i) provided the father is able to collect the children from school and has provided no less than 14 days’ notice in writing, text message or email to the mother, then from and commencing from as soon as practical from the conclusion of school on the friday, and (ii) otherwise and in default of agreement in writing, text or email, from and commencing at 6:30 pm on friday until the following sunday, or monday if the monday is a non-school day, at 6:30 pm (in daylight saving) australian eastern daylight time (summer) or until 5:30 pm in winter or australian eastern standard time (winter) and in the same rotation of weekends as in place at this day. (c) the june/july 2022 school holidays continue pursuant to the arrangements already in place. (d) for one half of each school term holiday, and in default of agreement in writing text or email, for the second half in the years ending with an even number and the first half years ending in an odd number, and (i) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half to commence from the last day of school at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the middle day at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and (ii) from the end of third term holidays in 2022, in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half to commence from the middle day at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the day before school resumes at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and (e) for one half of each long summer school holiday, and in default of agreement in writing text or email, for the second half where those holidays commence in a year ending in an even number and the first half where those holidays commence in a year ending in an odd number, and (i) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the middle day, and (ii) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the middle day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the day two clear days before the first day of school term with such days to be calculated as being included in the mother's time of half of those holidays, and (f) by electronic face time communication on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call. (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing text message or email, and (h) notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event father’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with him then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before father’s day until 5:30 pm on father’s day and notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event mother’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with her then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before mother’s day until 5:30 pm on mother’s day. (i) on the occasions of school holidays when the children are spending time with the father, the mother have electronic face time communication with the children on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call.   provided the father is able to collect the children from school and has provided no less than 14 days’ notice in writing, text message or email to the mother, then from and commencing from as soon as practical from the conclusion of school on the friday, and (ii) otherwise and in default of agreement in writing, text or email, from and commencing at 6:30 pm on friday until the following sunday, or monday if the monday is a non-school day, at 6:30 pm (in daylight saving) australian eastern daylight time (summer) or until 5:30 pm in winter or australian eastern standard time (winter) and in the same rotation of weekends as in place at this day.  ) otherwise and in default of agreement in writing, text or email, from and commencing at 6:30 pm on friday until the following sunday, or monday if the monday is a non-school day, at 6:30 pm (in daylight saving) australian eastern daylight time (summer) or until 5:30 pm in winter or australian eastern standard time (winter) and in the same rotation of weekends as in place at this day.   the june/july 2022 school holidays continue pursuant to the arrangements already in place. (d) for one half of each school term holiday, and in default of agreement in writing text or email, for the second half in the years ending with an even number and the first half years ending in an odd number, and (i) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half to commence from the last day of school at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the middle day at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and (ii) from the end of third term holidays in 2022, in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half to commence from the middle day at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the day before school resumes at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and (e) for one half of each long summer school holiday, and in default of agreement in writing text or email, for the second half where those holidays commence in a year ending in an even number and the first half where those holidays commence in a year ending in an odd number, and (i) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the middle day, and (ii) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the middle day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the day two clear days before the first day of school term with such days to be calculated as being included in the mother's time of half of those holidays, and (f) by electronic face time communication on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call. (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing text message or email, and (h) notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event father’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with him then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before father’s day until 5:30 pm on father’s day and notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event mother’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with her then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before mother’s day until 5:30 pm on mother’s day. (i) on the occasions of school holidays when the children are spending time with the father, the mother have electronic face time communication with the children on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call.   for one half of each school term holiday, and in default of agreement in writing text or email, for the second half in the years ending with an even number and the first half years ending in an odd number, and (i) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half to commence from the last day of school at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the middle day at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and (ii) from the end of third term holidays in 2022, in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half to commence from the middle day at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the day before school resumes at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and (e) for one half of each long summer school holiday, and in default of agreement in writing text or email, for the second half where those holidays commence in a year ending in an even number and the first half where those holidays commence in a year ending in an odd number, and (i) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the middle day, and (ii) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the middle day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the day two clear days before the first day of school term with such days to be calculated as being included in the mother's time of half of those holidays, and (f) by electronic face time communication on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call. (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing text message or email, and (h) notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event father’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with him then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before father’s day until 5:30 pm on father’s day and notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event mother’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with her then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before mother’s day until 5:30 pm on mother’s day. (i) on the occasions of school holidays when the children are spending time with the father, the mother have electronic face time communication with the children on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call.   in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half to commence from the last day of school at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the middle day at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and (ii) from the end of third term holidays in 2022, in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half to commence from the middle day at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the day before school resumes at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and  ) from the end of third term holidays in 2022, in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half to commence from the middle day at 6:30 pm and to conclude on the day before school resumes at 6:30 pm in daylight saving time and 5:30 pm in winter or eastern standard time, and   for one half of each long summer school holiday, and in default of agreement in writing text or email, for the second half where those holidays commence in a year ending in an even number and the first half where those holidays commence in a year ending in an odd number, and (i) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the middle day, and (ii) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the middle day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the day two clear days before the first day of school term with such days to be calculated as being included in the mother's time of half of those holidays, and (f) by electronic face time communication on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call. (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing text message or email, and (h) notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event father’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with him then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before father’s day until 5:30 pm on father’s day and notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event mother’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with her then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before mother’s day until 5:30 pm on mother’s day. (i) on the occasions of school holidays when the children are spending time with the father, the mother have electronic face time communication with the children on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call.   in default of agreement in writing text or email, the first half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the middle day, and (ii) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the middle day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the day two clear days before the first day of school term with such days to be calculated as being included in the mother's time of half of those holidays, and  ) in default of agreement in writing text or email, the second half of the long summer school holiday shall commence at 12:00 pm on the middle day after the last day of school term and conclude at 12:00 pm on the day two clear days before the first day of school term with such days to be calculated as being included in the mother's time of half of those holidays, and   by electronic face time communication on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call. (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing text message or email, and (h) notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event father’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with him then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before father’s day until 5:30 pm on father’s day and notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event mother’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with her then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before mother’s day until 5:30 pm on mother’s day. (i) on the occasions of school holidays when the children are spending time with the father, the mother have electronic face time communication with the children on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call.   at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing text message or email, and (h) notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event father’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with him then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before father’s day until 5:30 pm on father’s day and notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event mother’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with her then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before mother’s day until 5:30 pm on mother’s day. (i) on the occasions of school holidays when the children are spending time with the father, the mother have electronic face time communication with the children on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call.   notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event father’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with him then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before father’s day until 5:30 pm on father’s day and notwithstanding any provision in these orders, in the event mother’s day falls on a weekend the children are not otherwise spending time with her then the children spend time with him as agreed in writing, text message or email and in default of agreement, from 5:30 pm the evening before mother’s day until 5:30 pm on mother’s day. (i) on the occasions of school holidays when the children are spending time with the father, the mother have electronic face time communication with the children on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call.   on the occasions of school holidays when the children are spending time with the father, the mother have electronic face time communication with the children on at least one occasion in each week and in default of agreement in writing text or email, each wednesday evening at 7:00 pm with the children to be provided with privacy for the call.
property orders  $5,000 on account of costs relating directly and indirectly to the allegations concerning the country e bank account, and (b) the balance paid to the father, and the father bear, and indemnify the wife against, any taxation liability relating to the interest earned on the funds held in that account.   the balance paid to the father, and the father bear, and indemnify the wife against, any taxation liability relating to the interest earned on the funds held in that account.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action and save for choses-in-action against each other) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party to be solely liable for and indemnify the other party against any and all debts in such party’s name, including any liabilities which may encumber any asset to which that party is entitled to pursuant to these orders, (c) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account are to become the property of the party in whose name the account is held, (d) each party forego any claims that may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earn by the other, (e) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties with each other in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly served.   each party to be solely liable for and indemnify the other party against any and all debts in such party’s name, including any liabilities which may encumber any asset to which that party is entitled to pursuant to these orders, (c) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account are to become the property of the party in whose name the account is held, (d) each party forego any claims that may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earn by the other, (e) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties with each other in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly served.   monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account are to become the property of the party in whose name the account is held, (d) each party forego any claims that may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earn by the other, (e) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties with each other in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly served.   each party forego any claims that may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earn by the other, (e) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties with each other in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly served.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties with each other in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly served.   any joint tenancy of the parties with each other in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly served.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background
the final hearing
documents relied upon
exhibits tendered
the period from october 2016 until after separation in february 2017.
witnesses
summary of the mother’s case
and so she should retain most of the sale proceeds of the block of land and all her own assets/equity therein.
summary of the father’s case
credit of the parties ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... (citations omitted)
standard of proof
section 140 civil proceedings: standard of proof   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
parenting case: the applicable law
best interests
section 60ca child’s best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. section 60cc how a court determines what is in a child’s best interests determining child's best interests   subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3).
primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant. ...
section 61da presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders. (1) when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or   family violence.   when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
... section 65dac effect of parenting order that provides for shared parental responsibility (1) this section applies if, under a parenting order:   2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child.   the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child.   the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons. (3) the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision has been made jointly.
some significant events and controversies
separation
one parent, then the other, moves to suburb n after separation
first proceedings and final orders
by consent, the court orders on a final basis: 1. that the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children. that the children [x] born [in] 2010 and [y] born [in] 2013 (“the children”) live with the mother and spend time with the father every alternate weekends from 10:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday for a period of six months and thereafter, that the children spend time with the father every alternate weekends from conclusion of school friday to 5:00pm sunday until [y] completes grade 1 and thereafter, that the children spend time with the father every alternate weekends from conclusion of school friday to commencement of school monday, or tuesday if monday is a public holiday. that once [y] completes grade six, the parents consider the children spending equal time each home. that the children spend time with the father each wednesday from conclusion of school to 7:00pm for a period of six months, thereafter from conclusion of school wednesday to commencement of school thursday. that the children have phone or skype contact with the father each tuesday and thursday evenings at a time agreed between the parents. that the children spend half of all school holidays with each parent on week about basis until [y] completes grade 2, after which they spend time with each parent in first and second half blocks over the long summer break. that consideration be given for the children to attend important religious events with each parent including when the children are in the care of the other parent. that the father pay the mother the sum of $8,423.50 presenting half of the tuition, childcare, extra mathematics classes ([p classes]) and other school expenses that the mother has paid for the current academic year. that both parties communicate in a respectful and non-hostile way at all times. that each parent, their servants and agents be hereby restrained by injunction from denigrating or disrespecting in any way the other parent or members of the other parent’s family or household in the presence of or within the hearing of any one of the children of the marriage. that the mother and the father both be permitted to attend all school activities including school concerts, school plays, excursions, parent teacher interviews and the like normally attended by the parents. that the parties shall immediately inform the other of any serious illness or injury sustained by the children whilst in their care and further provide any particulars of any treatment received by the children together with the name and address of the treatment provider and or location. that each party authorises the other party to obtain medical records from any treating medical practitioners of the children. the parties are hereby restrained from arranging or delivering the children for counselling at any counselling service or any medical or dental specialist or allied health professional without the consent of the other in writing or save in the event of a medical emergency or normal consultation with a general practitioner. that each party shall notify the other within 7 days of any change to residential address, telephone number, email or other contact details. each parent be permitted to travel with the children interstate during the long-term summer holidays for a period not exceeding four (4) weeks provided that: (a) full itinerary together with copy of flight details, airplane tickets and contact details are provided to the other parent no less than one (1) month prior to the anticipated travel date, (b) the other parent does not unreasonably withhold his/her consent for the said travel to take place, and (c) the other parent shall receive make up time with the children for any travel time that the children spends with the travelling parent that impinges on the time that the other parent would have had with the children. by order of the court: that the father shall supervise the children’s time with the grandparents and ensure their welfare is not put at risk. and the court notes: that the mother and the father to equally be responsible for the tuition fees and all other educational fees. that the parties intend these orders shall as far as practicable finally determine the children and parental dispute between them and avoid further proceedings between them.   full itinerary together with copy of flight details, airplane tickets and contact details are provided to the other parent no less than one (1) month prior to the anticipated travel date, (b) the other parent does not unreasonably withhold his/her consent for the said travel to take place, and (c) the other parent shall receive make up time with the children for any travel time that the children spends with the travelling parent that impinges on the time that the other parent would have had with the children.   the other parent does not unreasonably withhold his/her consent for the said travel to take place, and (c) the other parent shall receive make up time with the children for any travel time that the children spends with the travelling parent that impinges on the time that the other parent would have had with the children.   the other parent shall receive make up time with the children for any travel time that the children spends with the travelling parent that impinges on the time that the other parent would have had with the children.
further proceedings
the first final hearing listing
... loans acquired as stated in my affidavit above, i received usd$7,500 as a loan from [mr q] and usd$20,000 from [mr r] for our move to australia. i have located evidence to support the receipt of funds from [mr r]. now produced and marked with the letters “-5” is a copy of a now closed [bank m] statement from 1 march to 31 march 2014 showing usd$20,000 loaned from [mr r]. (emphasis added)
... kindly be informed that the supposed account number ([...78]) is incorrect and cannot be validated. hence we cannot confirm the genuineness of the attached statement of account ... ... (emphasis added)
the court orders that: all extant applications be adjourned to the federal circuit court of australia at melbourne on 21 february 2022 at 10:00am final hearing (with an estimated hearing time of 3 days). the applicant mother file and serve any further material by 4:00pm 29 october 2021. the respondent father file and serve any further material by 4:00pm 30 november 2021. costs be reserved.
communication difficulties
the mr r debt and the impugned country e bank statement
the change in the mother’s employment situation
3. for the assistance of the court, i provide the following:
a. the act means the health insurance act 1973, b. [ab]’s means international [health care] graduates, c. [v model] means the [v] model, d. dpa means distribution priority area, e. [governing authority], f. [governing body, [governing body]).
a training requirements: 4. section 19aa of the act: [health care professionals] who are permanent residents or citizens of australia must become vocationally recognised. [health care professionals] become vocationally recognised by getting a qualification in a specialty that is recognised in australia. section 19aa of australia's health insurance act 1973 enforces this rule by law. under 19aa, you can’t get a medicare provider number if you are a permanent resident or citizen of australia, and you are not: recognised as a [member of a professional body] recognised as a [health professional] by the [relevant authority] recognised as a [member] by a [relevant governing authority] on an approved program if a [health care professional] does not hold [qualifications], they can provide services covered by medicare if they are on a section [program] approved training or workforce program. section 3ga of the act permits [health care professionals] who are subject to s19aa to provide professional services that attract medicare benefits through placements on approved workforce or training programs. i am currently working to obtain such registration in my chosen field, which is [health care]. 5. section 19ab of the act international graduates are restricted in where they can work in australia and access medicare benefits. section 19ab of australia's health insurance act 1973 sets out the rules for international graduates and these restrictions. under 19ab, a [health care professional] must work in a dpa if they’re a [health care professional], or a district of workforce shortage (dws) if they’re a [non-health care professional], for at least 10 years. the 10 year period is also known as the 10 year moratorium. training towards becoming a [health care professional] or who are a [health care professional] are required to work in a dpa location that is between 2 and 7, for the duration of their moratorium. a dpa is where the level of health services available to the local community does not meet national service benchmarks, considering medicare data, [medical] workforce, population demographics and socio-economic status. an area is automatically classified as a dpa when it is classified as 2 to 7 or the area is in the [city g]. annexed hereto and marked with the letter “-1” is a true copy [v model] map classification and fact sheet obtained from the department of health website on 6 july 2021. in addition to the location restrictions provided by section 19ab, i am required to work under supervision until i have completed my [qualifications]. i am currently enrolled, and have be so enrolled since 2015, in the [t program] with [the governing authority] working towards [qualifications]. annexed hereto and marked with the letter “-2” is a true copy [t program] participant guide. i first commenced employment as a [health care professional] in australia in 2015, in [town u] victoria being [v] area at that time. in 2018, i commenced employment as a [contractor] health care professional with [w centre] in [suburb z] (“[suburb z] practice”) at which time [suburb z] was classified [v model]. my contract of employment is valid until november 2022. annexed hereto and marked with the letter “-3” is a true copy of my contract with [w clinic]. in july 2019, due to australian government department of health boundary changes, [suburb z] was reclassified to [v model] as indicated in my annexure -1. due to the reclassification of [suburb z] from [v model] 2, to [v model 1], i am no longer able to continue my employment as a [health professional] with the [suburb z] practice beyond the expiry of my contract being november 2022, as it will not be renewed as neither the practice, my patients nor i would have access to medicare benefits. this would make it impossible to earn an income and render me unemployable to any prospective employer not within an [v model] 2 to [v model] 7 area. my only option to continue employment as a [health care professional] would be to work as a hospital [health professional]. working as a hospital [health professional] is not something i wish to do as: i would be ineligible to continue with the [t] program with the [governing authority].
b. i would have no prospect of ever becoming a [medical professional], and it would involve shift work and seriously affect my capacity to care for the children.
... i accepted the employment offer at the [city b] practice to secure a contract in a dpa in a prime location close to melbourne. if i had passed up the opportunity offered by the [city b] practice and waited until closer to the end of my current contract, i would have had to accept any position available outside an [v model]1 area. this may have necessitated me taking a position in an isolated or remote area and most likely in an area far removed from melbourne. accordingly, i say it was vitally important i accepted the [city b] practice offer to enable secure employment which would allow me to continue working towards becoming a medical professional of the [governing body] and apply for specialist registration. ... i am dismayed that the issue of my employment requirements has become an issue in these proceedings as i say the husband is and has always been fully aware of the restrictions that apply to overseas trained [health care professionals] in terms of working location as outlined above. i say this particularly as the following facts have been always known to the husband:
... the husband’s stepsister ms ac also a [health care professional], works in [city ad] and is subject to the same restrictions under the act.  phasis added at paragraph 11.]
... [mr neal], good evening. this is to inform you that i will be moving from [suburb n] to [regional city] effective 5th april 2021 because i have secured a new training position at a facility over there. this has been a difficult decision but i have no choice if i am to complete my training. i will continue to work with you so that we can follow the guidelines stated in the court orders. please don’t hesitate to contact me with any questions or concerns. ... (emphasis added).
the family report
a. that [x] and [y] live with the mother. the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, conditional upon the parties engaging in therapeutic counselling. if the father does not engage in counselling, consideration is given to the mother having sole parental responsibility and communicating with the father about significant parenting matters. the father refrains from any threats to the children in the aftermath of this court hearing. if there is any indication of such threats, consideration is given to the father’s time being reserved until the completion of therapeutic counselling. the parties engage in reportable family therapy with a recommended counsellor ... the children spend time with the father each weekend either on a friday from 5 pm until saturday 5 pm, or from saturday 5 pm until sunday 5 pm. it is recommended that the mother is permitted to relocate to [city b], and the children are enrolled in the school nominated by the mother. that permission is provided for the release of this report to the counsellor. the parties attend mediation after the family completes therapeutic counselling with a view to an increase in the father’s time. alternatively, if the father does not comply with the recommendations, that the mother brings the matter back to court and at such time, consideration is given to the appointment of an independent children’s lawyer.
... the mother reported a history of family violence characterised by psychological and emotional abuse, such as making demeaning comments. she also described his control of their finances, which she initially accepted as a cultural norm. she also reported him pressuring her into two terminations. ... the mother reported family violence during the early stages of the relationship. she alleged psychological abuse to undergo medical procedures against her will after the father begged her to have two terminations. despite further pressure, she did not terminate the pregnancy with [x]. ... she reported that [x] was not eager to spend time with his father. he withheld information about what happened at his father’s home. [x] confided that his father told him he would be punished if he discussed what happened in his home. [x] was always wary about raising issues, fearful about the consequences. [x] had raised concerns about some of his father’s comments. he did not want to tell his father about his female friends. his father had told [x] that he had girlfriends at [x]’s age and would teach [x] how to be a man. she tried to put [x] at ease, encouraged him to be resilient, and focus on being a child. ... the mother was concerned about the impact of the father’s behaviour on [x]’s emotional wellbeing. [x] would ask to sleep in her bed, and recently had stopped eating for a week. the mother took [x] to the gp, who had considered referring him for counselling. the mother raised concerns about [y] spending extra time with the father. she had received reports from [y]’s teacher that [y] was often sad and crying in class. [y] told the teacher that she was sad because she missed her mother when she went to her father’s house. the mother had supported her by buying a soft toy as a source of comfort and offering her a special holiday. the children have been responsive to the possibility of relocating. she was committed to ensuring as smooth a transition as possible. she was aware that they would miss their friends and was committed to them maintaining contact. the mother was concerned that the father’s partner had made detrimental comments about the relocation. the children reported that she had told them that they would never see their friends again if they moved to [city b]. the mother reported that the father had not fully engaged in a co-parenting relationship. they had communicated via an app, but he had not reciprocated since september 2020. the current means of communication was via email. the mother was particularly concerned about his lack of response to the recent concerns with [x]’s behaviour. she also reported that the father had blocked her phone number when she tried to call him and when [y] tried to communicate with her. the mother was particularly concerned that the father had not communicated about leaving the children in his partner’s care. she also disagreed with the father’s proposal that if he went away for work, the children would spend time with his partner. on one occasion, he had delegated responsibility to his partner to collect the children from school without advising her that he was overseas. the school contacted the mother, stating that the father’s staff was there to collect the children. the partner avoided disclosing that the father was away. the mother felt helpless about supporting the children with the issues with their father. she was very concerned about the father’s parenting style and the harm caused to the children. she did not believe he was responsive in attending to the children’s needs. by way of example, he had not participated in the most recent parent-teacher interviews for the children. her attitude was to “co-parent in peace” and remain child-focussed. ... the father described [x] as an intelligent and obedient child. he and [x] have a close relationship and was pleased that [x] confided in him when needed. he had recently told him about getting involved in a fight at school. the father offered advice and believed it was helpful. the father said that [x] enjoyed spending time and was always excited during visits. [x] gets on very well with his younger brother. the father described a very close relationship with [y]. he described their quality time spent chatting and preparing shopping lists. he said that she struggled to make friends and was quite shy. he was concerned about her adjusting to a new school environment due to her introverted nature. ... post separation, the mother demonstrated her capacity to engage in co-parenting. she had tried direct communication with the father and later reverted to indirect methods such as an app and emails. her focus was on promoting the children’s relationship with their father. regarding the challenges, she was intent on building their resilience to cope with the different parenting styles. the father reported his commitment to set aside past conflict and focus on the children's best interests. however, there were many examples to indicate that he was uncooperative in his co-parenting. these included his pervasively negative view of the mother, hindering his capacity to engage in respectful behaviour. ... regarding time spent with his father, [x] shrugged his shoulders and said he only wanted to spend “a bit” of time. he later mentioned that he felt unhappy that his father limited his access to television, whereas he had fewer restrictions with his mother. he was also non-responsive regarding his feelings about video call contact with his father. he described quality time playing monopoly with his father and enjoyed writing his own stories about heroes. his preference was to spend time with friends when with his father. [x] referred to the father’s partner as auntie [ms h]. he was non-responsive about his relationship with her, but he was very animated, describing his close relationship with his brother [f]. he said that he enjoyed playing music and jumping with him on the bed. they share a room, and if [f] cries, [x] tries to settle him. he mentioned that his sister use to sleep in his father’s bedroom, but not anymore. [x] was not sure if he liked spending the extra night with his father. he was convinced that his sister was not happy with the arrangement. he said that she cried at school and told [x] how she felt. he said that she wasn’t upset at their father’s house and just played. ... [x] said that he felt okay about moving to [city b]. his mother had reassured him that he could still visit his friends. [x] was also excited that his new school had a pool as he wanted to do more swimming. he was not upset about moving further away from his father. he wanted to continue spending time with his father but for shorter periods. he anticipated that he might have activities that would prevent him from spending more time with his father. ... [y] also described positive experiences spending time with her father. she said that it felt “nice” visiting him. she liked playing monopoly and watching television. she could not identify anything that made her feel sad spending time with him. she did not mention spending time with “auntie [ms h]” but detailed her joy playing with [f]. she said that she slept in her room but occasionally slept in her father’s bed. she also slept in her mother’s bed and liked it when her mother hugged her. [y] said she did not like spending the extra night at her father’s house, as she missed her mother. she had not been able to share these feelings with anyone. ... the father brought a game of monopoly, and the children were delighted to play with him. he nominated [x] as the banker, which appeared a familiar role. the father assisted both children with any challenges. the father guided [y] when she did not understand aspects of the game. [y] got sidetracked playing with stickers and was happy giving them to the father and [x]. the children were very dynamic and appeared very relaxed with the father. [x] was very competent with his arithmetic and was assisted by the father when needed. the father also guided [y] with basic mathematics, and she responded well to his praise. she reciprocated by helping him when needed. the children were observed with the mother in the waiting room. she offered them a variety of stimulating activities. the children were very engaged and very comfortable in their mother’s company. the mother, too, was animated and was praiseworthy of their achievements. ... there were, however, psychological vulnerabilities, that raise concerns about the father’s parenting capacity. if the mother’s account is reliable, his authoritarian parenting style was characterised by high levels of control, enforcing behaviours through threats of punishment. whether this parenting style is consistent with the father’s culture or reflects his attitude, it demonstrated his lack of insight into the children’s needs. from reports, he appeared to lack responsiveness to supporting them through the transition to increased time, such as offering a more flexible regime of phone contact and fostering consistency with activities between their homes. [x]’s access to inappropriate online movies was suggestive of inadequate supervision, which caused him significant harm. the father’s behaviours have also impacted his capacity to develop a co-parenting relationship. his avoidance of information exchange and collaboration were barriers. his failure to advise the mother of [x]’s significant health issues was highly problematic. furthermore, appointing parental responsibilities to his partner without informing the mother was a significant concern. ... as the primary caregiver, the mother has been responsible for attending to the children’s care needs. both children appeared to have a strong bond with the mother, and any disruption to their attachment would be highly detrimental to their developmental needs. the children have experienced significant periods of absence from the father, which has impacted the relationship. they both appeared to enjoy quality time but were reticent about increased time. the conditions that contribute to their security and emotional well-being in spending time with the father are cooperative, child-focussed, and flexible co-parenting. [x] presented as a child with emotional security in the care of his mother. there were vulnerabilities associated with spending time in the father’s care, as indicated by deterioration in his eating and sleep regime. [x] appeared ambivalent about the current arrangements but was cautious in expressing his views. [y] also presented with emotional vulnerabilities associated with the increase in time with the father. during the session, she expressed her ambivalence about the current regime and missing her mother. reports of [y]’s somatic symptoms and marked changes in her behaviour by school staff when spending time with her father indicated emotional harm. [emphasis added]
early 2021: the tumult
parental responsibility phasis added)
"major long-term issues" , in relation to a child, means issues about the care, welfare and development of the child of a long-term nature and includes (but is not limited to) issues of that nature about: (a) the child's education (both current and future), and (b) the child's religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child's health, and (d) the child's name, and   changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.
to avoid doubt, a decision by a parent of a child to form a relationship with a new partner is not, of itself, a major long-term issue in relation to the child. however, the decision will involve a major long-term issue if, for example, the relationship with the new partner involves the parent moving to another area and the move will make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with the other parent.
primary considerations
benefit of the children having a meaningful relationship with both parents
the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm.
additional considerations
any views expressed by the child
nature of relationship of with each of the child’s parents and other persons
extent each parent has taken or failed to participate in decisions or spend time
extent to which each fulfilled obligations to maintain the children
likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances
the practical difficulty and expense of spending time
capacity of each of the child’s parents to provide for the needs of the children
maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions)
attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood
any family violence and any family violence order that applies
order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks relevant
conclusion
property orders
section 79 alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or (b) in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or (b) in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,   in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,
including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and  either or both of the parties to the marriage, or (ii) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any), to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines. ) an order made under subsection (1) in property settlement proceedings may, after the death of a party to the marriage, be enforced on behalf of, or against, as the case may be, the estate of the deceased party. (1b) the court may adjourn property settlement proceedings, except where the parties to the marriage are: (a) parties to concurrent, pending or completed divorce or validity of marriage proceedings, or (ba) parties to a marriage who have divorced under the law of an overseas country, where that divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) parties to a marriage that has been annulled under the law of an overseas country, where that annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) parties to a marriage who have been granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country, where that legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,   parties to concurrent, pending or completed divorce or validity of marriage proceedings, or (ba) parties to a marriage who have divorced under the law of an overseas country, where that divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) parties to a marriage that has been annulled under the law of an overseas country, where that annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) parties to a marriage who have been granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country, where that legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,  ) parties to a marriage who have divorced under the law of an overseas country, where that divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) parties to a marriage that has been annulled under the law of an overseas country, where that annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) parties to a marriage who have been granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country, where that legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,  ) parties to a marriage that has been annulled under the law of an overseas country, where that annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) parties to a marriage who have been granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country, where that legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,   parties to a marriage who have been granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country, where that legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,
on such terms and conditions as it considers appropriate, for such period as it considers necessary to enable the parties to the marriage to consider the likely effects (if any) of an order under this section on the marriage or the children of the marriage, but nothing in this subsection shall be taken to limit any other power of the court to adjourn such proceedings.  ) where the period for which a court has adjourned property settlement proceedings as provided by subsection (1b) has not expired and: (a) divorce or validity of marriage proceedings are instituted by one or both of the parties to the marriage, or (ba) the parties to the marriage have divorced under the law of an overseas country and the divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) the marriage is annulled under the law of an overseas country and the annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) the parties to the marriage are granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country and the legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,   divorce or validity of marriage proceedings are instituted by one or both of the parties to the marriage, or (ba) the parties to the marriage have divorced under the law of an overseas country and the divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) the marriage is annulled under the law of an overseas country and the annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) the parties to the marriage are granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country and the legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,  ) the parties to the marriage have divorced under the law of an overseas country and the divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) the marriage is annulled under the law of an overseas country and the annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) the parties to the marriage are granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country and the legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,  ) the marriage is annulled under the law of an overseas country and the annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) the parties to the marriage are granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country and the legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,   the parties to the marriage are granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country and the legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,
a party to the first-mentioned proceedings may apply to the court for the hearing of those proceedings to be continued.   the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.
...   without limiting the power of any court to grant an adjournment in proceedings under this act, where, in property settlement proceedings, a court is of the opinion: (a) that there is likely to be a significant change in the financial circumstances of the parties to the marriage or either of them and that, having regard to the time when that change is likely to take place, it is reasonable to adjourn the proceedings, and   that there is likely to be a significant change in the financial circumstances of the parties to the marriage or either of them and that, having regard to the time when that change is likely to take place, it is reasonable to adjourn the proceedings, and   that an order that the court could make with respect to:  the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (ii) the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, if that significant change in financial circumstances occurs is more likely to do justice as between the parties to the marriage than an order that the court could make immediately with respect to: (iii) the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (iv) the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage,  ) the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage,  ) the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage,
the court may, if so requested by either party to the marriage or the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any), adjourn the proceedings until such time, before the expiration of a period specified by the court, as that party to the marriage or the relevant bankruptcy trustee, as the case may be, applies for the proceedings to be determined, but nothing in this subsection requires the court to adjourn any proceedings in any particular circumstances.   where a court proposes to adjourn proceedings as provided by subsection (5), the court may, before so adjourning the proceedings, make such interim order or orders or such other order or orders (if any) as it considers appropriate with respect to: (a) any of the property of the parties to the marriage or of either of them, or (b) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage. (7) the court may, in forming an opinion for the purposes of subsection (5) as to whether there is likely to be a significant change in the financial circumstances of either or both of the parties to the marriage, have regard to any change in the financial circumstances of a party to the marriage that may occur by reason that the party to the marriage: (a) is a contributor to a superannuation fund or scheme, or participates in any scheme or arrangement that is in the nature of a superannuation scheme, or (b) may become entitled to property as the result of the exercise in his or her favour, by the trustee of a discretionary trust, of a power to distribute trust property,   any of the property of the parties to the marriage or of either of them, or (b) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage.   any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage.   the court may, in forming an opinion for the purposes of subsection (5) as to whether there is likely to be a significant change in the financial circumstances of either or both of the parties to the marriage, have regard to any change in the financial circumstances of a party to the marriage that may occur by reason that the party to the marriage: (a) is a contributor to a superannuation fund or scheme, or participates in any scheme or arrangement that is in the nature of a superannuation scheme, or (b) may become entitled to property as the result of the exercise in his or her favour, by the trustee of a discretionary trust, of a power to distribute trust property,   is a contributor to a superannuation fund or scheme, or participates in any scheme or arrangement that is in the nature of a superannuation scheme, or (b) may become entitled to property as the result of the exercise in his or her favour, by the trustee of a discretionary trust, of a power to distribute trust property,   may become entitled to property as the result of the exercise in his or her favour, by the trustee of a discretionary trust, of a power to distribute trust property,
but nothing in this subsection shall be taken to limit the circumstances in which the court may form the opinion that there is likely to be a significant change in the financial circumstances of a party to the marriage.   where, before property settlement proceedings are completed, a party to the marriage dies: (a) the proceedings may be continued by or against, as the case may be, the legal personal representative of the deceased party and the applicable rules of court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal representative as a party to the proceedings,   the proceedings may be continued by or against, as the case may be, the legal personal representative of the deceased party and the applicable rules of court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal representative as a party to the proceedings,   if the court is of the opinion: (i) that it would have made an order with respect to property if the deceased party had not died, and (ii) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,   that it would have made an order with respect to property if the deceased party had not died, and (ii) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,  ) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,
the court may make such order as it considers appropriate with respect to: (iii) any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (iv) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, and (c) an order made by the court pursuant to paragraph (b) may be enforced on behalf of, or against, as the case may be, the estate of the deceased party.  i) any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (iv) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, and  ) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, and   an order made by the court pursuant to paragraph (b) may be enforced on behalf of, or against, as the case may be, the estate of the deceased party.   the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1), or a family court of a state, shall not make an order under this section in property settlement proceedings (other than an order until further order or an order made with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings) unless: (a) the parties to the proceedings have attended a conference in relation to the matter to which the proceedings relate: (i) in the case of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1)--with the chief executive officer, or a senior registrar or registrar of the court, or (ii) in the case of the family court of that state--with a senior registrar or registrar of that family court, or (b) the court is satisfied that, having regard to the need to make an order urgently, or to any other special circumstance, it is appropriate to make the order notwithstanding that the parties to the proceedings have not attended a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a), or (c) the court is satisfied that it is not practicable to require the parties to the proceedings to attend a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a). (10) the following are entitled to become a party to proceedings in which an application is made for an order under this section by a party to a marriage (the subject marriage ): (a) a creditor of a party to the proceedings if the creditor may not be able to recover his or her debt if the order were made,   the parties to the proceedings have attended a conference in relation to the matter to which the proceedings relate: (i) in the case of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1)--with the chief executive officer, or a senior registrar or registrar of the court, or (ii) in the case of the family court of that state--with a senior registrar or registrar of that family court, or (b) the court is satisfied that, having regard to the need to make an order urgently, or to any other special circumstance, it is appropriate to make the order notwithstanding that the parties to the proceedings have not attended a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a), or (c) the court is satisfied that it is not practicable to require the parties to the proceedings to attend a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a).   in the case of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1)--with the chief executive officer, or a senior registrar or registrar of the court, or (ii) in the case of the family court of that state--with a senior registrar or registrar of that family court, or  ) in the case of the family court of that state--with a senior registrar or registrar of that family court, or   the court is satisfied that, having regard to the need to make an order urgently, or to any other special circumstance, it is appropriate to make the order notwithstanding that the parties to the proceedings have not attended a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a), or (c) the court is satisfied that it is not practicable to require the parties to the proceedings to attend a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a).   the court is satisfied that it is not practicable to require the parties to the proceedings to attend a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a).  ) the following are entitled to become a party to proceedings in which an application is made for an order under this section by a party to a marriage (the subject marriage ): (a) a creditor of a party to the proceedings if the creditor may not be able to recover his or her debt if the order were made,   a creditor of a party to the proceedings if the creditor may not be able to recover his or her debt if the order were made,  ) a person: (i) who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the subject marriage, and (ii) who could apply, or has an application pending, for an order under section 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, in relation to the de facto relationship, (ab) a person who is a party to a part viiiab financial agreement (that is binding on the person) with a party to the subject marriage, (b) any other person whose interests would be affected by the making of the order.   who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the subject marriage, and (ii) who could apply, or has an application pending, for an order under section 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, in relation to the de facto relationship,  ) who could apply, or has an application pending, for an order under section 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, in relation to the de facto relationship,  ) a person who is a party to a part viiiab financial agreement (that is binding on the person) with a party to the subject marriage, (b) any other person whose interests would be affected by the making of the order.   any other person whose interests would be affected by the making of the order.  a) subsection (10) does not apply to a creditor of a party to the proceedings: (a) if the party is a bankrupt--to the extent to which the debt is a provable debt (within the meaning of the bankruptcy act 1966 ), or   if the party is a bankrupt--to the extent to which the debt is a provable debt (within the meaning of the bankruptcy act 1966 ), or   if the party is a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement--to the extent to which the debt is covered by the personal insolvency agreement.  b) if a person becomes a party to proceedings under this section because of paragraph (10)(aa), the person may, in the proceedings, apply for:   an order under section 90sm, or (b) a declaration under section 90sl, in relation to the de facto relationship described in that paragraph.  ) if: (a) an application is made for an order under this section in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and   an application is made for an order under this section in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and   either of the following subparagraphs apply to a party to the marriage:  when the application was made, the party was a bankrupt, (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party became a bankrupt, and (c) the bankruptcy trustee applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the bankrupt's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,  ) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party became a bankrupt, and   the bankruptcy trustee applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the bankrupt's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,   the court is satisfied that the interests of the bankrupt's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,
the court must join the bankruptcy trustee as a party to the proceedings.  ) if a bankruptcy trustee is a party to property settlement proceedings, then, except with the leave of the court, the bankrupt party to the marriage is not entitled to make a submission to the court in connection with any vested bankruptcy property in relation to the bankrupt party. (13) the court must not grant leave under subsection (12) unless the court is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances.  ) the court must not grant leave under subsection (12) unless the court is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances.  ) if: (a) an application is made for an order under this section in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) either of the following subparagraphs apply to a party to the marriage (the debtor party ): (i) when the application was made, the party was a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, or (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and (c) the trustee of the agreement applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,   an application is made for an order under this section in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) either of the following subparagraphs apply to a party to the marriage (the debtor party ): (i) when the application was made, the party was a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, or (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and (c) the trustee of the agreement applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,   either of the following subparagraphs apply to a party to the marriage (the debtor party ): (i) when the application was made, the party was a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, or (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and (c) the trustee of the agreement applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,   when the application was made, the party was a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, or (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and  ) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and   the trustee of the agreement applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,   the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,
the court must join the trustee of the agreement as a party to the proceedings.  ) if the trustee of a personal insolvency agreement is a party to property settlement proceedings, then, except with the leave of the court, the party to the marriage who is the debtor subject to the agreement is not entitled to make a submission to the court in connection with any property subject to the agreement. (16) the court must not grant leave under subsection (15) unless the court is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances. (17) for the purposes of subsections (11) and (14), an application for an order under this section is taken to be finally determined when:  ) the court must not grant leave under subsection (15) unless the court is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances. (17) for the purposes of subsections (11) and (14), an application for an order under this section is taken to be finally determined when:  ) for the purposes of subsections (11) and (14), an application for an order under this section is taken to be finally determined when:   the application is withdrawn or dismissed, or (b) an order (other than an interim order) is made as a result of the application.   an order (other than an interim order) is made as a result of the application.
section 75 matters to be taken into consideration in relation to spousal maintenance   in exercising jurisdiction under section 74, the court shall take into account only the matters referred to in subsection (2).   the matters to be so taken into account are:   the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and (ii) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and  ) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:   subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:  any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,
and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  ) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and a) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viiiab in relation to:  a party to the marriage, or (ii) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.  ) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  i) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   in exercising its jurisdiction under section 74, a court shall disregard any entitlement of the party whose maintenance is under consideration to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   in this section: "party" means a party to the marriage concerned.
section 80 general powers of court   the court, in exercising its powers under this part, may do any or all of the following:   order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments, (b) order payment of a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic sum, (ba) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a marriage, (c) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order, (e) appoint or remove trustees, (f) order that payments be made direct to a party to the marriage, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the marriage, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order, (i) impose terms and conditions, (j) make an order by consent, (k) make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, and (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.  ) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a marriage, (c) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payments be made direct to a party to the marriage, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the marriage, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, and (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.   subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.   the making of an order of a kind referred to in paragraph (1)(ba), or of any other order under this part, in relation to the maintenance of a party to a marriage does not prevent a court from making a subsequent order in relation to the maintenance of the party. (3) the applicable rules of court may make provision with respect to the making of orders under this part in relation to the maintenance of parties to marriages (whether as to their form or otherwise) for the purpose of facilitating their enforcement and the collection of maintenance payable under them. (4) if a bankruptcy trustee is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the bankrupt. (5) if the trustee of a personal insolvency agreement is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the debtor subject to the agreement.   the applicable rules of court may make provision with respect to the making of orders under this part in relation to the maintenance of parties to marriages (whether as to their form or otherwise) for the purpose of facilitating their enforcement and the collection of maintenance payable under them. (4) if a bankruptcy trustee is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the bankrupt. (5) if the trustee of a personal insolvency agreement is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the debtor subject to the agreement.   if a bankruptcy trustee is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the bankrupt. (5) if the trustee of a personal insolvency agreement is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the debtor subject to the agreement.   if the trustee of a personal insolvency agreement is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the debtor subject to the agreement.   subsections (4) and (5) do not limit paragraph (1)(d).
just and equitable ] first, it is necessary to begin consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property... the question posed by s 79(2) (and/or section 90sm(3)) is thus whether, having regard to those existing interests, the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order.  ] the fundamental propositions that have been identified require a court have a principled reason for interfering with the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties to the marriage and whatever may have been their stated or unstated assumptions and agreements about property interest during the continuance of the marriage. [42] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife. no less importantly, the express implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship... and the assumption that any adjustment of those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4) (and/or section 90sm(3)).
the preferred approach ] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79. that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) (“the other factors”) including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.
the two suburb o blocks, the caveat and the sale
sale of the [suburb o] property i was unable to build on the [suburb o] property because i was unable to obtain a loan from [bank ag] to build a home on the land. my broker, [mr ah], from [bank ag] advised that the bank’s reason for declining the loan was that there was a defect on the title. i was not aware at this time but subsequently learned that [ms neal] had lodged a caveat on the [suburb o] property. i lost my deposit of $20,000 to [company aj] for this build. it was not financially viable for me to continue to pay for all outgoings to maintain the [suburb o] property if i was unable to build on it. ...as such, i decided to sell the [suburb o] property in march 2020. the [suburb o] property was listed for sale on or about 19 march 2020. on 24 june 2020, i entered into a contract of sale for the sale of the [suburb o] property. the purchase price was $385,000. settlement was due on 31 august 2020. i instructed [ak conveyancing] to act as my conveyancer. they informed me that there was a caveat on the [suburb o] property that had been lodged by [ms neal]. i was not aware of the caveat until this time. i am aware and believe that the conveyancer contacted [ms neal] in relation to the caveat and she directed them to her lawyer to discuss the removal of it for settlement. i requested that [ms neal]’s lawyer remove the caveat and they advised that [ms neal] wanted to retain 60% of the total amount of $385,000. i explained that this wasn't possible as there was a mortgage owing and costs associated with the sale of the land. i tried negotiating with [ms neal]’s lawyer to no avail. given settlement of the sale of the [suburb o] property was imminent and i could not reach an agreement with [ms neal], i issued proceedings seeking that [ms neal] remove her caveat and for a final property settlement between us. transfer of the [motor vehicle 1] and jointly owned chattels on 6 april 2017, [ms neal] emailed me and requested that i transfer the ownership of the [motor vehicle 1] to her. i actioned this as soon as possible and transferred the [motor vehicle 1] to [ms neal]’s name within the week. [ms neal] retained possession of all of our jointly owned chattels and furniture at separation. i had to purchase some nominal furniture and white goods at my sole expense post separation. they now hold a nominal value.
rapid market increase
step one: identify property & liabilities at hearing
1. proceeds of the second [suburb o] block on trust $85,618 2. father’s ‘keep’
a. part property (from proceeds) $12,500 b. balance of deposit taken by father $11,809 c. father’s motor vehicle 2 $4,000
total $28,309 3. father’s half equity in building block purchased with partner
agreed value (50%) $165,000 mortgage debt (50%) (145,000) father’s equity $20,000
4. mother’s equity [suburb af] property agreed value $525,000 mortgage debt (388,320) equity $136,680 5. mother’s equity [city b] suburb block
agreed value $385,000 mortgage debt (167,185) equity $217,815
6. mother’s share portfolio $ 44,825 7. mother’s ‘keep’ a. [motor vehicle 1] $4,000 b. bank acc’s #[...]79,#[...]39,#[..18] $4,500 c. jewellery & accessories $10,000 d. centrelink debt (6,522) e. [ms al] & [ms am] debt (45,000) total mother’s bits and pieces (33,022) 8. total non superannuation assets $500,225 9. father’s superannuation $ 34,710 10. mother’s superannuation $ 52,725
proceeds of the second suburb o block on trust
$85,618 17.1%
father’s building block equity & keep
$48,309 9.65%
mother’s property equity, shares and keep
$366,298 73.22%
total assets
$500,225 100%
mother’s accounts: nab #[...]49 not included: opened 31 mar 2017 nab #[...]28 31 jan 2017: $3,452 (page 7 of m8) wbc #[...]79 31 jan 2017: $ 59 (page 21 of m8) wbc #[...]39 31 jan 2017: $2,942 (page 35 of m8) anz #[...]62 31 jan 2017 $9,101 (page 39 of m8) total available: mother’s accounts $15,554
father’s accounts: nab #[...]81 31 jan 2017: $ 1 (page 10/51 f3) cba joint acc #[...]31 31 jan 2017 $370 (page 20/51 f3) cba mcard #[...]84 9 feb 2017 (2,012) (page 29/51 f3) wbc #[...]27 31 jan 2017 $312 (page 33/51 f3) wbc #[...]44 31 jan 2017 $0 (page 37/51 f3) creditline #[...]03 21 jan 2017 (1,620) (page 50/51 f3) total available: father’s accounts (2,929) joint $ applied to 2nd [suburb o] block $14,450 net of assets of father at separation $11,501
step two: section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) contribution
step three: section 75(2) factors
step four: just and equitable and conclusion
costs of the country e bank account
section 117 costs   subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.   if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.
note 1: for other provisions about the award of costs by the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1), see paragraphs 69(4)(d) and (e) of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 . note 2: for other provisions about the award of costs by the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), see paragraphs 192(4)(d) and (e) of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 . (2a) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to:   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and
associates: dated: 15 july 2022
dated: 15 july 2022