last updated: 25 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
farih & tannous [2022] fedcfamc2f 958
orders
the court orders that:
parenting
property  victoria police infringement number ... issued to e pty ltd, (b) victoria police infringement number ... issued to e pty ltd, and (c) any alleged money owed to the second respondent by the father and/or both the father and mother.   victoria police infringement number ... issued to e pty ltd, and (c) any alleged money owed to the second respondent by the father and/or both the father and mother.   any alleged money owed to the second respondent by the father and/or both the father and mother.   the centrelink debt, (b) the victoria police impoundment notice in her name, (c) the hecs help debt, (d) the d company loan, and (e) the nab credit card debt account identified as ...50.   the victoria police impoundment notice in her name, (c) the hecs help debt, (d) the d company loan, and (e) the nab credit card debt account identified as ...50.   the hecs help debt, (d) the d company loan, and (e) the nab credit card debt account identified as ...50.   the d company loan, and (e) the nab credit card debt account identified as ...50.   the nab credit card debt account identified as ...50.   the property at b street, suburb c, and (b) any motor vehicles removed from b street, suburb c,   any motor vehicles removed from b street, suburb c,
and the father retain any payment arising out of any such claim(s).   each parent be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all superannuation and other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such parent as at the date of these orders, (b) all insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (c) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank accounts to be the property of the party in whose name such bank account is held, and (d) each parent be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that parent is entitled pursuant to these orders and any liability otherwise in their respective names.   all insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (c) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank accounts to be the property of the party in whose name such bank account is held, and (d) each parent be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that parent is entitled pursuant to these orders and any liability otherwise in their respective names.   monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank accounts to be the property of the party in whose name such bank account is held, and (d) each parent be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that parent is entitled pursuant to these orders and any liability otherwise in their respective names.   each parent be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that parent is entitled pursuant to these orders and any liability otherwise in their respective names.
reasons for judgment
judge boymal
introduction
the hearing in august 2021  the release of the section 67z response dated 11 august 2021 (s67z response) from the department of families, fairness and housing (dffh), (b) the court not acceding to the father’s request for an adjournment of the final hearing on the basis that he wished to subpoena further documents including from the department of corrections and dffh, (c) the court being told that the father had breach of intervention order proceedings in the magistrates’ court the following week and a further listing in september 2021 for another matter and judicial monitoring as he was still on a community corrections order, (d) orders and arrangements made to facilitate the father’s mother’s appearance in court which included providing her with an interpreter. the father’s mother was overseas in city h where she lives. she ultimately did appear, (e) orders made for the final hearing to proceed on an undefended basis as against the second respondent. the second respondent was joined as a party to the proceedings on 25 february 2020. she had filed no material in the proceedings. she had not engaged legal representation. the father through his counsel expressed to the court that he intended to call his mother as a witness in support of his case. in order to ensure that the matter could proceed on the listed days in august the court indicated it would provide latitude to the father to call his mother to give oral evidence in support of his case in the absence of any affidavit filed on her behalf. the parameters of the evidence of the father’s mother appeared to be narrow and known by counsel for the mother, that is, the father’s mother wanted her money back, (f) in the afternoon on the second day counsel for the father advised the court that she had sought a ruling from the ethics committee of the victorian bar. the ethic committee’s response was not forthcoming in a time frame that would provide the parties the opportunity to have the matter dealt with during the allocated hearing days. there was also the possibility that subject to the ruling of the ethics committee the father may need to obtain alternate legal representation. the court was not advised of the subject matter of the ruling that was put to the ethics committee. in those circumstances the final hearing was adjourned for a 3 day final hearing to commence on 24 november 2021, and (g) a costs order being made that the father pay the mother’s costs thrown away in the sum of $7,000.00 within 30 days. the father agreed that he should pay the mother’s costs. the court determined the quantum. the father deposed in his affidavit affirmed on 13 august 2021 at paragraph 107 that he had accumulated $18,000.00 in savings by way of wages he had earned in the previous four months and that these savings together with a small amount of scrap gold he had purchased from wages and a diamond ring he had previously purchased for the mother were stored in a safe at his residence.[2] however, the father through his counsel advised that the funds had been depleted by his purchase of equipment for his business and that the balance of his savings was then at $8,000.00.   the court not acceding to the father’s request for an adjournment of the final hearing on the basis that he wished to subpoena further documents including from the department of corrections and dffh, (c) the court being told that the father had breach of intervention order proceedings in the magistrates’ court the following week and a further listing in september 2021 for another matter and judicial monitoring as he was still on a community corrections order, (d) orders and arrangements made to facilitate the father’s mother’s appearance in court which included providing her with an interpreter. the father’s mother was overseas in city h where she lives. she ultimately did appear, (e) orders made for the final hearing to proceed on an undefended basis as against the second respondent. the second respondent was joined as a party to the proceedings on 25 february 2020. she had filed no material in the proceedings. she had not engaged legal representation. the father through his counsel expressed to the court that he intended to call his mother as a witness in support of his case. in order to ensure that the matter could proceed on the listed days in august the court indicated it would provide latitude to the father to call his mother to give oral evidence in support of his case in the absence of any affidavit filed on her behalf. the parameters of the evidence of the father’s mother appeared to be narrow and known by counsel for the mother, that is, the father’s mother wanted her money back, (f) in the afternoon on the second day counsel for the father advised the court that she had sought a ruling from the ethics committee of the victorian bar. the ethic committee’s response was not forthcoming in a time frame that would provide the parties the opportunity to have the matter dealt with during the allocated hearing days. there was also the possibility that subject to the ruling of the ethics committee the father may need to obtain alternate legal representation. the court was not advised of the subject matter of the ruling that was put to the ethics committee. in those circumstances the final hearing was adjourned for a 3 day final hearing to commence on 24 november 2021, and (g) a costs order being made that the father pay the mother’s costs thrown away in the sum of $7,000.00 within 30 days. the father agreed that he should pay the mother’s costs. the court determined the quantum. the father deposed in his affidavit affirmed on 13 august 2021 at paragraph 107 that he had accumulated $18,000.00 in savings by way of wages he had earned in the previous four months and that these savings together with a small amount of scrap gold he had purchased from wages and a diamond ring he had previously purchased for the mother were stored in a safe at his residence.[2] however, the father through his counsel advised that the funds had been depleted by his purchase of equipment for his business and that the balance of his savings was then at $8,000.00.   the court being told that the father had breach of intervention order proceedings in the magistrates’ court the following week and a further listing in september 2021 for another matter and judicial monitoring as he was still on a community corrections order, (d) orders and arrangements made to facilitate the father’s mother’s appearance in court which included providing her with an interpreter. the father’s mother was overseas in city h where she lives. she ultimately did appear, (e) orders made for the final hearing to proceed on an undefended basis as against the second respondent. the second respondent was joined as a party to the proceedings on 25 february 2020. she had filed no material in the proceedings. she had not engaged legal representation. the father through his counsel expressed to the court that he intended to call his mother as a witness in support of his case. in order to ensure that the matter could proceed on the listed days in august the court indicated it would provide latitude to the father to call his mother to give oral evidence in support of his case in the absence of any affidavit filed on her behalf. the parameters of the evidence of the father’s mother appeared to be narrow and known by counsel for the mother, that is, the father’s mother wanted her money back, (f) in the afternoon on the second day counsel for the father advised the court that she had sought a ruling from the ethics committee of the victorian bar. the ethic committee’s response was not forthcoming in a time frame that would provide the parties the opportunity to have the matter dealt with during the allocated hearing days. there was also the possibility that subject to the ruling of the ethics committee the father may need to obtain alternate legal representation. the court was not advised of the subject matter of the ruling that was put to the ethics committee. in those circumstances the final hearing was adjourned for a 3 day final hearing to commence on 24 november 2021, and (g) a costs order being made that the father pay the mother’s costs thrown away in the sum of $7,000.00 within 30 days. the father agreed that he should pay the mother’s costs. the court determined the quantum. the father deposed in his affidavit affirmed on 13 august 2021 at paragraph 107 that he had accumulated $18,000.00 in savings by way of wages he had earned in the previous four months and that these savings together with a small amount of scrap gold he had purchased from wages and a diamond ring he had previously purchased for the mother were stored in a safe at his residence.[2] however, the father through his counsel advised that the funds had been depleted by his purchase of equipment for his business and that the balance of his savings was then at $8,000.00.   orders and arrangements made to facilitate the father’s mother’s appearance in court which included providing her with an interpreter. the father’s mother was overseas in city h where she lives. she ultimately did appear, (e) orders made for the final hearing to proceed on an undefended basis as against the second respondent. the second respondent was joined as a party to the proceedings on 25 february 2020. she had filed no material in the proceedings. she had not engaged legal representation. the father through his counsel expressed to the court that he intended to call his mother as a witness in support of his case. in order to ensure that the matter could proceed on the listed days in august the court indicated it would provide latitude to the father to call his mother to give oral evidence in support of his case in the absence of any affidavit filed on her behalf. the parameters of the evidence of the father’s mother appeared to be narrow and known by counsel for the mother, that is, the father’s mother wanted her money back, (f) in the afternoon on the second day counsel for the father advised the court that she had sought a ruling from the ethics committee of the victorian bar. the ethic committee’s response was not forthcoming in a time frame that would provide the parties the opportunity to have the matter dealt with during the allocated hearing days. there was also the possibility that subject to the ruling of the ethics committee the father may need to obtain alternate legal representation. the court was not advised of the subject matter of the ruling that was put to the ethics committee. in those circumstances the final hearing was adjourned for a 3 day final hearing to commence on 24 november 2021, and (g) a costs order being made that the father pay the mother’s costs thrown away in the sum of $7,000.00 within 30 days. the father agreed that he should pay the mother’s costs. the court determined the quantum. the father deposed in his affidavit affirmed on 13 august 2021 at paragraph 107 that he had accumulated $18,000.00 in savings by way of wages he had earned in the previous four months and that these savings together with a small amount of scrap gold he had purchased from wages and a diamond ring he had previously purchased for the mother were stored in a safe at his residence.[2] however, the father through his counsel advised that the funds had been depleted by his purchase of equipment for his business and that the balance of his savings was then at $8,000.00.   orders made for the final hearing to proceed on an undefended basis as against the second respondent. the second respondent was joined as a party to the proceedings on 25 february 2020. she had filed no material in the proceedings. she had not engaged legal representation. the father through his counsel expressed to the court that he intended to call his mother as a witness in support of his case. in order to ensure that the matter could proceed on the listed days in august the court indicated it would provide latitude to the father to call his mother to give oral evidence in support of his case in the absence of any affidavit filed on her behalf. the parameters of the evidence of the father’s mother appeared to be narrow and known by counsel for the mother, that is, the father’s mother wanted her money back, (f) in the afternoon on the second day counsel for the father advised the court that she had sought a ruling from the ethics committee of the victorian bar. the ethic committee’s response was not forthcoming in a time frame that would provide the parties the opportunity to have the matter dealt with during the allocated hearing days. there was also the possibility that subject to the ruling of the ethics committee the father may need to obtain alternate legal representation. the court was not advised of the subject matter of the ruling that was put to the ethics committee. in those circumstances the final hearing was adjourned for a 3 day final hearing to commence on 24 november 2021, and (g) a costs order being made that the father pay the mother’s costs thrown away in the sum of $7,000.00 within 30 days. the father agreed that he should pay the mother’s costs. the court determined the quantum. the father deposed in his affidavit affirmed on 13 august 2021 at paragraph 107 that he had accumulated $18,000.00 in savings by way of wages he had earned in the previous four months and that these savings together with a small amount of scrap gold he had purchased from wages and a diamond ring he had previously purchased for the mother were stored in a safe at his residence.[2] however, the father through his counsel advised that the funds had been depleted by his purchase of equipment for his business and that the balance of his savings was then at $8,000.00.   in the afternoon on the second day counsel for the father advised the court that she had sought a ruling from the ethics committee of the victorian bar. the ethic committee’s response was not forthcoming in a time frame that would provide the parties the opportunity to have the matter dealt with during the allocated hearing days. there was also the possibility that subject to the ruling of the ethics committee the father may need to obtain alternate legal representation. the court was not advised of the subject matter of the ruling that was put to the ethics committee. in those circumstances the final hearing was adjourned for a 3 day final hearing to commence on 24 november 2021, and (g) a costs order being made that the father pay the mother’s costs thrown away in the sum of $7,000.00 within 30 days. the father agreed that he should pay the mother’s costs. the court determined the quantum. the father deposed in his affidavit affirmed on 13 august 2021 at paragraph 107 that he had accumulated $18,000.00 in savings by way of wages he had earned in the previous four months and that these savings together with a small amount of scrap gold he had purchased from wages and a diamond ring he had previously purchased for the mother were stored in a safe at his residence.[2] however, the father through his counsel advised that the funds had been depleted by his purchase of equipment for his business and that the balance of his savings was then at $8,000.00.   a costs order being made that the father pay the mother’s costs thrown away in the sum of $7,000.00 within 30 days. the father agreed that he should pay the mother’s costs. the court determined the quantum. the father deposed in his affidavit affirmed on 13 august 2021 at paragraph 107 that he had accumulated $18,000.00 in savings by way of wages he had earned in the previous four months and that these savings together with a small amount of scrap gold he had purchased from wages and a diamond ring he had previously purchased for the mother were stored in a safe at his residence.[2] however, the father through his counsel advised that the funds had been depleted by his purchase of equipment for his business and that the balance of his savings was then at $8,000.00.
the final hearing in november 2021   the father’s mother had still not filed an affidavit. i acknowledge that at the august hearing i indicated that no such affidavit was required. however the final hearing had been adjourned for some three months and there was ample time for an affidavit to be prepared. nor did the father call his mother to give oral evidence in the final hearing in the absence of an affidavit. an order was made on 17 august 2021 that unless the leave of the court was obtained the parents could not file any further trial affidavits. no leave had been sought by either parent, (b) the father did not file any subpoenas between the august hearing and the final hearing, (c) on 31 august 2021 the icl issued a subpoena to dffh. on 13 september 2021 the father filed a notice of subpoena objection (subpoena objection) to the production and inspection of documents from dffh notwithstanding that his counsel indicated in the august hearing that the father wished to subpoena the dffh file. the father was self-represented when he filed the subpoena objection. on 11 october 2021 at the hearing date of the subpoena objection the father withdrew the subpoena objection and an order was made that the question of the icl’s costs fixed at $1,998.00 and the mother’s costs fixed at $2,200.00 be adjourned for determination at the final hearing. these costs were not pursued during the final hearing. the father was represented by counsel at the subpoena objection hearing, the same counsel who appeared at the final hearing, (d) the father had not yet paid the mother’s costs as ordered on 17 august 2021, (e) counsel for the father was present in the virtual courtroom at the commencement of the final hearing on 24 november 2021 as was his instructor. the father was not present. from information given to the court by counsel for the father i was left in no doubt that he and his instructor had done everything possible to obtain instructions from the father and to secure the father’s attendance. i made orders providing for the mother and icl to be at liberty to apply to proceed on an undefended basis if the father failed to engage in the proceedings at midday. at midday the mother and father were present as were all members of counsel, and (f) notwithstanding the difficulties presented to counsel for the father and his instructor by the conduct of the father i am of the view that in all of the circumstances counsel for the father and his instructor fulsomely represented the father for the duration of the proceedings.   the father did not file any subpoenas between the august hearing and the final hearing, (c) on 31 august 2021 the icl issued a subpoena to dffh. on 13 september 2021 the father filed a notice of subpoena objection (subpoena objection) to the production and inspection of documents from dffh notwithstanding that his counsel indicated in the august hearing that the father wished to subpoena the dffh file. the father was self-represented when he filed the subpoena objection. on 11 october 2021 at the hearing date of the subpoena objection the father withdrew the subpoena objection and an order was made that the question of the icl’s costs fixed at $1,998.00 and the mother’s costs fixed at $2,200.00 be adjourned for determination at the final hearing. these costs were not pursued during the final hearing. the father was represented by counsel at the subpoena objection hearing, the same counsel who appeared at the final hearing, (d) the father had not yet paid the mother’s costs as ordered on 17 august 2021, (e) counsel for the father was present in the virtual courtroom at the commencement of the final hearing on 24 november 2021 as was his instructor. the father was not present. from information given to the court by counsel for the father i was left in no doubt that he and his instructor had done everything possible to obtain instructions from the father and to secure the father’s attendance. i made orders providing for the mother and icl to be at liberty to apply to proceed on an undefended basis if the father failed to engage in the proceedings at midday. at midday the mother and father were present as were all members of counsel, and (f) notwithstanding the difficulties presented to counsel for the father and his instructor by the conduct of the father i am of the view that in all of the circumstances counsel for the father and his instructor fulsomely represented the father for the duration of the proceedings.   on 31 august 2021 the icl issued a subpoena to dffh. on 13 september 2021 the father filed a notice of subpoena objection (subpoena objection) to the production and inspection of documents from dffh notwithstanding that his counsel indicated in the august hearing that the father wished to subpoena the dffh file. the father was self-represented when he filed the subpoena objection. on 11 october 2021 at the hearing date of the subpoena objection the father withdrew the subpoena objection and an order was made that the question of the icl’s costs fixed at $1,998.00 and the mother’s costs fixed at $2,200.00 be adjourned for determination at the final hearing. these costs were not pursued during the final hearing. the father was represented by counsel at the subpoena objection hearing, the same counsel who appeared at the final hearing, (d) the father had not yet paid the mother’s costs as ordered on 17 august 2021, (e) counsel for the father was present in the virtual courtroom at the commencement of the final hearing on 24 november 2021 as was his instructor. the father was not present. from information given to the court by counsel for the father i was left in no doubt that he and his instructor had done everything possible to obtain instructions from the father and to secure the father’s attendance. i made orders providing for the mother and icl to be at liberty to apply to proceed on an undefended basis if the father failed to engage in the proceedings at midday. at midday the mother and father were present as were all members of counsel, and (f) notwithstanding the difficulties presented to counsel for the father and his instructor by the conduct of the father i am of the view that in all of the circumstances counsel for the father and his instructor fulsomely represented the father for the duration of the proceedings.   the father had not yet paid the mother’s costs as ordered on 17 august 2021, (e) counsel for the father was present in the virtual courtroom at the commencement of the final hearing on 24 november 2021 as was his instructor. the father was not present. from information given to the court by counsel for the father i was left in no doubt that he and his instructor had done everything possible to obtain instructions from the father and to secure the father’s attendance. i made orders providing for the mother and icl to be at liberty to apply to proceed on an undefended basis if the father failed to engage in the proceedings at midday. at midday the mother and father were present as were all members of counsel, and (f) notwithstanding the difficulties presented to counsel for the father and his instructor by the conduct of the father i am of the view that in all of the circumstances counsel for the father and his instructor fulsomely represented the father for the duration of the proceedings.   counsel for the father was present in the virtual courtroom at the commencement of the final hearing on 24 november 2021 as was his instructor. the father was not present. from information given to the court by counsel for the father i was left in no doubt that he and his instructor had done everything possible to obtain instructions from the father and to secure the father’s attendance. i made orders providing for the mother and icl to be at liberty to apply to proceed on an undefended basis if the father failed to engage in the proceedings at midday. at midday the mother and father were present as were all members of counsel, and (f) notwithstanding the difficulties presented to counsel for the father and his instructor by the conduct of the father i am of the view that in all of the circumstances counsel for the father and his instructor fulsomely represented the father for the duration of the proceedings.   notwithstanding the difficulties presented to counsel for the father and his instructor by the conduct of the father i am of the view that in all of the circumstances counsel for the father and his instructor fulsomely represented the father for the duration of the proceedings.   the family reports by ms j dated 18 march 2021 and 25 june 2021, (b) the psychiatric assessment by dr k of the father dated 27 may 2021, and (c) the s67z response released on 16 august 2021.   the psychiatric assessment by dr k of the father dated 27 may 2021, and (c) the s67z response released on 16 august 2021.   the s67z response released on 16 august 2021.
parenting
proposals of the mother and icl  the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children and the children live with the mother, (b) the children spend no time or have no communication with the father except in accordance with the children’s wishes and on such terms as nominated by the mother including professional supervision, (c) the children be permitted to travel outside the jurisdiction of australia with the mother, (d) the mother do all things necessary to obtain family violence counselling for x as recommended in paragraph 53 of the family report dated 18 march 2021, and (e) a suite of ancillary and consequential orders.   the children spend no time or have no communication with the father except in accordance with the children’s wishes and on such terms as nominated by the mother including professional supervision, (c) the children be permitted to travel outside the jurisdiction of australia with the mother, (d) the mother do all things necessary to obtain family violence counselling for x as recommended in paragraph 53 of the family report dated 18 march 2021, and (e) a suite of ancillary and consequential orders.   the children be permitted to travel outside the jurisdiction of australia with the mother, (d) the mother do all things necessary to obtain family violence counselling for x as recommended in paragraph 53 of the family report dated 18 march 2021, and (e) a suite of ancillary and consequential orders.   the mother do all things necessary to obtain family violence counselling for x as recommended in paragraph 53 of the family report dated 18 march 2021, and (e) a suite of ancillary and consequential orders.   a suite of ancillary and consequential orders.
proposal of the father  the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children, (b) the children live with the mother, (c) the children spend around 12 months of supervised time with the father at a contact centre, (d) thereafter time progress as recommended by the family therapist (taking into account child contact centre reports and all other relevant matters) and failing a favourable assessment at the mother’s discretion, (e) after the first six months of supervised time the father engage with ms l in order to obtain a report to aid in the assessment of the progression of the spend time arrangements, (f) the time the children spend with the father be subject to the father providing the child contact centre staff with documentary evidence of a negative drug test and the father attending upon and following the lawful directions of his psychologist, (g) the continuation of the spend time arrangements and progression of spend time arrangements are subject to favourable reports from the child contact centre, the assessments of his psychologist and the family therapist, the father not committing family violence and the father being able to demonstrate his abstinence from drug use, and (h) a suite of restraints including that each parent be restrained by injunction from discussing these proceedings and/or their family law dispute with the children.   the children live with the mother, (c) the children spend around 12 months of supervised time with the father at a contact centre, (d) thereafter time progress as recommended by the family therapist (taking into account child contact centre reports and all other relevant matters) and failing a favourable assessment at the mother’s discretion, (e) after the first six months of supervised time the father engage with ms l in order to obtain a report to aid in the assessment of the progression of the spend time arrangements, (f) the time the children spend with the father be subject to the father providing the child contact centre staff with documentary evidence of a negative drug test and the father attending upon and following the lawful directions of his psychologist, (g) the continuation of the spend time arrangements and progression of spend time arrangements are subject to favourable reports from the child contact centre, the assessments of his psychologist and the family therapist, the father not committing family violence and the father being able to demonstrate his abstinence from drug use, and (h) a suite of restraints including that each parent be restrained by injunction from discussing these proceedings and/or their family law dispute with the children.   the children spend around 12 months of supervised time with the father at a contact centre, (d) thereafter time progress as recommended by the family therapist (taking into account child contact centre reports and all other relevant matters) and failing a favourable assessment at the mother’s discretion, (e) after the first six months of supervised time the father engage with ms l in order to obtain a report to aid in the assessment of the progression of the spend time arrangements, (f) the time the children spend with the father be subject to the father providing the child contact centre staff with documentary evidence of a negative drug test and the father attending upon and following the lawful directions of his psychologist, (g) the continuation of the spend time arrangements and progression of spend time arrangements are subject to favourable reports from the child contact centre, the assessments of his psychologist and the family therapist, the father not committing family violence and the father being able to demonstrate his abstinence from drug use, and (h) a suite of restraints including that each parent be restrained by injunction from discussing these proceedings and/or their family law dispute with the children.   thereafter time progress as recommended by the family therapist (taking into account child contact centre reports and all other relevant matters) and failing a favourable assessment at the mother’s discretion, (e) after the first six months of supervised time the father engage with ms l in order to obtain a report to aid in the assessment of the progression of the spend time arrangements, (f) the time the children spend with the father be subject to the father providing the child contact centre staff with documentary evidence of a negative drug test and the father attending upon and following the lawful directions of his psychologist, (g) the continuation of the spend time arrangements and progression of spend time arrangements are subject to favourable reports from the child contact centre, the assessments of his psychologist and the family therapist, the father not committing family violence and the father being able to demonstrate his abstinence from drug use, and (h) a suite of restraints including that each parent be restrained by injunction from discussing these proceedings and/or their family law dispute with the children.   after the first six months of supervised time the father engage with ms l in order to obtain a report to aid in the assessment of the progression of the spend time arrangements, (f) the time the children spend with the father be subject to the father providing the child contact centre staff with documentary evidence of a negative drug test and the father attending upon and following the lawful directions of his psychologist, (g) the continuation of the spend time arrangements and progression of spend time arrangements are subject to favourable reports from the child contact centre, the assessments of his psychologist and the family therapist, the father not committing family violence and the father being able to demonstrate his abstinence from drug use, and (h) a suite of restraints including that each parent be restrained by injunction from discussing these proceedings and/or their family law dispute with the children.   the time the children spend with the father be subject to the father providing the child contact centre staff with documentary evidence of a negative drug test and the father attending upon and following the lawful directions of his psychologist, (g) the continuation of the spend time arrangements and progression of spend time arrangements are subject to favourable reports from the child contact centre, the assessments of his psychologist and the family therapist, the father not committing family violence and the father being able to demonstrate his abstinence from drug use, and (h) a suite of restraints including that each parent be restrained by injunction from discussing these proceedings and/or their family law dispute with the children.   the continuation of the spend time arrangements and progression of spend time arrangements are subject to favourable reports from the child contact centre, the assessments of his psychologist and the family therapist, the father not committing family violence and the father being able to demonstrate his abstinence from drug use, and (h) a suite of restraints including that each parent be restrained by injunction from discussing these proceedings and/or their family law dispute with the children.   a suite of restraints including that each parent be restrained by injunction from discussing these proceedings and/or their family law dispute with the children.
the section 67z response  disclosed that he did not want any contact with his father, he constantly experienced feelings of anxiety and worry that the father would locate his school and/or home and that he did not like anything about the father, (b) was very clear in his wish to not have any contact with the father due to his fear for his and the mother’s safety, (c) stated that the mother had told him that if he wants to see or speak with the father he is able to, however he does not want to, (d) was able to recall specific incidents of family violence that he had been exposed and subjected to including: (i) the father tying him and the mother to the bed with belts as a form of discipline, (ii) the father engaging in metamphetamine use and x falling over whilst holding drug-related paraphernalia, which shattered and caused an injury, and (iii) unknown males with weapons attended the home in search of the father and he had to tell them that he did not know where his father was.   was very clear in his wish to not have any contact with the father due to his fear for his and the mother’s safety, (c) stated that the mother had told him that if he wants to see or speak with the father he is able to, however he does not want to, (d) was able to recall specific incidents of family violence that he had been exposed and subjected to including: (i) the father tying him and the mother to the bed with belts as a form of discipline, (ii) the father engaging in metamphetamine use and x falling over whilst holding drug-related paraphernalia, which shattered and caused an injury, and (iii) unknown males with weapons attended the home in search of the father and he had to tell them that he did not know where his father was.   stated that the mother had told him that if he wants to see or speak with the father he is able to, however he does not want to, (d) was able to recall specific incidents of family violence that he had been exposed and subjected to including: (i) the father tying him and the mother to the bed with belts as a form of discipline, (ii) the father engaging in metamphetamine use and x falling over whilst holding drug-related paraphernalia, which shattered and caused an injury, and (iii) unknown males with weapons attended the home in search of the father and he had to tell them that he did not know where his father was.   was able to recall specific incidents of family violence that he had been exposed and subjected to including: (i) the father tying him and the mother to the bed with belts as a form of discipline, (ii) the father engaging in metamphetamine use and x falling over whilst holding drug-related paraphernalia, which shattered and caused an injury, and (iii) unknown males with weapons attended the home in search of the father and he had to tell them that he did not know where his father was.   the father tying him and the mother to the bed with belts as a form of discipline, (ii) the father engaging in metamphetamine use and x falling over whilst holding drug-related paraphernalia, which shattered and caused an injury, and (iii) unknown males with weapons attended the home in search of the father and he had to tell them that he did not know where his father was.  ) the father engaging in metamphetamine use and x falling over whilst holding drug-related paraphernalia, which shattered and caused an injury, and (iii) unknown males with weapons attended the home in search of the father and he had to tell them that he did not know where his father was.  i) unknown males with weapons attended the home in search of the father and he had to tell them that he did not know where his father was.
- past violence and abuse of mother and history of violent behaviour - substance abuse - significant transition points - controlling behaviours - separation, instability post separation - financial control by the father - suicidal behaviour/other mental health issues/depression - breaches of ivos - obsession with victim and jealous preoccupation - court proceedings initiated - stalking post separation
dr k  tannous] adjusted to separation with considerable difficulty. he reported experiencing symptoms consistent with a reactive major depressive disorder. he reported that he remained afflicted with considerable depression given the stress of separation from his children remained prominent...[7] [mr tannous] does not otherwise present with signs of a major mental illness. personality and cultural factors are likely germaine in this case, but without more information being available it is difficult to offer a more detailed formulation.[8]   smoked hashish in country f from age 13 to 21, (b) smoked cannabis from age 21 until twenty-one months ago, (c) commenced smoking methamphetamine from late 2011, (d) used methamphetamine episodically until 2016, (e) in 2016 he increased his use of methamphetamine following a serious incident when he was the victim of a criminal offence and developed a daily pattern of use leading to methamphetamine dependency, and (f) had abstained from all illicit drugs for twenty-one months.   smoked cannabis from age 21 until twenty-one months ago, (c) commenced smoking methamphetamine from late 2011, (d) used methamphetamine episodically until 2016, (e) in 2016 he increased his use of methamphetamine following a serious incident when he was the victim of a criminal offence and developed a daily pattern of use leading to methamphetamine dependency, and (f) had abstained from all illicit drugs for twenty-one months.   commenced smoking methamphetamine from late 2011, (d) used methamphetamine episodically until 2016, (e) in 2016 he increased his use of methamphetamine following a serious incident when he was the victim of a criminal offence and developed a daily pattern of use leading to methamphetamine dependency, and (f) had abstained from all illicit drugs for twenty-one months.   used methamphetamine episodically until 2016, (e) in 2016 he increased his use of methamphetamine following a serious incident when he was the victim of a criminal offence and developed a daily pattern of use leading to methamphetamine dependency, and (f) had abstained from all illicit drugs for twenty-one months.   in 2016 he increased his use of methamphetamine following a serious incident when he was the victim of a criminal offence and developed a daily pattern of use leading to methamphetamine dependency, and (f) had abstained from all illicit drugs for twenty-one months.   had abstained from all illicit drugs for twenty-one months.   described his relationship with the mother as having “difficulties like any couple’ and he didn’t consider any issues to be “major”, (b) coyly admitted to past engagements in verbal arguments with the mother but he portrayed this as being regular arguments between couples, and (c) said “i have never walked away from a fight – this is a war”.   coyly admitted to past engagements in verbal arguments with the mother but he portrayed this as being regular arguments between couples, and (c) said “i have never walked away from a fight – this is a war”.   said “i have never walked away from a fight – this is a war”.   late 2019, (b) late 2019 – early 2020, (c) early 2020 – mid 2020, and (d) mid 2020 – late 2020.[10]   late 2019 – early 2020, (c) early 2020 – mid 2020, and (d) mid 2020 – late 2020.[10]   early 2020 – mid 2020, and (d) mid 2020 – late 2020.[10]   mid 2020 – late 2020.[10]   was able to locate the mother via her telephone and credit card usage, (b) had breached the intervention order on 18 occasions prior to his first period in jail when he was incarcerated for two weeks, (c) was in the community for three weeks before he was incarcerated again for sixty-five further breaches relating to an email exchange between him and the mother. the father told the court that it was the mother who contacted him sixty-five times,[11] (d) was incarcerated for a further four months, (e) was released for nine days before breaching again, (f) was breached in the context of him contacting the mother’s father to express his condolences after the mother had contacted him to tell him that her grandmother had died, (g) was incarcerated for a further three months, (h) was released in the community for a further three months, (i) was breached again for texting the mother that he loved her, and (j) spent a further three months in prison.   had breached the intervention order on 18 occasions prior to his first period in jail when he was incarcerated for two weeks, (c) was in the community for three weeks before he was incarcerated again for sixty-five further breaches relating to an email exchange between him and the mother. the father told the court that it was the mother who contacted him sixty-five times,[11] (d) was incarcerated for a further four months, (e) was released for nine days before breaching again, (f) was breached in the context of him contacting the mother’s father to express his condolences after the mother had contacted him to tell him that her grandmother had died, (g) was incarcerated for a further three months, (h) was released in the community for a further three months, (i) was breached again for texting the mother that he loved her, and (j) spent a further three months in prison.   was in the community for three weeks before he was incarcerated again for sixty-five further breaches relating to an email exchange between him and the mother. the father told the court that it was the mother who contacted him sixty-five times,[11] (d) was incarcerated for a further four months, (e) was released for nine days before breaching again, (f) was breached in the context of him contacting the mother’s father to express his condolences after the mother had contacted him to tell him that her grandmother had died, (g) was incarcerated for a further three months, (h) was released in the community for a further three months, (i) was breached again for texting the mother that he loved her, and (j) spent a further three months in prison.   was incarcerated for a further four months, (e) was released for nine days before breaching again, (f) was breached in the context of him contacting the mother’s father to express his condolences after the mother had contacted him to tell him that her grandmother had died, (g) was incarcerated for a further three months, (h) was released in the community for a further three months, (i) was breached again for texting the mother that he loved her, and (j) spent a further three months in prison.   was released for nine days before breaching again, (f) was breached in the context of him contacting the mother’s father to express his condolences after the mother had contacted him to tell him that her grandmother had died, (g) was incarcerated for a further three months, (h) was released in the community for a further three months, (i) was breached again for texting the mother that he loved her, and (j) spent a further three months in prison.   was breached in the context of him contacting the mother’s father to express his condolences after the mother had contacted him to tell him that her grandmother had died, (g) was incarcerated for a further three months, (h) was released in the community for a further three months, (i) was breached again for texting the mother that he loved her, and (j) spent a further three months in prison.   was incarcerated for a further three months, (h) was released in the community for a further three months, (i) was breached again for texting the mother that he loved her, and (j) spent a further three months in prison.   was released in the community for a further three months, (i) was breached again for texting the mother that he loved her, and (j) spent a further three months in prison.   was breached again for texting the mother that he loved her, and (j) spent a further three months in prison.   spent a further three months in prison.
ms j
that at this time [x] and [y] not have direct contact or communication with the father. that [x] and [y] not be exposed to parental conflict, family violence, expressed negative comments in relation to the other parent or extended family members. that [x] have the opportunity to engage in child focused family violence counselling given his experiences of family violence and the trauma this has resulted for him.[12]   was offered the opportunity to speak with the report writer. he impressed as a little nervous however was able to express his feelings and thoughts in a clear and capable manner consistent with his age. [x] was informed of the limitations of confidentiality. [x] was keen to express his preference not to have any form of contact or communication with his father. [x] made comment that ‘i want a new father, i have the worst dad, i hate him, i don’t like anything about him, he has bad friends and he ruined my birthday a couple of years ago’. [x] stated that he did not have any positive memories of his father adding ‘i would rather forget it all’. he expressed some worry that he would ‘say the wrong thing’ to the report writer with the possibility that he would ‘go to live with my dad or with another family’. [x] stated that his wish was ‘to never see dad again, i don’t want to see his face or hear his voice’. [x] described his mother in loving and positive terms adding ‘she is nice, she cares for us, she protects us from dad every day, i don’t want dad to know where we live, we have locks’. [x] made comment that of an afternoon at school ‘i go to the office and wait for mum, i don’t want dad to come to school’. [x] stated that there are some ‘marriage photos’ of his parents in the maternal family home that he feels like ‘ripping up’. [x] described his mother as ‘crying at lot, she had to go to court yesterday’. he added that his mother has said to him ‘if i want to see dad i can, but i don’t want to’. [x] recalled that when his parents were together ‘everything scared me, i was happy when we didn’t live with dad anymore, then i didn’t have to stop the fights between mum and dad, dad hurt mum, he hit her, mum and dad were always fighting and i couldn’t sleep, [y] slept right through’. [x] described his life as ‘much better now, i ham (sic) happier, there are no fights, i am not yelling at my teachers now, i have been to ten schools, it is really important i stay at my school, i have some friends but not many there’. [x] stressed that his family were also very important to him, referring to his maternal grandmother and extended family members. [x] stated that he would like to move to a bigger house where he can have his own bedroom and not share with his younger brother. [x] stated that he ‘panics that dad might find us, he has tracked us, he found us and we had to pack quickly’. [x] expressed a desire ‘to see my old friends’. [x] expressed a wish for his father to ‘disappear and for my mum to be rich’. [x] recalled a ‘history of hitting’ perpetrated by his father adding ‘you wouldn’t believe it all the things that have happened, i have just told you a bit but not all of it’. [x] stated that if he feels worried that he talks to his teacher or with his mother.[13]
strenuously denied perpetrating family violence during the marriage adding ‘i was not violent, i didn’t make threats or swear’. he described ‘my ex setting me up, family violence is like a red flag to courts’... he described the marriage as ‘normal’ noting ‘every marriage has ups and downs’. [mr tannous] stated that he ‘still love my wife’ making comment that whilst he accepts separation, he does not accept that the marriage has ended, this due to religious beliefs.[17]   says the views expressed by the father in response to perpetrating family violence are of concern and lacked personal responsibility in this area, and (b) is of the view the children have been directly exposed to and witnessed family violence and highly probable that they would have been exposed to concerning paternal behaviours including effects of illicit drug use, angry responses and high levels of maternal distress.   is of the view the children have been directly exposed to and witnessed family violence and highly probable that they would have been exposed to concerning paternal behaviours including effects of illicit drug use, angry responses and high levels of maternal distress.
there is professional agreement that [mr tannous] continues to demonstrate a lack of personal insight into the significance and impact of his drug use and behaviours that constitute family violence. [mr tannous] continues to lack understanding in relation to the subsequent emotional impact upon the mother and children. it is noted that this assessment is reflected in both the family report and psychiatric report.[18]
the mother’s evidence
you can see from the way he is now, screaming and yelling – yelling at the screen, and he just – see the way he’s looking at me, that’s enough, making me more nervous, and then if you want me to put this person with my kids. he’s not behaving in front of everybody in the court and making me more scared and nervous just sitting on the camera...he has no respect to anyone...this is my life with him all the time. try to intimidate me and think i scare from him.[24]
the father’s evidence  during his evidence the father referred to emails and messages sent to him by the mother, videos, cctv footage, comments made by the magistrate during intervention order proceedings, an affidavit by his mother and other documents to support that the allegations made by the mother were false. not one piece of such alleged evidence was provided to the court to support the father’s version of events or denials. i make no criticism of the father’s legal representatives in this regard, and (b) the evidence supports that the father was using cannabis and methamphetamine during the marriage very consistently. i accept the mother’s evidence in relation to the extent of his illicit substance use. i consider that it would be difficult to cavil with the statement that the father’s recollection of events has been impaired given the level of his illicit substance abuse, despite the father’s assertion to the contrary.   the evidence supports that the father was using cannabis and methamphetamine during the marriage very consistently. i accept the mother’s evidence in relation to the extent of his illicit substance use. i consider that it would be difficult to cavil with the statement that the father’s recollection of events has been impaired given the level of his illicit substance abuse, despite the father’s assertion to the contrary.
family violence  in response to the mother’s allegation that in the final two years of the marriage that the father would typically beat her twice a week and often in the presence of the children the father asked “after food or before food. if she is saying twice a week...that’s what, monday and friday... no, if it’s scheduled twice, twice a week, so if one week we didn’t do it, what’s going to happen? that is not true. could she prove i did that twice a week? and that was already by days or weekends or what?”,[30] (b) the father would not concede that the mother may have been afraid of him when she saw him punch the wall. he had hit the wall so hard that he had a crack on his hand but glibly added “it’s my hand, not her hand. it’s my hand... if i want to hit her head i could do it.”[31] the father said he was not on ice on this occasion. i find that response troubling. it highlights that the father has a propensity for violent and aggressive behaviour even when not under the influence of a serious illicit substance, and (c) the father when denying tying x and the mother to the bed said “i tie the dog with them...how big was the bed to tie [ms farih] and tie [x]? did i get tied with them as well?”[32]   the father would not concede that the mother may have been afraid of him when she saw him punch the wall. he had hit the wall so hard that he had a crack on his hand but glibly added “it’s my hand, not her hand. it’s my hand... if i want to hit her head i could do it.”[31] the father said he was not on ice on this occasion. i find that response troubling. it highlights that the father has a propensity for violent and aggressive behaviour even when not under the influence of a serious illicit substance, and (c) the father when denying tying x and the mother to the bed said “i tie the dog with them...how big was the bed to tie [ms farih] and tie [x]? did i get tied with them as well?”[32]   the father when denying tying x and the mother to the bed said “i tie the dog with them...how big was the bed to tie [ms farih] and tie [x]? did i get tied with them as well?”[32]   the mother acknowledged to child protection that she never reported any family violence to police and she was not truthful to her family or community supports about what was going on in the home. child protection noted that the mother holds a lot of guilt and shame for not coming forward sooner.[35] the mother though was able to provide photographic documentation of some of the injuries she had sustained. she presented to child protection as genuine in her experiences,[36] (b) i place substantial weight on the fact that p service has, and continues to provide, significant resources to the mother and children to secure their safety, (c) the mother’s genuine palpable fear of the father, (d) x’s recollection of violent incidents and his view of the father, (e) the father’s admission as outlined in paragraph 7 of these reasons and his narratives to both dr k and ms j, albeit he minimises the level of the violence, (f) the father’s minimisation of his behaviour and his attitude in relation to family violence that he displayed to the court, and (g) the father has been incarcerated on four occasions for a total of around 10 months for breaches of the intervention order including for stalking.   i place substantial weight on the fact that p service has, and continues to provide, significant resources to the mother and children to secure their safety, (c) the mother’s genuine palpable fear of the father, (d) x’s recollection of violent incidents and his view of the father, (e) the father’s admission as outlined in paragraph 7 of these reasons and his narratives to both dr k and ms j, albeit he minimises the level of the violence, (f) the father’s minimisation of his behaviour and his attitude in relation to family violence that he displayed to the court, and (g) the father has been incarcerated on four occasions for a total of around 10 months for breaches of the intervention order including for stalking.   the mother’s genuine palpable fear of the father, (d) x’s recollection of violent incidents and his view of the father, (e) the father’s admission as outlined in paragraph 7 of these reasons and his narratives to both dr k and ms j, albeit he minimises the level of the violence, (f) the father’s minimisation of his behaviour and his attitude in relation to family violence that he displayed to the court, and (g) the father has been incarcerated on four occasions for a total of around 10 months for breaches of the intervention order including for stalking.   x’s recollection of violent incidents and his view of the father, (e) the father’s admission as outlined in paragraph 7 of these reasons and his narratives to both dr k and ms j, albeit he minimises the level of the violence, (f) the father’s minimisation of his behaviour and his attitude in relation to family violence that he displayed to the court, and (g) the father has been incarcerated on four occasions for a total of around 10 months for breaches of the intervention order including for stalking.   the father’s admission as outlined in paragraph 7 of these reasons and his narratives to both dr k and ms j, albeit he minimises the level of the violence, (f) the father’s minimisation of his behaviour and his attitude in relation to family violence that he displayed to the court, and (g) the father has been incarcerated on four occasions for a total of around 10 months for breaches of the intervention order including for stalking.   the father’s minimisation of his behaviour and his attitude in relation to family violence that he displayed to the court, and (g) the father has been incarcerated on four occasions for a total of around 10 months for breaches of the intervention order including for stalking.   the father has been incarcerated on four occasions for a total of around 10 months for breaches of the intervention order including for stalking.   “she know the truth. she know what happened. she know that what she is saying is not true. she knows that she plays me up for a year, keep breaching me”,[44] (b) “my situation of drugs or my anger issues or whatever i had in the past, that’s because my father wasn’t in my life, although him and my mum is still together. i don’t want my son to grow up with no father. she is getting a revenge of me. as she told me on the phone, she getting revenge of me and my kids”,[45] (c) “i breached the intervention order because she was setting me up.”[46] the father also blames the mother’s parents for inducing him to breach the intervention order, (d) when explaining why he hit the wall in 2014 in the presence of the mother he said that the mother did not respect his “steam point” and she kept “abusing it”.[47] he was of the view that it is the mother that should have changed her behaviour during the marriage and “give him his space.”[48] he said “she’s not respecting my wish to stop the conversation now because i might have an issue”,[49] (e) “but as long as she knows that what she did to me the last two years wasn’t fair and i’m similar upset from her. that was a reaction and action from someone who was being hurt. and she was punishing me for something i didn’t do”,[50] (f) the father described the mother as ‘selfish’ to ms j and told her that she was denying him a parenting relationship with the children.[51]   “my situation of drugs or my anger issues or whatever i had in the past, that’s because my father wasn’t in my life, although him and my mum is still together. i don’t want my son to grow up with no father. she is getting a revenge of me. as she told me on the phone, she getting revenge of me and my kids”,[45] (c) “i breached the intervention order because she was setting me up.”[46] the father also blames the mother’s parents for inducing him to breach the intervention order, (d) when explaining why he hit the wall in 2014 in the presence of the mother he said that the mother did not respect his “steam point” and she kept “abusing it”.[47] he was of the view that it is the mother that should have changed her behaviour during the marriage and “give him his space.”[48] he said “she’s not respecting my wish to stop the conversation now because i might have an issue”,[49] (e) “but as long as she knows that what she did to me the last two years wasn’t fair and i’m similar upset from her. that was a reaction and action from someone who was being hurt. and she was punishing me for something i didn’t do”,[50] (f) the father described the mother as ‘selfish’ to ms j and told her that she was denying him a parenting relationship with the children.[51]   “i breached the intervention order because she was setting me up.”[46] the father also blames the mother’s parents for inducing him to breach the intervention order, (d) when explaining why he hit the wall in 2014 in the presence of the mother he said that the mother did not respect his “steam point” and she kept “abusing it”.[47] he was of the view that it is the mother that should have changed her behaviour during the marriage and “give him his space.”[48] he said “she’s not respecting my wish to stop the conversation now because i might have an issue”,[49] (e) “but as long as she knows that what she did to me the last two years wasn’t fair and i’m similar upset from her. that was a reaction and action from someone who was being hurt. and she was punishing me for something i didn’t do”,[50] (f) the father described the mother as ‘selfish’ to ms j and told her that she was denying him a parenting relationship with the children.[51]   when explaining why he hit the wall in 2014 in the presence of the mother he said that the mother did not respect his “steam point” and she kept “abusing it”.[47] he was of the view that it is the mother that should have changed her behaviour during the marriage and “give him his space.”[48] he said “she’s not respecting my wish to stop the conversation now because i might have an issue”,[49] (e) “but as long as she knows that what she did to me the last two years wasn’t fair and i’m similar upset from her. that was a reaction and action from someone who was being hurt. and she was punishing me for something i didn’t do”,[50] (f) the father described the mother as ‘selfish’ to ms j and told her that she was denying him a parenting relationship with the children.[51]   “but as long as she knows that what she did to me the last two years wasn’t fair and i’m similar upset from her. that was a reaction and action from someone who was being hurt. and she was punishing me for something i didn’t do”,[50] (f) the father described the mother as ‘selfish’ to ms j and told her that she was denying him a parenting relationship with the children.[51]   the father described the mother as ‘selfish’ to ms j and told her that she was denying him a parenting relationship with the children.[51]
the service advised that [mr tannous] had been listed as “non-compliant” following 4 sessions and was exited from the program due to “his loud and threatening manner and disrespectful behaviors”, “exhibiting a very strong blaming narrative and unwillingness to accept any responsibility (in complete denial) for the breaches that occurred, and that [ms farih] has felt intimidated and scared by him”, “comments made to the worker by [mr tannous] stating that he is only doing the course to see his kids, he is reporting this to his lawyer and will use it to make sure the ivo is not extended.”[52]
if [ms farih] could say what the issues one, two, three, four and i understand what the issues are and what change is and i work on it, that could give her some of the protection or some of the security, because as long as she doesn’t – as long as she doesn’t address what could make her feel secure and say if – no matter what i do, even if i took 10, 20, then the heavier of course, as long as i don’t address her fear, she will always be scared of me. the purpose of me taking that course is to make that people surround me or dealing with me or living with me feeling safe and secure and not intimidated by my action and reactions. if she doesn’t say what her fear is, that course will never fix it, but now all i’m doing is i complied with the course.[56] she have to tell me what can i do for her to make her feel more secure and more safe around me and around the kids. it doesn’t have to be we’re living together. but when she sees me or she feels comfortable to let me see the kids or feels comfortable or safe to deal with me again, she has to address things and i work on it.[57]   he would reconcile with the mother if she wanted to but “both of us have to respect each other and both of us have to do a program. i know i have to respect her and also she has to respect me”,[58] (b) “i still love her because she look after my kids. i still love her because she’s a good mother. i still love her, that she was with me good for the ten years. i do respect her for the person that she is. it doesn’t have to be because she’s my wife”,[59] (c) “until now, even after what she done, she know that i can’t hurt her”,[60] and (d) in response to the question by counsel for the icl whether he could go back and change the time of separation the father said “i would take my wife and my kids and leave the country.”[61] the father does not trust the process of the justice system in australia and believes that if the wife and x had left the country with him he would not have this problem.[62]   “i still love her because she look after my kids. i still love her because she’s a good mother. i still love her, that she was with me good for the ten years. i do respect her for the person that she is. it doesn’t have to be because she’s my wife”,[59] (c) “until now, even after what she done, she know that i can’t hurt her”,[60] and (d) in response to the question by counsel for the icl whether he could go back and change the time of separation the father said “i would take my wife and my kids and leave the country.”[61] the father does not trust the process of the justice system in australia and believes that if the wife and x had left the country with him he would not have this problem.[62]   “until now, even after what she done, she know that i can’t hurt her”,[60] and (d) in response to the question by counsel for the icl whether he could go back and change the time of separation the father said “i would take my wife and my kids and leave the country.”[61] the father does not trust the process of the justice system in australia and believes that if the wife and x had left the country with him he would not have this problem.[62]   in response to the question by counsel for the icl whether he could go back and change the time of separation the father said “i would take my wife and my kids and leave the country.”[61] the father does not trust the process of the justice system in australia and believes that if the wife and x had left the country with him he would not have this problem.[62]
only way that you will make me stop is one thing: open my grave and put me in, because i’m not going to stop... i will keep trying with all the legal way, whatever courses you want me to do, i will keep trying. i will never give up.[64]
the father’s mental health
father’s drug use
legal principles
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.
parental responsibility
spend time arrangements
meaningful relationship
the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm
........ as was recognised by hale lj (as her ladyship then was) in re c and b (children) (care order: future harm) [2001] 1 f.l.r 611 at [28], in child-related proceedings, a comparatively small risk of really serious harm can justify action, while even the virtual certainty of slight harm might not. it could hardly be otherwise, because no prudent adult would willingly expose a child to the risk of sexual abuse when there is an unacceptably high chance of its occurrence, even though the chance is not proven by the evidence to be probable. requiring the proof of any possible future child abuse as a probability would pervert the law as settled by the high court in m v m and malec.
ancillary parenting orders
property   identify and attribute value to the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties at the time of the hearing (the asset pool), (b) take into account the contributions made by the parties financially and non-financially to the property directly or indirectly to the acquisition, conservation and improvement of the property and to the welfare of the family including in the capacity of homemaker and parent in accordance with section 79(4)(a)-(c), (c) consider whether there should be any further adjustment having regard to the matters contained in section 79(4)(d)-(g) which includes any relevant factors in section 75(2), and (d) undertake an assessment whether the proposed adjustment provides justice and equity to the parties.[91]   take into account the contributions made by the parties financially and non-financially to the property directly or indirectly to the acquisition, conservation and improvement of the property and to the welfare of the family including in the capacity of homemaker and parent in accordance with section 79(4)(a)-(c), (c) consider whether there should be any further adjustment having regard to the matters contained in section 79(4)(d)-(g) which includes any relevant factors in section 75(2), and (d) undertake an assessment whether the proposed adjustment provides justice and equity to the parties.[91]   consider whether there should be any further adjustment having regard to the matters contained in section 79(4)(d)-(g) which includes any relevant factors in section 75(2), and (d) undertake an assessment whether the proposed adjustment provides justice and equity to the parties.[91]   undertake an assessment whether the proposed adjustment provides justice and equity to the parties.[91]
the asset pool
assets
ownership
value
net proceeds of sale b street, suburb c
joint
$98,009.60
shares in e pty ltd
nominal
total assets
liabilities
d company loan
mother
$2,293.38
nab credit card
$9,295.00
centrelink debt
$12,780.73
victoria police impoundment notice
$917.00
victoria police infringement number ...
e pty ltd
$3,329.80
total liabilities
$31,945.71
net asset pool
$66,063.89   the husband includes contents of a safe at $20,000.00 whereas the wife does not include any such asset, (b) the wife includes $43,975.03 as a debt owing to the ato being a hecs help debt whereas the husband does not include any such liability, and (c) the husband includes $30,000.00 as a loan owing to his mother whereas the wife does not include any such liability.   the wife includes $43,975.03 as a debt owing to the ato being a hecs help debt whereas the husband does not include any such liability, and (c) the husband includes $30,000.00 as a loan owing to his mother whereas the wife does not include any such liability.   the husband includes $30,000.00 as a loan owing to his mother whereas the wife does not include any such liability.
contents of safe
ato–hecs help debt
money from the father’s mother  the father’s evidence is inconsistent with the content of the agreement contract, (b) there is no evidence from the father’s mother, and (c) the mother was not provided with the opportunity to answer the contentions raised in relation to any further sums which may have been provided.   there is no evidence from the father’s mother, and (c) the mother was not provided with the opportunity to answer the contentions raised in relation to any further sums which may have been provided.   the mother was not provided with the opportunity to answer the contentions raised in relation to any further sums which may have been provided.   the mother asserts that it was not until the commencement of these proceedings that the father brought to her attention that the money provided by the father’s mother was a loan. i accept that assertion, (b) the mother was not cross-examined on the assertions made in relation to her passport and bank account names, her presence in country f at the asserted time of the signing of the agreement contract or whether she had knowledge that an agreement contract was going to be or had been signed, (c) there are no formal affidavits of translations. the mother disputes that the documents were translated by an accredited translator and questions the legitimacy and accuracy of the documents, (d) i am not satisfied that the “agreement contract” was entered into on the date or the circumstances asserted by the father and the person contending to be a lawyer, and (e) there is no evidence from the father’s mother in relation to these matters.   the mother was not cross-examined on the assertions made in relation to her passport and bank account names, her presence in country f at the asserted time of the signing of the agreement contract or whether she had knowledge that an agreement contract was going to be or had been signed, (c) there are no formal affidavits of translations. the mother disputes that the documents were translated by an accredited translator and questions the legitimacy and accuracy of the documents, (d) i am not satisfied that the “agreement contract” was entered into on the date or the circumstances asserted by the father and the person contending to be a lawyer, and (e) there is no evidence from the father’s mother in relation to these matters.   there are no formal affidavits of translations. the mother disputes that the documents were translated by an accredited translator and questions the legitimacy and accuracy of the documents, (d) i am not satisfied that the “agreement contract” was entered into on the date or the circumstances asserted by the father and the person contending to be a lawyer, and (e) there is no evidence from the father’s mother in relation to these matters.   i am not satisfied that the “agreement contract” was entered into on the date or the circumstances asserted by the father and the person contending to be a lawyer, and (e) there is no evidence from the father’s mother in relation to these matters.   there is no evidence from the father’s mother in relation to these matters.
adjusted net asset pool
just and equitable to make an order
contributions
relevant factors pursuant to sections 79(4)(d)–(g) and 75(2)
justice and equity to the parents  the value of net assets available for adjustment is extremely small, (b) there are unknowns in relation to what compensation/insurance monies the father may obtain by pursuing claims in relation to the suburb c property and the cars, (c) there is a large quantum of liabilities which will remain the responsibility of the wife, (d) the mother overall has made superior contributions to those of the father, (e) the mother has greater future needs than those of the father and those needs are substantial, and (f) the father has a proven significant savings capacity.   there are unknowns in relation to what compensation/insurance monies the father may obtain by pursuing claims in relation to the suburb c property and the cars, (c) there is a large quantum of liabilities which will remain the responsibility of the wife, (d) the mother overall has made superior contributions to those of the father, (e) the mother has greater future needs than those of the father and those needs are substantial, and (f) the father has a proven significant savings capacity.   there is a large quantum of liabilities which will remain the responsibility of the wife, (d) the mother overall has made superior contributions to those of the father, (e) the mother has greater future needs than those of the father and those needs are substantial, and (f) the father has a proven significant savings capacity.   the mother overall has made superior contributions to those of the father, (e) the mother has greater future needs than those of the father and those needs are substantial, and (f) the father has a proven significant savings capacity.   the mother has greater future needs than those of the father and those needs are substantial, and (f) the father has a proven significant savings capacity.   the father has a proven significant savings capacity.
associate: dated: 22 july 2022
dated: 22 july 2022
[1] father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, paragraph 41. [2] father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, paragraph 107. [3] evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140.[4] mother’s revised proposed minute of final orders dated 25 november 2021; independent children’s lawyer’s revised proposed minute of final orders dated 25 november 2021. [5] father’s minutes of proposed orders dated 25 november 2021. [6] annexure “k-1" to dr k’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, page 11.[7] annexure “k-1" to dr k’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021.[8] ibid.[9] annexure “k-1" to dr k’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021.[10] father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, paragraph 32. [11] transcript 25 november 2021, p.146. [12] ms j family report filed on 19 march 2021, paragraphs 51-53. [13] ms j family report filed on 19 march 2021, paragraphs 37-39. [14] ibid, paragraph 45.[15] ibid.[16] ibid.[17] ibid, paragraph 31. [18] ms j family report filed on 26 june 2021, page 4. [19] department of families, fairness and housing section 67z response report (dffh s67z response) dated 11 august 2021, page 6. [20] exhibit m6. [21] exhibit m3. [22] ibid.[23] ms j family report filed on 19 march 2021, paragraph 30. [24] transcript 24 november 2021, p.15.[25] ibid, p.23. [26] ibid. [27] ibid. [28] annexure “f-4” to the mother's affidavit filed 26 july 2021. [29] transcript 24 november 2021, p.49. [30] ibid, p.52. [31] transcript 25 november 2021, p.124. [32] transcript 24 november 2021, p.55-56. [33] ibid, p.62. [34] amador & amador [2009] famcafc 196 at [81].[35] dffh s67z response, page 6. [36] ibid, page 5. [37] transcript 24 november 2021, p.54. [38] transcript 25 november 2021, p.162. [39] annexure “f-2” to the mother's affidavit filed 26 july 2021, paragraph 6. [40] transcript 24 november 2021, p.52.[41] ibid, p.35.[42] transcript 25 november 2021, p.169.[43] exhibit m7. [44] transcript 24 november 2021, p.33.[45] ibid, p.33.[46] transcript 25 november 2021, p.114.[47] transcript 24 november 2021, p.49.[48] transcript 25 november 2021, p.122.[49] ibid, p.123.[50] ibid, p.167.[51] ms j family report filed on 19 march 2021, paragraph 32. [52] dffh s67z response, page 6. [53] exhibit m3. [54] transcript 25 november 2021, p.131.[55] transcript 24 november 2021, p.66. [56] transcript 24 november 2021, p.41. [57] transcript 25 november 2021, p.165. [58] ibid, p.165-166. [59] transcript 24 november 2021, p.37. [60] ibid, p.44. [61] transcript 25 november 2021, p.145. [62] transcript 25 november 2021, p.146. [63] exhibit m1. [64] transcript 25 november 2021, p.169. [65] ibid, p.78. [66] ms j family report filed on 19 march 2021, paragraph 27. [67] transcript 25 november 2021, p.147. [68] ibid, p.79. [69] transcript 25 november 2021, p.79. [70] transcript 24 november 2021, p.10. [71] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(1). [72] ibid, s 60ca. [73] ibid, s 61da. [74] ibid, s 65daa. [75] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60cc(2a). [76] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 citing with approval the interpretation by brown j in mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520.[77] transcript 24 november 2021, p.24. [78] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4ab(2). [79] slater & light [2013] famcafc 4 at [37].[80] blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 at [83].[81] eastley & eastley [2022] fedcfamc1a 101 at [26]. [82] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. [83] transcript 25 november 2021, p.185. [84] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [118].[85] ibid at [122].[86] blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 at [83].[87] transcript 24 november 2021, p.10.[88] mother’s revised proposed minute of final orders dated 25 november 2021. [89] father’s minutes of orders proposed dated 25 november 2021. [90] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108.[91] hickey & hickey & attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia) [2003] famca 395; (2003) flc 93-143.[92] mother's affidavit filed 26 july 2021, paragraph 81; father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, paragraph 61. [93] father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, paragraph 107.[94] transcript 25 november 2021, p.96. [95] annexure “f-11” to the mother's affidavit filed 26 july 2021. [96] transcript 25 november 2021, p.110.[97] annexure “t-13” to the father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, page 80. [98] ibid, page 82-83.[99] transcript 25 november 2021, p.110.[100] ibid.[101] ibid, p.98-99.[102] annexure “t-13” to the father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, page 81.[103] father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, paragraph 69. [104] father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, paragraph 70.[105] ibid, paragraph 68. [106] mother's affidavit filed 26 july 2021, paragraph 75. [107] ibid, paragraph 76. [108] father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, paragraph 79. [109] mother's affidavit filed 26 july 2021, paragraph 77. [110] father’s affidavit filed 13 august 2021, paragraph 83. [111] annexure “f-7” to the mother's affidavit filed 26 july 2021; annexure “f-8” to the mother's affidavit filed 26 july 2021. [112] mother's affidavit filed 26 july 2021, paragraph 49.[113] ibid, paragraph 52.[114] ibid, paragraph 55. [115] ibid, paragraph 56. [116] transcript 25 november 2021, p.105. [117] ibid, p.174. [118] ibid, p.104. [119] ibid, p.112. [120] family law act 1975 (cth) s 75(2)(o). [121] ibid.