last updated: 1 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kemp & vinson [2022] fedcfamc2f 963
orders
the court orders that:  all parties are to attend all appointments at times and places as scheduled by dr d, (b) the respondents are to ensure x’s attendance at all appointments at times and places scheduled by dr d, (c) the respondents shall at all times encourage x to attend therapy with dr d, (d) all parties are to follow all recommendations given by dr d, (e) all parties are restrained from discouraging the therapy process and/or the therapist and permitting or allowing any other person to do so in x’s presence and/or hearing, (f) each party is restrained from discussing with x any material discussed in therapy unless it is under the guidance of dr d.   the respondents are to ensure x’s attendance at all appointments at times and places scheduled by dr d, (c) the respondents shall at all times encourage x to attend therapy with dr d, (d) all parties are to follow all recommendations given by dr d, (e) all parties are restrained from discouraging the therapy process and/or the therapist and permitting or allowing any other person to do so in x’s presence and/or hearing, (f) each party is restrained from discussing with x any material discussed in therapy unless it is under the guidance of dr d.   the respondents shall at all times encourage x to attend therapy with dr d, (d) all parties are to follow all recommendations given by dr d, (e) all parties are restrained from discouraging the therapy process and/or the therapist and permitting or allowing any other person to do so in x’s presence and/or hearing, (f) each party is restrained from discussing with x any material discussed in therapy unless it is under the guidance of dr d.   all parties are to follow all recommendations given by dr d, (e) all parties are restrained from discouraging the therapy process and/or the therapist and permitting or allowing any other person to do so in x’s presence and/or hearing, (f) each party is restrained from discussing with x any material discussed in therapy unless it is under the guidance of dr d.   all parties are restrained from discouraging the therapy process and/or the therapist and permitting or allowing any other person to do so in x’s presence and/or hearing, (f) each party is restrained from discussing with x any material discussed in therapy unless it is under the guidance of dr d.   each party is restrained from discussing with x any material discussed in therapy unless it is under the guidance of dr d.   each party shall take all steps necessary to obtain a mental health care plan for the purpose of family therapy, (b) each party shall be responsible for their own costs associated with their engagement in family therapy where such costs are not provided for under their respective mental health care plan.   each party shall be responsible for their own costs associated with their engagement in family therapy where such costs are not provided for under their respective mental health care plan.   for a period of six months from today, at the suburb f centre on every alternate saturday for 3 hours with such time to be supervised by the centre until such time as the suburb g centre is able to facilitate such time, (b) upon the suburb g centre being able to facilitate time on every alternate saturday for 3 hours then such time shall thereafter commence on the first available saturday at the suburb g centre, (c) at the expiration of the 6 month period in accordance with orders 8(a) and 8(b) above, for a period of 3 months on every alternate saturday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm in a public place as agreed between the applicants and the first respondent in writing with such time to occur in the city of sydney area, (d) at the expiration of the period specified in order 8(c) and thereafter, each alternate saturday from 10:00 am to 5:00 pm with changeovers to occur with the applicant mother collecting x from the first respondent’s home at the commencement of time and the first respondent collecting x from the first applicant’s home at the conclusion of time.   upon the suburb g centre being able to facilitate time on every alternate saturday for 3 hours then such time shall thereafter commence on the first available saturday at the suburb g centre, (c) at the expiration of the 6 month period in accordance with orders 8(a) and 8(b) above, for a period of 3 months on every alternate saturday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm in a public place as agreed between the applicants and the first respondent in writing with such time to occur in the city of sydney area, (d) at the expiration of the period specified in order 8(c) and thereafter, each alternate saturday from 10:00 am to 5:00 pm with changeovers to occur with the applicant mother collecting x from the first respondent’s home at the commencement of time and the first respondent collecting x from the first applicant’s home at the conclusion of time.   at the expiration of the 6 month period in accordance with orders 8(a) and 8(b) above, for a period of 3 months on every alternate saturday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm in a public place as agreed between the applicants and the first respondent in writing with such time to occur in the city of sydney area, (d) at the expiration of the period specified in order 8(c) and thereafter, each alternate saturday from 10:00 am to 5:00 pm with changeovers to occur with the applicant mother collecting x from the first respondent’s home at the commencement of time and the first respondent collecting x from the first applicant’s home at the conclusion of time.   at the expiration of the period specified in order 8(c) and thereafter, each alternate saturday from 10:00 am to 5:00 pm with changeovers to occur with the applicant mother collecting x from the first respondent’s home at the commencement of time and the first respondent collecting x from the first applicant’s home at the conclusion of time.
the court notes that:
the court orders that  to the parties as to how the contact that this order provides for is to take place, (b) to the parties of the terms of this order, their purpose, the obligations which it creates, the consequences that may flow from a failure to obey its terms, its reasons for making this order and the parties right to apply for a variation or revocation of the order. (c) pursuant to s 68p(2)(b)-(d) of the family law act 1975 (cth), the women’s legal service is also requested to provide the applicants with an explanation as to how the contact that it provides for is to take place.   to the parties of the terms of this order, their purpose, the obligations which it creates, the consequences that may flow from a failure to obey its terms, its reasons for making this order and the parties right to apply for a variation or revocation of the order. (c) pursuant to s 68p(2)(b)-(d) of the family law act 1975 (cth), the women’s legal service is also requested to provide the applicants with an explanation as to how the contact that it provides for is to take place.   pursuant to s 68p(2)(b)-(d) of the family law act 1975 (cth), the women’s legal service is also requested to provide the applicants with an explanation as to how the contact that it provides for is to take place.
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
the competing proposals
the evidence
the child
the parties
further witnesses
background
please stop contacting me via facebook messages, via text, via phone and any other means. i have already advised you i can not talk to you when you last called me but you have persisted. continue to harass me this way and i have no other option but to take the next step. do not contact me again.[3]
the cessation of x’s time with the applicants  e first applicant] you haven’t given me the opportunity. you took the opportunity away from me. you almost tried – i turned to you for help. can you say that you actually gave me the opportunity to be a mum and have a meaningful relationship? [the first respondent] no.[6]
reportable family therapy
the family report
for many children who are separated from their biological parents, being reunited with their biological families can assist them in development of identity. where safe to do so, it would be considered beneficial for x’s development and wellbeing to have a relationship with her biological parents and siblings.[8]
the law   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
the primary considerations   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
meaningful relationship
risk issues in the applicants’ care
family violence
this is my battle, let me deal with her!!! i’ll destroy this bitch on my own till she necks herself!!! this was the [mr kemp] i was trying to avoid. the kunt [mr kemp]!!! i’m a fucken king troll!!! she just woken that don’t give a fuck [mr kemp]!!!
mr kemp affirmed that he wanted to destroy ms kemp, that he wanted to wear her down emotionally in circumstances where he knew she was suffering mental illness.
criminal history
drugs
kidnapping concerns
...like, we’ve had [x]’s address. we’ve had [mr budd]’s address. we’ve had the school’s address. at any given time, we could have gone to their addresses, but we didn’t. i started the process of this legal to do it the right way.[13]
...like, we were celebrating, like, you know, her being at school. and we didn’t get to go and walk in her first day of school. so, yes, it was – it was one of those moments where i was a proud dad ..... “wow, my daughter is so 20 beautiful i’m going to make this photo my profile photo”...[14]
mental health
risk issues in the respondents’ care
the additional considerations
any views expressed by x
the nature of x’s relationship with her parents and other significant persons
the extent to which the parents have taken the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues or spend time or communicate with the child
the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child
the capacity of each parent to provide for x’s needs, including emotional and intellectual needs
the likely effect of any changes in x’s circumstances including the effect of any separation from either of the parents or any other person with whom they have been living
any other relevant fact or circumstance
on the back of the family court expert’s recommendations, my lawyers are about to file an application to vacate (cancel) the previous orders arranging for such contact, which contact would be completely opposite to the advice and recommendation of the family court expert consultant in this matter. for this reason, i ask your forbearance in this matter whilst we have this application dealt with by the court. i do not want to be in a position with some form of contact occurs in the interim through your organisational or elsewhere, and the court subsequently rules that it is not in [x]’s best interests that there is to be any contact. clearly any interim contact would thereby undermine and prejudice those future orders of the court and [x]’s best interests and welfare in the interim. the court and the parties have been awaiting the outcome of this family report, and now given the unequivocal terms in which the recommendations are made, i have no option other than to seek to set aside any orders facilitating or attempting to facilitate any contact with [x] by the applicants in the court case, at this time.[18]
discussion
risk assessment  e second applicant] ...we – we’ve exercised different ways of dealing with things that we do not agree with. we now take our disagreements outside of the house. we go for a walk. we go down to the local park, sit down there, discuss things and – and just write – just write things that we need to improve on... so we’re just trying to bring new methods on how to take care of whatever we don’t agree with.[19]
parental responsibility
the orders
conclusion
hopefully the adults can have a conversation with each other is not as it is not helpful for the child be travelling between hostile parties... this will unravel pretty quickly if the adults can’t display maturity, sensitivity and trust that has been significantly eroded. they will be the vital ingredients for [x] to move forward with the least disruption.
associate: dated: 22 july 2022
dated: 22 july 2022
[1] exhibit t.[2] exhibit t.[3] exhibit t.[4] transcript 30 march 2022, p.185 lines 29-35.[5] transcript 30 march 2022, p.235 lines 14-24.[6] transcript 29 march 2022, p.167 lines 16-18. [7] affidavit of dr d dated 14 february 2022, annexure b, paragraph 22.[8] family report dated 4 august 2021, paragraph 133.[9] affidavit of dr d dated 14 february 2022, annexure b, paragraphs 21-22.[10] exhibit m.[11] transcript 29 march 2022, p.108 lines 5-20.[12] transcript 29 march 2022, p.104 lines 28-29.[13] transcript 28 march 2022, p.76 lines 29-32. [14] transcript 29 march 2022, p.113 lines 18-22.[15] family report dated 4 august 2021, paragraph 64.[16] family report dated 4 august 2021, paragraph 64.[17] affidavit of dr d filed 14 february 2022, annexure b, paragraph 15.[18] exhibit u.[19] transcript 29 march 2022, p.105 lines 20-26.[20] transcript 29 march 2022, p.97 line 16.