last updated: 29 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
simiko & kellidis (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 982
orders
parenting
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
1. the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children: (a) x born in 2008, (b) y born in 2010, and (c) z born in 2013.   x born in 2008, (b) y born in 2010, and (c) z born in 2013.   y born in 2010, and (c) z born in 2013.   z born in 2013.
live with
time with the father  each alternate weekend, from after school or 3.00pm on friday to the commencement of school or 9:00am on monday, (b) from the conclusion of school each wednesday until 7:30pm with y spending time with the father one week, and z spending time with the father on the alternate week. (c) for the purposes of order 5(b), the father is responsible for delivering, or arranging for delivery, of the children to the mother, or as directed by the mother, at the end of that time.   from the conclusion of school each wednesday until 7:30pm with y spending time with the father one week, and z spending time with the father on the alternate week. (c) for the purposes of order 5(b), the father is responsible for delivering, or arranging for delivery, of the children to the mother, or as directed by the mother, at the end of that time.   for the purposes of order 5(b), the father is responsible for delivering, or arranging for delivery, of the children to the mother, or as directed by the mother, at the end of that time.
holidays  for the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods commencing in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, the first half of each school holiday period with the mother and the second half with the father, and (b) for terms 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods commencing in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, the first half of each school holiday period with the father and the second half with the mother. (c) for end of year (term 4) school holiday periods commencing in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, in two week blocks with each parent commencing with the mother, (d) for the end of year (term 4) school holiday periods commencing in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, in two week blocks with each parent commencing with the father, (e) for the purpose of orders 7(c) and 7(d) in the event the term 4 school holiday period exceeds eight weeks then the following shall apply: (i) for the first eight weeks, the children shall spend time with each parent in accordance with orders 7(c) and 7(d) above, and (ii) the children shall spend the remainder of the school holiday period equally with both parents, and for that purpose the number of remaining nights shall be divided by two with each parent spending an equal number of nights with the children, and where there is an odd number of nights, the parent who did not spend christmas eve with the children during that school holiday period shall spend the additional night with the children.   for terms 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods commencing in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, the first half of each school holiday period with the father and the second half with the mother. (c) for end of year (term 4) school holiday periods commencing in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, in two week blocks with each parent commencing with the mother, (d) for the end of year (term 4) school holiday periods commencing in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, in two week blocks with each parent commencing with the father, (e) for the purpose of orders 7(c) and 7(d) in the event the term 4 school holiday period exceeds eight weeks then the following shall apply: (i) for the first eight weeks, the children shall spend time with each parent in accordance with orders 7(c) and 7(d) above, and (ii) the children shall spend the remainder of the school holiday period equally with both parents, and for that purpose the number of remaining nights shall be divided by two with each parent spending an equal number of nights with the children, and where there is an odd number of nights, the parent who did not spend christmas eve with the children during that school holiday period shall spend the additional night with the children.   for end of year (term 4) school holiday periods commencing in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, in two week blocks with each parent commencing with the mother, (d) for the end of year (term 4) school holiday periods commencing in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, in two week blocks with each parent commencing with the father, (e) for the purpose of orders 7(c) and 7(d) in the event the term 4 school holiday period exceeds eight weeks then the following shall apply: (i) for the first eight weeks, the children shall spend time with each parent in accordance with orders 7(c) and 7(d) above, and (ii) the children shall spend the remainder of the school holiday period equally with both parents, and for that purpose the number of remaining nights shall be divided by two with each parent spending an equal number of nights with the children, and where there is an odd number of nights, the parent who did not spend christmas eve with the children during that school holiday period shall spend the additional night with the children.   for the end of year (term 4) school holiday periods commencing in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, in two week blocks with each parent commencing with the father, (e) for the purpose of orders 7(c) and 7(d) in the event the term 4 school holiday period exceeds eight weeks then the following shall apply: (i) for the first eight weeks, the children shall spend time with each parent in accordance with orders 7(c) and 7(d) above, and (ii) the children shall spend the remainder of the school holiday period equally with both parents, and for that purpose the number of remaining nights shall be divided by two with each parent spending an equal number of nights with the children, and where there is an odd number of nights, the parent who did not spend christmas eve with the children during that school holiday period shall spend the additional night with the children.   for the purpose of orders 7(c) and 7(d) in the event the term 4 school holiday period exceeds eight weeks then the following shall apply: (i) for the first eight weeks, the children shall spend time with each parent in accordance with orders 7(c) and 7(d) above, and (ii) the children shall spend the remainder of the school holiday period equally with both parents, and for that purpose the number of remaining nights shall be divided by two with each parent spending an equal number of nights with the children, and where there is an odd number of nights, the parent who did not spend christmas eve with the children during that school holiday period shall spend the additional night with the children.   for the first eight weeks, the children shall spend time with each parent in accordance with orders 7(c) and 7(d) above, and (ii) the children shall spend the remainder of the school holiday period equally with both parents, and for that purpose the number of remaining nights shall be divided by two with each parent spending an equal number of nights with the children, and where there is an odd number of nights, the parent who did not spend christmas eve with the children during that school holiday period shall spend the additional night with the children.  ) the children shall spend the remainder of the school holiday period equally with both parents, and for that purpose the number of remaining nights shall be divided by two with each parent spending an equal number of nights with the children, and where there is an odd number of nights, the parent who did not spend christmas eve with the children during that school holiday period shall spend the additional night with the children.   school holidays are defined to commence at 3.00pm on the friday that is or follows the last day of the relevant school term, (b) school holidays are defined to conclude at 3.00pm on the last friday before the first day of the following school term, (c) the midpoint of the school holidays is 3.00pm on the middle friday if the holiday period has an even number of weeks and 3.00pm on the middle tuesday if the holiday period has an odd number of weeks.   school holidays are defined to conclude at 3.00pm on the last friday before the first day of the following school term, (c) the midpoint of the school holidays is 3.00pm on the middle friday if the holiday period has an even number of weeks and 3.00pm on the middle tuesday if the holiday period has an odd number of weeks.   the midpoint of the school holidays is 3.00pm on the middle friday if the holiday period has an even number of weeks and 3.00pm on the middle tuesday if the holiday period has an odd number of weeks.
and it is noted
for the purposes of school holidays, the last weekend of the school holiday period is excluded from the holiday period. the children shall spend that weekend with whichever parent they did not spend time with for the last weekend of the preceding school term, such that those weekends follow the alternate weekend arrangement prescribed by order 4.
special days
christmas  in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, from 9.00am on 24 december until 3.00pm on 25 december with the mother and from 3.00pm on 25 december until 5.00pm on boxing day with the father, and (b) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 9.00am on 24 december until 3.00pm on 25 december with the father and from 3.00pm on 25 december until 5.00pm on boxing day with the mother.   in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from 9.00am on 24 december until 3.00pm on 25 december with the father and from 3.00pm on 25 december until 5.00pm on boxing day with the mother.
easter  the greek orthodox easter holy week, from 9.00am on greek orthodox easter monday and concluding at 9.00am on the following monday with the mother, (b) christian easter, from 9.00am on good friday until 5.00pm on (christian) easter monday with the father, (c) in the event order 10(a) causes the children or either of them to miss a weekend in their father's care, they shall have makeup time in his care the following weekend instead.   christian easter, from 9.00am on good friday until 5.00pm on (christian) easter monday with the father, (c) in the event order 10(a) causes the children or either of them to miss a weekend in their father's care, they shall have makeup time in his care the following weekend instead.   in the event order 10(a) causes the children or either of them to miss a weekend in their father's care, they shall have makeup time in his care the following weekend instead.
birthdays  from 9.00am until 8.00pm on the mother’s birthday, (b) from 9.00am until 8:00pm on mother’s day   from 9.00am until 8:00pm on mother’s day   from 9.00am until 8.00pm on the father’s birthday, (b) from 9.00am until 8:00pm on father’s day   from 9.00am until 8:00pm on father’s day
other special occasions  the parent seeking to take the children to such event/occasion shall provide the other parent with: (i) as much notice as possible, and in any event at least 14 days prior to the date of the event/occasion, (ii) a proposal for makeup time equivalent to the time that the other parent would have spent with the children pursuant to these orders, with such time being made up as close to possible as the time missed by the other parent, and (iii) if available, a copy of the invitation. (b) the other parent shall respond within 7 days of receiving notice pursuant to the preceding order, advising as to whether or not they provide their consent, and for that purpose, neither parent shall unreasonably refuse consent.   as much notice as possible, and in any event at least 14 days prior to the date of the event/occasion, (ii) a proposal for makeup time equivalent to the time that the other parent would have spent with the children pursuant to these orders, with such time being made up as close to possible as the time missed by the other parent, and (iii) if available, a copy of the invitation.  ) a proposal for makeup time equivalent to the time that the other parent would have spent with the children pursuant to these orders, with such time being made up as close to possible as the time missed by the other parent, and (iii) if available, a copy of the invitation.  i) if available, a copy of the invitation.   the other parent shall respond within 7 days of receiving notice pursuant to the preceding order, advising as to whether or not they provide their consent, and for that purpose, neither parent shall unreasonably refuse consent.   in the event the wedding falls on the weekend that the father has the children pursuant to order 5, then the father’s time that weekend shall be suspended and the children shall remain in the mother’s care from friday to sunday that weekend, and (b) the time that the father missed with the children shall be ‘made up’ by the children spending time with the father on the weekend immediately following the wedding in 2022, at times consistent with order 5.   the time that the father missed with the children shall be ‘made up’ by the children spending time with the father on the weekend immediately following the wedding in 2022, at times consistent with order 5.
other provisions  discussing any aspect of their divorce or these proceedings with the children or in front of the children, (b) denigrating or criticising the other to the children or in front of the children.   denigrating or criticising the other to the children or in front of the children.   any medical appointment, (b) any social invitation or engagement: (c) any school related event or meeting (including, for example, interviews and assemblies), (d) all extracurricular activities:   any social invitation or engagement: (c) any school related event or meeting (including, for example, interviews and assemblies), (d) all extracurricular activities:   any school related event or meeting (including, for example, interviews and assemblies), (d) all extracurricular activities:   all extracurricular activities:
sharing of information
child support
it is noted that:
the court further orders that:
property  the parties have liberty to apply, with 7 days’ notice, with respect to the sale of d street, suburb e.   nab bank loan account ...97, secured by mortgage registration number ...43, registered against the g street, suburb h property, (b) the amount owing as at the date of these orders by her, by the husband, or by her and the husband jointly, to the wife’s father, z, or the wife’s parents.   the amount owing as at the date of these orders by her, by the husband, or by her and the husband jointly, to the wife’s father, z, or the wife’s parents.
reasons for judgmentjudge mansfield
introduction
procedural background
applications in the case
final hearing
exhibits and other material relied upon
exhibit number
description
a1
affidavit of ms simiko dated 30 march 2022
a2
‘parenting arrangements term 2 2021 and supporting documents’ – 11 pages
a3
nab bank statement #6 - 1 page
a4
tender bundle regarding non-disclosure by the respondent
a5
letter from applicant’s lawyers to applicant regarding usb
a6
affidavit of z dated 30 march 2022
a7
email correspondence between solicitors- 3 pages ending 6 august 2019
r1
affidavit of mr kellidis dated 10 february 2020 (limited to use in the parenting proceedings only)
r2
affidavit of mr kellidis dated 17 august 2020 (limited to use in the parenting proceedings only)
c1
family report by ms j dated 15 july 2020
c2
affidavit of ms j dated 29 april 2022
c3
valuation report of g street, suburb h, 2 may 2022 of mr k
c4
valuation report of d street, suburb e, 2 may 2022 of mr k
by the applicant
financial statement filed 30 march 2022
case outline filed 28 april 2022
clean minute of orders sought
by the respondent
amended response filed 17 august 2020
by way of updated final orders sought: “what i want from parenting orders” – 1 page “property” – 1 page
“what i want from parenting orders” – 1 page “property” – 1 page
“property” – 1 page
by the independent children’s lawyer
minute of proposed orders of the icl
respondent’s non-compliance with trial directions  for use within the parenting proceedings only, the father was granted leave to adduce as evidence in chief two affidavits previously filed in the proceedings, (b) in the property proceedings, the applicant’s application was granted to the extent that the respondent was not permitted to adduce any evidence in chief, (c) the proceedings would not be determined wholly undefended in that whilst the respondent was not permitted to adduce evidence in chief in the property proceedings, by that stage he had cross-examined the applicant’s witnesses, he would cross-examine the family report author, he would be cross-examined, and he would make submissions.   in the property proceedings, the applicant’s application was granted to the extent that the respondent was not permitted to adduce any evidence in chief, (c) the proceedings would not be determined wholly undefended in that whilst the respondent was not permitted to adduce evidence in chief in the property proceedings, by that stage he had cross-examined the applicant’s witnesses, he would cross-examine the family report author, he would be cross-examined, and he would make submissions.   the proceedings would not be determined wholly undefended in that whilst the respondent was not permitted to adduce evidence in chief in the property proceedings, by that stage he had cross-examined the applicant’s witnesses, he would cross-examine the family report author, he would be cross-examined, and he would make submissions.
the parenting proceedingsthe orders sought  the mother have sole parental responsibility and the children live with her, (b) y and z spend time with the father: (i) during school terms, alternate weekends from after school on friday to 7.30pm on sunday. (ii) during school holidays, for half of the time, (iii) various times on various special occasions, (c) the parties be restrained from changing the children’s schools,   y and z spend time with the father: (i) during school terms, alternate weekends from after school on friday to 7.30pm on sunday. (ii) during school holidays, for half of the time, (iii) various times on various special occasions, (c) the parties be restrained from changing the children’s schools,   during school terms, alternate weekends from after school on friday to 7.30pm on sunday. (ii) during school holidays, for half of the time, (iii) various times on various special occasions,  ) during school holidays, for half of the time, (iii) various times on various special occasions,  i) various times on various special occasions,   the parties be restrained from changing the children’s schools,   x to spend time with the father in accordance with her wishes (whereas the mother was silent on x’s time with the father), (b) that the mother be required to notify and consider any views of the father prior to making a decision in exercise of parental responsibility, (c) the alternate weekend time conclude at the commencement of school on monday rather than 7.30pm on sunday. (d) y and z each spend additional time with the father during school terms on wednesdays from after school to 7.30pm in alternating weeks (y one week, and z the next) provided that the father first provides: (i) a medical certificate from his general practitioner that clears the father for any form of return to work, and (ii) proof of attendance at no less than four appointments with a registered psychologist. (e) the icl is silent on the restraint with respect to changing the children’s school.   that the mother be required to notify and consider any views of the father prior to making a decision in exercise of parental responsibility, (c) the alternate weekend time conclude at the commencement of school on monday rather than 7.30pm on sunday. (d) y and z each spend additional time with the father during school terms on wednesdays from after school to 7.30pm in alternating weeks (y one week, and z the next) provided that the father first provides: (i) a medical certificate from his general practitioner that clears the father for any form of return to work, and (ii) proof of attendance at no less than four appointments with a registered psychologist. (e) the icl is silent on the restraint with respect to changing the children’s school.   the alternate weekend time conclude at the commencement of school on monday rather than 7.30pm on sunday. (d) y and z each spend additional time with the father during school terms on wednesdays from after school to 7.30pm in alternating weeks (y one week, and z the next) provided that the father first provides: (i) a medical certificate from his general practitioner that clears the father for any form of return to work, and (ii) proof of attendance at no less than four appointments with a registered psychologist. (e) the icl is silent on the restraint with respect to changing the children’s school.   y and z each spend additional time with the father during school terms on wednesdays from after school to 7.30pm in alternating weeks (y one week, and z the next) provided that the father first provides: (i) a medical certificate from his general practitioner that clears the father for any form of return to work, and (ii) proof of attendance at no less than four appointments with a registered psychologist. (e) the icl is silent on the restraint with respect to changing the children’s school.   a medical certificate from his general practitioner that clears the father for any form of return to work, and (ii) proof of attendance at no less than four appointments with a registered psychologist.  ) proof of attendance at no less than four appointments with a registered psychologist.   the icl is silent on the restraint with respect to changing the children’s school.   there be equal shared parental responsibility, (b) the children, including x, live with him and spend alternative weekends and wednesdays after school with the mother during school terms and half the time during school holidays.   the children, including x, live with him and spend alternative weekends and wednesdays after school with the mother during school terms and half the time during school holidays.   there be equal shared parental responsibility, (b) the children, including x, live with each parent on a week about basis. (c) y and z each spend wednesdays from after school to 8.00pm in alternating weeks with the other parent (y one week, and z the next).   the children, including x, live with each parent on a week about basis. (c) y and z each spend wednesdays from after school to 8.00pm in alternating weeks with the other parent (y one week, and z the next).   y and z each spend wednesdays from after school to 8.00pm in alternating weeks with the other parent (y one week, and z the next).
issues  whether the parents have equal shared parental responsibility or whether the mother have sole parental responsibility. (2) what, if any, separate arrangements should be made for x. (3) whether the children live week about or with the mother. (4) if the children live with the mother, what time they are to spend with the father. (5) whether or not the child support departure order is made.   what, if any, separate arrangements should be made for x. (3) whether the children live week about or with the mother. (4) if the children live with the mother, what time they are to spend with the father. (5) whether or not the child support departure order is made.   whether the children live week about or with the mother. (4) if the children live with the mother, what time they are to spend with the father. (5) whether or not the child support departure order is made.   if the children live with the mother, what time they are to spend with the father. (5) whether or not the child support departure order is made.   whether or not the child support departure order is made.
parenting proceedings – legal principles.  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm arising from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm arising from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.
parental responsibility  the child’s education (both current and future), and (f) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (g) the child’s health, and (h) the child’s name, and (i) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (g) the child’s health, and (h) the child’s name, and (i) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s health, and (h) the child’s name, and (i) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s name, and (i) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.
the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
best interests of the child  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
there is no legislative definition of “meaningful relationship” but for there to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child.
... having a “meaningful relationship” with both parents is but one part of a set of arrangements that makes up a care arrangement. all parts of the arrangement must be considered before deciding what outcome is in the child’s best interests.
additional considerations
issues relating to the children – their views, level of maturity, culture and relationships:
issues relating to the parents – decision making, time spent with children, fulfilled obligations, attitude, capacity and exercise of responsibility:
issues of family violence:
effect of change:
practical difficulty of implementation:
avoiding further proceedings:
other relevant matters:
consideration – parenting proceedings  since 24 august 2020 when the order was made by consent for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility, there have been six interlocutory applications with respect to parenting matters including payment of school fees and z’s enrolment at school, (b) the parents’ disinclination or inability to attend family therapy despite orders to do so being made by consent on 25 november 2021, (c) the mother intends for the children to remain enrolled at their current private schools and the father believes they should attend public schools unless and until he can afford to contribute to the school fees, (d) the parents do not have any kind of effective communication. they have different parenting styles and different views about parenting, and (e) the absence of any evidence demonstrating that the parents have, could or would comply with the mandatory requirements in section 65dac that the parties jointly make decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the children.   the parents’ disinclination or inability to attend family therapy despite orders to do so being made by consent on 25 november 2021, (c) the mother intends for the children to remain enrolled at their current private schools and the father believes they should attend public schools unless and until he can afford to contribute to the school fees, (d) the parents do not have any kind of effective communication. they have different parenting styles and different views about parenting, and (e) the absence of any evidence demonstrating that the parents have, could or would comply with the mandatory requirements in section 65dac that the parties jointly make decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the children.   the mother intends for the children to remain enrolled at their current private schools and the father believes they should attend public schools unless and until he can afford to contribute to the school fees, (d) the parents do not have any kind of effective communication. they have different parenting styles and different views about parenting, and (e) the absence of any evidence demonstrating that the parents have, could or would comply with the mandatory requirements in section 65dac that the parties jointly make decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the children.   the parents do not have any kind of effective communication. they have different parenting styles and different views about parenting, and (e) the absence of any evidence demonstrating that the parents have, could or would comply with the mandatory requirements in section 65dac that the parties jointly make decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the children.   the absence of any evidence demonstrating that the parents have, could or would comply with the mandatory requirements in section 65dac that the parties jointly make decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the children.   notwithstanding the communication difficulties with the father since separation and certainly since 24 august 2020, the mother has been the primary carer for the children and has discharged her responsibilities in the exercise of parental responsibility in an appropriate manner, (b) each of the six interlocutory applications were resolved specifically or generally in her favour, (c) the father’s evidence under cross-examination by counsel for the icl is that: (i) he understands equal shared parental responsibility to mean the children spending equal time with each parent, (ii) he understands the parents’ interests are to be considered equal to the children’s interests, and (iii) he considers the children as a considerable support and of assistance to him.   each of the six interlocutory applications were resolved specifically or generally in her favour, (c) the father’s evidence under cross-examination by counsel for the icl is that: (i) he understands equal shared parental responsibility to mean the children spending equal time with each parent, (ii) he understands the parents’ interests are to be considered equal to the children’s interests, and (iii) he considers the children as a considerable support and of assistance to him.   the father’s evidence under cross-examination by counsel for the icl is that: (i) he understands equal shared parental responsibility to mean the children spending equal time with each parent, (ii) he understands the parents’ interests are to be considered equal to the children’s interests, and (iii) he considers the children as a considerable support and of assistance to him.   he understands equal shared parental responsibility to mean the children spending equal time with each parent, (ii) he understands the parents’ interests are to be considered equal to the children’s interests, and (iii) he considers the children as a considerable support and of assistance to him.  ) he understands the parents’ interests are to be considered equal to the children’s interests, and (iii) he considers the children as a considerable support and of assistance to him.  i) he considers the children as a considerable support and of assistance to him.  13] ... his reports of time spent with the children, and his conversations with [x] directly contrast with what the children are reporting to their mother and in this assessment. [3.14] additionally, despite both parties agreeing that shared care was not working for the children at the last assessment, [mr kellidis] has perseverated on a desire for this arrangement. this raises some concerns about his insight and cognitive processing. it is further noted that [mr kellidis] was unwilling to demonstrate flexibility in the children attending important maternal family events due to "instructions from legal aid." he presents with considerable characteristics of anxiety, avoidance, low empathy and poor cognitive flexibility. [3.15] in short, [mr kellidis] displays no insight into the perspectives of his children or the impact that his anxieties have on them. on the one hand, [mr kellidis] has idealistic views of his role as a parent and the life he wants for his children. however, he is then so driven by his anxieties about making these things happen that [mr kellidis]’ communication is abrupt and without consideration of how he is received by others. while there is no doubt that [mr kellidis] wants the best for his children, his ability to communicate with them in a way that they find supportive is being impacted by his anxiety. without some intervention around his anxiety and communication, it is likely that his relationship with all three children will continue to be challenging.
arrangements for x
the theme of [mr kellidis]’ poor insight is also reflected in the state of his relationship with [x]. it is unlikely that [x] will voluntarily return to a shared living arrangement with her father and without significant improvement in [mr kellidis]’ communication, insight and psychological traits of anxiety and rigidity, any attempt at forcing this relationship is likely to destroy what is left of it. ... [x] is distressed by the idea of spending more time with him for fear of future altercations and comments which cause her to feel badly about herself.
live with and time with
themes outlined in [ms simiko]'s affidavits around the children's interaction with their father, supervision and care tasks while in his home were confirmed in discussions. concerningly, there was indication that the children continue to be exposed to conversations about their role in decisions on living arrangements.   despite the recent reality of the breakdown of his relationship with x, the father prioritised not compromising his beliefs and world views over the negative effect of them on his children. (b) the father refused to accept that he may have been wrong in his opinion that the forensic psychologist advised him to discuss the context of the first family report with the children, including that he said “i have three little liars.” even after hearing the forensic psychologist deny that she gave such advice to him, in explanation of his behaviours the father maintained that she did. (c) the father’s disinclination to do anything about resolving the uncertain and conflicting circumstances around his back condition. he complains of this condition to the forensic psychologist to obtain latitude for his idleness, or, for extra credit for doing things in spite of it. he says it is an impediment limiting his ability to work and consequently why he does not pay any child support. he doesn’t do anything about treating the condition, offering vague reasoning such as covid-19 and not wanting an operation. at the same time, he says it is a condition that is up to him to manage and it does not interfere with his capacity to provide for all of the needs of the children when in his care.   the father refused to accept that he may have been wrong in his opinion that the forensic psychologist advised him to discuss the context of the first family report with the children, including that he said “i have three little liars.” even after hearing the forensic psychologist deny that she gave such advice to him, in explanation of his behaviours the father maintained that she did. (c) the father’s disinclination to do anything about resolving the uncertain and conflicting circumstances around his back condition. he complains of this condition to the forensic psychologist to obtain latitude for his idleness, or, for extra credit for doing things in spite of it. he says it is an impediment limiting his ability to work and consequently why he does not pay any child support. he doesn’t do anything about treating the condition, offering vague reasoning such as covid-19 and not wanting an operation. at the same time, he says it is a condition that is up to him to manage and it does not interfere with his capacity to provide for all of the needs of the children when in his care.   the father’s disinclination to do anything about resolving the uncertain and conflicting circumstances around his back condition. he complains of this condition to the forensic psychologist to obtain latitude for his idleness, or, for extra credit for doing things in spite of it. he says it is an impediment limiting his ability to work and consequently why he does not pay any child support. he doesn’t do anything about treating the condition, offering vague reasoning such as covid-19 and not wanting an operation. at the same time, he says it is a condition that is up to him to manage and it does not interfere with his capacity to provide for all of the needs of the children when in his care.   the reduction of one night is sufficient to limit the children’s exposure to the father’s at times adverse parenting attitudes, (b) it provides for some time that is not weekend time with minimal disruption to the children’s routines and homework, (c) it eliminates the need for a changeover on sunday evening.   it provides for some time that is not weekend time with minimal disruption to the children’s routines and homework, (c) it eliminates the need for a changeover on sunday evening.   it eliminates the need for a changeover on sunday evening.   despite some considerable pressure being put on the forensic psychologist in cross-examination, she remained of the view that this time was of value to the children. in addition, she affirmed it was not comparable to or transferable to additional weekend time, (b) it is substantial and significant time being time that each child will spend with the father that does not fall on a weekend or holiday, (c) the benefit to the relationship between the children and the father outweighs the disruption to the children’s routines and homework. to further mitigate the disruption, an order has been made requiring the father to deliver the child to the mother at the end of the time, and (d) it provides an opportunity for x to have contact with her father.   it is substantial and significant time being time that each child will spend with the father that does not fall on a weekend or holiday, (c) the benefit to the relationship between the children and the father outweighs the disruption to the children’s routines and homework. to further mitigate the disruption, an order has been made requiring the father to deliver the child to the mother at the end of the time, and (d) it provides an opportunity for x to have contact with her father.   the benefit to the relationship between the children and the father outweighs the disruption to the children’s routines and homework. to further mitigate the disruption, an order has been made requiring the father to deliver the child to the mother at the end of the time, and (d) it provides an opportunity for x to have contact with her father.   it provides an opportunity for x to have contact with her father.   the wednesday afternoon time is already occurring and it is far less than the alternate weekend or holiday time with the father, (b) whatever the extent of the back condition is, the father was able to attend and move around court seemingly freely which is probably commensurate with the level of activity required of him for the few hours on wednesday afternoons, (c) i am not satisfied that compelling the father to attend psychological therapy will be of any utility. whether or not the father is willing and able to accept that psychological therapy may be of benefit is a matter for him, (d) both of these conditions, really, are aimed at motivating the father to improve his own circumstances. whilst i accept that there would probably be a consequential benefit to the children if the father did in fact improve his own circumstances, these proceedings are about the children, not the father. the children are old enough to undoubtedly become aware of these conditional arrangements and there is a risk that they perceive the situation unfavourably. for example, by being used as a reward, or inappropriately drawing attention to the father’s shortfalls.   whatever the extent of the back condition is, the father was able to attend and move around court seemingly freely which is probably commensurate with the level of activity required of him for the few hours on wednesday afternoons, (c) i am not satisfied that compelling the father to attend psychological therapy will be of any utility. whether or not the father is willing and able to accept that psychological therapy may be of benefit is a matter for him, (d) both of these conditions, really, are aimed at motivating the father to improve his own circumstances. whilst i accept that there would probably be a consequential benefit to the children if the father did in fact improve his own circumstances, these proceedings are about the children, not the father. the children are old enough to undoubtedly become aware of these conditional arrangements and there is a risk that they perceive the situation unfavourably. for example, by being used as a reward, or inappropriately drawing attention to the father’s shortfalls.   i am not satisfied that compelling the father to attend psychological therapy will be of any utility. whether or not the father is willing and able to accept that psychological therapy may be of benefit is a matter for him, (d) both of these conditions, really, are aimed at motivating the father to improve his own circumstances. whilst i accept that there would probably be a consequential benefit to the children if the father did in fact improve his own circumstances, these proceedings are about the children, not the father. the children are old enough to undoubtedly become aware of these conditional arrangements and there is a risk that they perceive the situation unfavourably. for example, by being used as a reward, or inappropriately drawing attention to the father’s shortfalls.   both of these conditions, really, are aimed at motivating the father to improve his own circumstances. whilst i accept that there would probably be a consequential benefit to the children if the father did in fact improve his own circumstances, these proceedings are about the children, not the father. the children are old enough to undoubtedly become aware of these conditional arrangements and there is a risk that they perceive the situation unfavourably. for example, by being used as a reward, or inappropriately drawing attention to the father’s shortfalls.   the reasons for the order for the mother to have sole parental responsibility do not include for the father to be kept out of or away from major long term issues, (b) to assist the parties to comply with and meaningfully consider the requirement at order 2, and (c) in order to promote a meaningful relationship between the father and the children.   to assist the parties to comply with and meaningfully consider the requirement at order 2, and (c) in order to promote a meaningful relationship between the father and the children.   in order to promote a meaningful relationship between the father and the children.
the child support proceedingsthe orders sought
2. pursuant to section 124 of the child support assessment act 1989 the respondent father, [mr kellidis], shall pay the following by way of child support for the children [x] born [in] 2008, [y] born [in] 2010 and [z] born [in] 2013, in addition to the amounts payable by the father to the mother, [ms simiko], in accordance with the administrative assessment of child support:
a. within 7 days the father shall pay to the [f] school the sum of $61,129.76 being outstanding school fees for [x] and [y] to 30 march 2021, b. from the date of these orders the father is to pay half of all school fees owing to [f] school for the education of the three children [x] born [in] 2008, [y] born [in] 2010 and [z] born [in] 2013 as and when the fee fall due, c. within 7 days the father shall pay to [l] orthodontics the sum of $2,945 representing half of the orthodontic expenses for [x] to date, and d. from the date of these orders the father shall pay to [l] orthodontics half of the cost of orthodontic treatment of the children [x] and [y].
6. the mother is responsible for [z]’s school fees at [b] school with a right to argue, at the final hearing in 2022, that the father ought to be required to pay those fees or make a contribution to them, including retrospectively. consent orders it is noted that:
a. the wife filed an application in a case on 31 july 2021 seeking, by way of enforcement of a child support departure order made on 16 april 2021, the sale of a property owned by the husband and his brother, [mr m], at [d street, suburb e] (the property), b. the property is owned by the husband and [ms m] as tenants in common in equal shares, c. the application in a case is listed for hearing on 25 november 2021, d. the husband and [mr m] have since listed the property for sale, e. on the basis that the property is presently listed for sale and that all reasonable and timely steps are taken by the husband and [mr m] to sell the property, the wife does not to press orders 4 – 8 of her application that that the property be sold. f. the court notes an undertaking provided by [mr m] in the terms attached to these orders. g. the balance of the wife’s application remains listed for hearing on 25 november 2021.
by consent it is ordered: 2. by this order, upon completion of the sale of the property, the husband is taken to have authorised and directed the solicitor acting on the sale of the property for the vendors to cause the sum of $83,687.70 to be paid from his share of the net sale proceeds (after discharge payment of any secured creditor, costs of sale and usual adjustments on sale) to the solicitors for the wife. 3. the solicitors for the wife are, immediately upon receipt of such amount, to pay or cause to be paid the following:
a. $61,129.76 to [f] school, in full satisfaction of the husband’s obligation pursuant to order 2 (a) of the orders dated 16 april 2021, b. $13,726.35 to [f] school, in full satisfaction of any obligation of the husband pursuant to order 2 (b) of the orders dated 16 april 2021 up to and including term 4, 2021, c. $2,945.00 to [l] orthodontics, in full satisfaction of the husband’s obligation pursuant to order 2 (c) of the orders dated 16 april 2021, d. $1,650.00 to [l] orthodontics, in full satisfaction of any obligation of the husband pursuant to order 2 (d) of the orders dated 16 april 2021 to 25 november 2021, e. $4,236.59 to the wife or at the wife’s direction, in full satisfaction of the costs order at order 3 of the orders dated 16 april 2021, together with interest calculated to 25 november 2021.
28. the following orders are made pursuant to section 124 of the child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth) (the csaa). 29. that the father shall pay the following by way of child support for the children, in addition to the amounts payable by the father to the mother in accordance with the administrative assessment of child support:
29.1 within 7 days the father shall pay to the [f] school the sum of $86,371.74 being the current outstanding school fees for [x] and [y] to 6 may 2022, 29.2 within 7 days the father shall pay to the mother the sum of $7,018.75 being half the amount of school fees incurred by the mother for term 1 and term 2 of 2022 for the child [z]’s attendance at [b] school, 29.3 from the date of these orders the father is to pay half of all school fees owing [f] school for the education of [x] and [y] as and when the fees fall due, 29.4 from the date of these orders the father is to pay half of all school fees owing to [b] school for the education of [z] as and when the fees fall due, 29.5 within 7 days the father shall pay to [l] orthodontics the sum of $4,452.50 representing half of the orthodontic expenses for x to date, and 29.6 from the date of these orders the father shall pay to [l] orthodontics half of the cost of orthodontic treatment for the children x and y.
30. for the purposes of s125 of the csaa, the annual rate of child support paid by the father under any relevant administrative assessment is not reduced by the above orders. 31. by way of security for the payment of child support by the husband, the husband is to pay to the wife, the sum of $150,000 from his share of the proceeds of sale of the property at [d street, suburb e], and the wife is to cause such amount to be paid into an interest bearing account in a financial institution of the wife’s choosing, in the name of the wife (“the child support account”). 32. the wife is restrained from withdrawing any amount from the child support account except as provided for in the following order. 33. in the event the husband is in arrears of his obligation to pay child support pursuant to order 29 above for a period in excess of one calendar month, the wife is at liberty to withdraw from the account referred to in the previous order the amount of the arrears then outstanding. 34. upon the happening of a child support terminating event for the last of the children, the balance of funds held in the child support account, including any interest earned, is to be paid to the husband. 35. the wife is to cause a copy of all the orders made herein to be served upon the child support registrar as soon as practicable.
departure 27. the following orders are made pursuant to section 124 of the child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth) (the csaa). 28. that the father shall pay the following by way of child support for the children, in addition to the amounts payable by the father to the mother in accordance with the administrative assessment of child support:
28.1 from the date of these orders the father is to pay half of all school fees owing to [b] school for the education of [z] as and when the fees fall due. ·
29. for the purposes of s125 of the csaa the annual rate of child support paid by the father under any relevant administrative assessment is not reduced by the above order. security 30. by way of security for the payment of child support by the husband, the husband is to pay to the wife, the sum of $150,000 from his share of the proceeds of sale of the property at [d street, suburb e], and the wife is to cause such amount to be paid into an interest bearing account in a financial institution of the wife’s choosing, in the name of the wife (“the child support account”) 31. the wife is restrained from withdrawing any amount from the child support account except as provided for in the following order. 32. in the event the husband is in arrears of his obligation to pay child support pursuant to order 29 above for a period in excess of one calendar month, the wife is at liberty to withdraw from the account referred to in the previous order the amount of the arrears then outstanding. 33. upon the happening of a child support terminating event for the last of the children, the balance of funds held in the child support account including any interest earned, is to be paid to the husband. 34. the wife is to cause a copy of all the orders made herein to be served upon the child support registrar as soon as practicable.
2. the mother proposes the following notations to her minute of order sought, arising from the submission at trial, as follows: and it is noted:
a. order 2 of the orders dated 16 april 2021 remain of force and effect. b. orders 2-4 of annexure a of the orders made 25 november 2021 remain of force and effect.
3. the mother presses as a primary application the orders sought at clauses 28 to 35 of her amended initiating application filed 30 march 2022. an alternative application is put below. 4. the mother’s application is in two parts:
a. at orders 28 to 30, departure orders, b. at orders 31 to 35, security for the departure orders.
departure orders 5. the mother seeks departure orders pursuant to the child support (assessment) act 1989 (the csaa). 6. ... 7. the relevant part of the csaa is part 7, and the relevant division here is division 5. the power is conveyed on the court in s124. 8. the mother seeks an order that the father pay half the school fees for the child [z] to attend [b] school. from a practical perspective, that order brings orders governing the payment for [z]’s attendance at [b] school in line with the orders governing the payment for his older sisters’ attendance at [f] school. those orders are dated 16 april 2021. when they were made, [z] attended [f] school as well. 9. notwithstanding that the application before the court is effectively an update of the substance of the original orders reflecting a change of school to a school of comparable cost, the mother concedes that the court must be satisfied as to the relevant matters before making the departure orders sought. 10. accordingly, these submissions address the legislative pathway and requirements. .... 31. [t]here are existing, it is submitted final, orders for child support departure. those were made on 16 april 2021. they were enforced by orders made on 25 november 2021. when the [d street, suburb e] property sells, $83,687.70 will be paid to the wife. that amount satisfies:
a. at order 3a, [f school] fees quantified in the 16 april 2021 orders, which was the amount outstanding at that time, b. at order 3b, [f school] fees post the 16 april 2021 orders, being the amount outstanding to the end of term 4, 2021, c. at order 3c, orthodontic costs quantified in the 16 april 2021 orders, which was the amount outstanding at that time, d. at order 3d, orthodontic costs post the 16 april 2021 orders and up to 25 november 2021, e. costs.
32. certainly, the 25 november 2021 orders, and the enforcement mechanism provided therein, deal with the husband’s obligation to 25 november 2021 (or in the case of [f school] more specifically, to the end of term 4, 2021). 33. moving forward, the departure orders create the obligation. the retention of the $150,000 is not double dipping. orders 32 and 33 provide the conditions by which the wife can withdraw from the $150,000 and order 34 provides if the husband pays his child support properly then the account, plus interest, gets released to the husband on the happening of a child support event for the last child. 34. it’s conceded the retention of the $150,000 disadvantages the father, but in circumstances when he has egregiously failed to comply with his child support obligations, it is submitted that order is just and equitable in the context of the csaa. 35. there are three separate applications or sources of funds: the 25 november 2021 orders effectively deal with amounts up to the end of 2021, the orders sought in these proceedings brings payment for [z]’s attendance at [b school] in line with the girls’ attendance at [f school], the $150,000 provides a form of security if the father continues to ignore his obligations to pay child support pursuant to departure orders.
consideration – the child support orders sought  there are a multitude of previous orders made in these proceedings, including as to costs. the final orders do not seek to reconcile all of them and purposely do not include an order that “all previous orders be discharged.” further, rule 5.01 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 ought to be read in this context. (b) the orders made on 16 april 2021 were a result of an interim hearing on an application in a case. they do not specifically state that they are made on an interim basis. however, they do not finally decide the proceeding and in my view order 2 made on 16 april 2021 is not a final order. further, the components of order 2 that amount to a money order have since been overtaken by the orders made on 25 november 2021. order 2 has been discharged in the final orders. (c) orders 2 and 3 made on 25 november 2021 together are effectively a money order and is extant until satisfied by the father. it need not be reconsidered. the practical and useful effect is it quantifies the father’s liability up to 25 november 2021 and provides an enforcement mechanism. (d) despite there being various references to “departure orders,” there is no application (and nor has there been one at any time on an interim basis) for a departure order pursuant to division 4 of part 7 of the assessment act that seeks to depart from the provisions of the assessment act relating to administrative assessment of child support. (e) i am concerned only with an application under division 5 for an order under section 123(1)(a) for provision of child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts. further, there is no application under section 123(1)(b) for provision of child support by way of a lump sum payment. (f) in the plainest of terms, in the child support proceedings the mother seeks: (i) to not disturb or depart from administrative assessments and any resultant periodic child support, (ii) that the father pay to the mother half of the school fees that she has already paid, (iii) that the father pay directly to the children’s schools half of the future school fees, (iv) that the father provide security of $150,000 from the forthcoming proceeds of sale of real property to meet his school fees liabilities in the event he defaults, (v) that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.   the orders made on 16 april 2021 were a result of an interim hearing on an application in a case. they do not specifically state that they are made on an interim basis. however, they do not finally decide the proceeding and in my view order 2 made on 16 april 2021 is not a final order. further, the components of order 2 that amount to a money order have since been overtaken by the orders made on 25 november 2021. order 2 has been discharged in the final orders. (c) orders 2 and 3 made on 25 november 2021 together are effectively a money order and is extant until satisfied by the father. it need not be reconsidered. the practical and useful effect is it quantifies the father’s liability up to 25 november 2021 and provides an enforcement mechanism. (d) despite there being various references to “departure orders,” there is no application (and nor has there been one at any time on an interim basis) for a departure order pursuant to division 4 of part 7 of the assessment act that seeks to depart from the provisions of the assessment act relating to administrative assessment of child support. (e) i am concerned only with an application under division 5 for an order under section 123(1)(a) for provision of child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts. further, there is no application under section 123(1)(b) for provision of child support by way of a lump sum payment. (f) in the plainest of terms, in the child support proceedings the mother seeks: (i) to not disturb or depart from administrative assessments and any resultant periodic child support, (ii) that the father pay to the mother half of the school fees that she has already paid, (iii) that the father pay directly to the children’s schools half of the future school fees, (iv) that the father provide security of $150,000 from the forthcoming proceeds of sale of real property to meet his school fees liabilities in the event he defaults, (v) that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.   orders 2 and 3 made on 25 november 2021 together are effectively a money order and is extant until satisfied by the father. it need not be reconsidered. the practical and useful effect is it quantifies the father’s liability up to 25 november 2021 and provides an enforcement mechanism. (d) despite there being various references to “departure orders,” there is no application (and nor has there been one at any time on an interim basis) for a departure order pursuant to division 4 of part 7 of the assessment act that seeks to depart from the provisions of the assessment act relating to administrative assessment of child support. (e) i am concerned only with an application under division 5 for an order under section 123(1)(a) for provision of child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts. further, there is no application under section 123(1)(b) for provision of child support by way of a lump sum payment. (f) in the plainest of terms, in the child support proceedings the mother seeks: (i) to not disturb or depart from administrative assessments and any resultant periodic child support, (ii) that the father pay to the mother half of the school fees that she has already paid, (iii) that the father pay directly to the children’s schools half of the future school fees, (iv) that the father provide security of $150,000 from the forthcoming proceeds of sale of real property to meet his school fees liabilities in the event he defaults, (v) that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.   despite there being various references to “departure orders,” there is no application (and nor has there been one at any time on an interim basis) for a departure order pursuant to division 4 of part 7 of the assessment act that seeks to depart from the provisions of the assessment act relating to administrative assessment of child support. (e) i am concerned only with an application under division 5 for an order under section 123(1)(a) for provision of child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts. further, there is no application under section 123(1)(b) for provision of child support by way of a lump sum payment. (f) in the plainest of terms, in the child support proceedings the mother seeks: (i) to not disturb or depart from administrative assessments and any resultant periodic child support, (ii) that the father pay to the mother half of the school fees that she has already paid, (iii) that the father pay directly to the children’s schools half of the future school fees, (iv) that the father provide security of $150,000 from the forthcoming proceeds of sale of real property to meet his school fees liabilities in the event he defaults, (v) that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.   i am concerned only with an application under division 5 for an order under section 123(1)(a) for provision of child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts. further, there is no application under section 123(1)(b) for provision of child support by way of a lump sum payment. (f) in the plainest of terms, in the child support proceedings the mother seeks: (i) to not disturb or depart from administrative assessments and any resultant periodic child support, (ii) that the father pay to the mother half of the school fees that she has already paid, (iii) that the father pay directly to the children’s schools half of the future school fees, (iv) that the father provide security of $150,000 from the forthcoming proceeds of sale of real property to meet his school fees liabilities in the event he defaults, (v) that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.   in the plainest of terms, in the child support proceedings the mother seeks: (i) to not disturb or depart from administrative assessments and any resultant periodic child support, (ii) that the father pay to the mother half of the school fees that she has already paid, (iii) that the father pay directly to the children’s schools half of the future school fees, (iv) that the father provide security of $150,000 from the forthcoming proceeds of sale of real property to meet his school fees liabilities in the event he defaults, (v) that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.   to not disturb or depart from administrative assessments and any resultant periodic child support, (ii) that the father pay to the mother half of the school fees that she has already paid, (iii) that the father pay directly to the children’s schools half of the future school fees, (iv) that the father provide security of $150,000 from the forthcoming proceeds of sale of real property to meet his school fees liabilities in the event he defaults, (v) that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.  ) that the father pay to the mother half of the school fees that she has already paid, (iii) that the father pay directly to the children’s schools half of the future school fees, (iv) that the father provide security of $150,000 from the forthcoming proceeds of sale of real property to meet his school fees liabilities in the event he defaults, (v) that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.  i) that the father pay directly to the children’s schools half of the future school fees, (iv) that the father provide security of $150,000 from the forthcoming proceeds of sale of real property to meet his school fees liabilities in the event he defaults, (v) that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.  ) that the father provide security of $150,000 from the forthcoming proceeds of sale of real property to meet his school fees liabilities in the event he defaults, (v) that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.   that the father pay to the mother half of the orthodontic fees that she has already paid, (vi) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.  ) that the father pay directly to the orthodontist half of the future orthodontist fees.
child support - facts, matters and circumstances ] after we separated, but prior to proceedings, [mr kellidis] and i attended a round table conference with our solicitors on 1 july 2019. we reached an agreement at that conference that provided (in summary):   i would pay [z]'s school fees, (e) [mr kellidis] would pay [x] and [y]'s school fees and costs.  ] (c) on 14 december 2020, i filed an application in a case to seek child support departure orders that [mr kellidis] be ordered pay outstanding arrears to [f school] and his half share of ongoing school fees for the children to continue to attend [f school], outstanding arrears for [l] orthodontics and ongoing medical expenses. [15] (e) on 16 april 2021, orders were made by judge hughes that [mr kellidis] shall pay by way of child support, the periodic amounts payable pursuant to the child support assessment and in addition:
i) outstanding amounts for arrears payable to [f school] in the sum of $61,129.76 for [x]'s and [y]'s outstanding school fees, and to [l] orthodontics in the sum of $2,945, and ii) ongoing payments for the children's school fees at [f school], and their orthodontic expenses payable to [l] orthodontics.  on 13 july 2021, i filed a further application in a case seeking the enforcement of the orders made on 16 april 2021, such that [mr kellidis] be required to pay these amounts by selling the property he owned jointly with his brother. (g) on 11 november 2021, i filed a further application in a case seeking that [z] be enrolled to attend [b] school and that [mr kellidis] be required to pay child support in accordance with the administrative assessment and half of the school fees for [z]. (h) on 25 november 2021, the matter came before judge hughes for an interim hearing on the outstanding issues, being the applications as detailed at paragraphs 12(e), 12(f) and 12(g). in relation to these applications, the following orders were made (in summary, not verbatim):  orders were made by consent that [z] be enrolled in [b] school to commence from term 1 in 2022. (iv) it was noted that [mr kellidis] had consented to the sale of the [d street, suburb e] property. ] [mr kellidis] did not comply with the july 2019 agreement, nor has he complied with the orders dated 16 april 2021, requiring him to pay:   the outstanding amount in arrears payable to [f school], (b) the outstanding amount in arrears payable to [l] orthodontics, (c) ongoing payment of fees to [f school] for [x]and [y]'s fees, (d) ongoing payment of the children's orthodontics costs.  ] [mr kellidis] has not made any payments towards the children's expenses. [71] the children have attended [f school] since they were at the early learning centre at age 4. this was something that [mr kellidis] and i agreed during our relationship and confirmed in the july 2019 agreement. [72] since term 1 of 2022, [z] has attended [b] school. he moved schools on my application as traditionally boys attended [f school] until year 2 and then moved to [b school]. [f school] now caters for boys until the end of year 3 but i still proposed that [z] move at the end of year 2, and orders were made to that effect. he is doing well at [b school] and enjoys attending there. [73] the order for [z] to change schools was made, in part, on the basis that i pay the fees on an interim basis. the court noted at the time that i could seek that [mr kellidis] pay half of the fees incurred to date and in future on a final basis, and i do seek that. the fees at [b school] and [f school] are equivalent, the progression from [f school] to [b school] is common (and, by the end of year 3 in any case, some change of school is required) and [mr kellidis] had agreed prior to separation that z would transition from [f school] to [b school] and then reneged on that agreement. i am particularly concerned about the negative impact on [z] of him attending a school other than one of the schools if both his sisters continue at [f school]. [81] after the july 2019 agreement i expected that [mr kellidis] would pay the school fees for [x] and [y] at [f school] as we had agreed. i paid [z's] school fees from that date. [82] on 28 february 2020 i received an email from [f school] that said some of the school fees were outstanding. at the time, [z's] school fees were up to date. i forwarded the email to [mr kellidis] and said “i would like to know what your intentions are in regards to the outstanding school fees. have these been paid? are you planning to pay them by the end of the week?” [83] [mr kellidis] responded by saying, “i have not paid it get [sic] as i have no funds to do so ... i believe its unfair for either of us to pay more than half of our children's total schooling fees ... i believe we should keep all three children in girls [school] till at least the end of term two this year,( i’ve been informed that [f school] require one terms notice if we require to pull out the kids and send them elsewhere) so we have till thursday 9th april 2020 to [g street, suburb h] and [n] primary schools to check them out. i was impressed. any schools for our children's future schooling ??” [84] to my knowledge there had been no change in [mr kellidis]’s financial circumstances between july 2019 and february 2020. [85] on 6 august 2020 [mr kellidis] and i received an email from the [f school] finance officer. that email confirmed:   our debt at the time was $28,532.35, and (b) that there had been one payment of $3,675.37 on 16 july 2020. that debt was referable, entirely, to the girls' school fees. the payment on 16 july 2020 was a payment that i made towards [z's] school fees.  ] in late august or early september 2020 [mr kellidis]sent me a message with words to the effect of “you should pay one-third of the school fees, i’ll pay another third and your father can pay another third”. [87] on 4 september 2020 i instructed my solicitors to write to [mr kellidis]’s solicitors confirming the agreement that we had reached in july 2019, and, noting [mr kellidis]’s proposal to pay one third of the school fees, asking him to at least pay that amount. [mr kellidis] did not respond to that letter. [88] on 2 october 2020 i received a phone call from the children's school. the office worker who rang said to me words to the effect, “'there is a large debt owed. we need to work out how this is going to be paid.” [89] i organised a meeting with the finance officer the following week, who said to me, “you are both liable for the school fees, because you both signed the enrolment form,” or words like that. i explained the july 2019 agreement. [94] [x]'s teeth have been crooked and crowded for a long time. prior to separation, and from recollection in 2017, we agreed to and did make an appointment for her to see [dr o], an orthodontist at [l] orthodontist. [dr o] recommended we immediately start orthodontic care to expand her jaw and remedy an overbite, with a few to braces being used later. we agreed to that and [x] commenced receiving treatment, initially a twin block and then brackets to her front teeth. [95] [x] continued to be treated by [dr o] throughout 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 and this year. prior to separation, [mr kellidis]and i always followed his advice, which was always to the effect that braces would be required at some point, and she would need to have some teeth removed prior to the braces being applied. [96] earlier in 2020, at an appointment with [dr o] with [x], he said to me, “we need to do the surgery [to remove her teeth] and put her braces on before the end of the year.” [97] on 9 september 2020 i received an email from [x]'s orthodontist. [98] that email provided an updated quote for her orthodontic work, and confirmed a total amount owing of $8,905. i sent this information to [mr kellidis] by email. [99] i have exhausted the lifetime ‘maximum’ for orthodontic treatment for [x] through our private health insurance. [107] [y] is following a similar process. she has had twin blocks and now uses a plate, and is preparing for braces. i have also exhausted the lifetime maximum for that care from private health insurance. [108] following an interim hearing before judge hughes on 16 april 2021, orders were made for [mr kellidis] to pay: -
a. [f school] school fee to the sum of $61,129.76 for outstanding school fees for [x] and [y] to 30 march 2021, b. half of all school fees owing to [f school] for the education of the three children as and when they fall due, c. within 7 days, the sum of $2,945 to [l] orthodontists (which was half of the amount i had incurred to that time), d. from the date of the orders, half the cost of orthodontic treatment of the children [x] and [y]. e. within 7 days, the sum of $3,852 to me by way of costs.  9] [mr kellidis] has not complied, at all, with the 16 april 2021 child support departure orders. nor has he appealed them. he has ignored them. this has been a cause of frustration and stress to me as the costs i incurred in obtaining them were far greater than the quantum of the costs order made in my favour. [110] my solicitors sent a letter to [mr kellidis] dated 23 april 2021, in relation to the payments he was required to pay pursuant to the orders. [111] [mr kellidis], by email dated 23 april 2021 to my solicitors, acknowledged receipt of the email attaching the letter dated 23 april 2021. he emailed again on 27 april 2021 in relation to various matters, but in relation to the issue of the payments that he was required to pay pursuant to the orders, amongst other things, [mr kellidis] said the following:
a. “i can state that i can't pay these sums as i have no funds to do so. i did mention this several times in court on friday 16 april 2021 as the court transcripts will reveal”. b. proposing that we sell “some jewellery” and the [g street, suburb h] property to pay the amount owing by way of school fees and orthodontic costs.  2] on 13 july 2021, i filed an application in a case seeking, by way of enforcement of a child support departure order made on 16 april 2021, the sale of the [d street, suburb e] property. the matter was listed for interim hearing on 25 november 2021. [113] on 25 november 2021, [mr kellidis] and [mr m] agreed to list the [d street, suburb e] property for sale. [mr m] provided an undertaking that he agreed to that action (which i understand was filed). [115] the [d street, suburb e] property is listed for sale but to the best of my knowledge has not sold. my solicitors have made enquiries of the listing agent who said, on 4 march 2022 responding to a query from my solicitor as to the amount of any written offers: high $2,000,000’s need to get into the $4,000,000’s + or high $3,000,000’s as the brother [mr m] wants a high price. to build now would cost more than that as it is a large block and solid brick. [116] the consequence of that is that both the past and future amounts required to be paid by [mr kellidis] in the child support departure orders made on 16 april 2021 and enforced by order dated 25 november 2021 remain outstanding. [118] i am aged 46. [119] i am in good health. [120] i continue to work part time and flexible hours so that i can take the children to and collect them from school. i earn approximately $73,500 net per year. my income is generous for the working conditions i enjoy. [121] there is a current child support assessment that mandates [mr kellidis] pay me $76.25 per month. that child support assessment commenced on 1 december 2021 and is meant to be in place until 28 february 2023. the current child support assessment is annexed and marked "-3" (pages 50 to 52). the previous child support assessment for the period 9 september 2021 to 30 november 2021 required [mr kellidis] to pay me $366.75 per month. [mr kellidis] has not paid me any child support since either of the assessments were implemented. [122] i have not repartnered. [123] broadly i do not know [mr kellidis]’s current circumstances. he is aged 49 and to the best of my knowledge he does not suffer from any condition that impedes his capacity to work and i do not know why he has not taken steps to obtain employment. [124] in his financial statement filed 25 october 2019, [mr kellidis] deposed to earning approximately $500 per week by way of salary, having more than $156,000 in his bank account, and having net assets in his name worth more than $1.3 million. [125] although in his affidavits filed on 17 august 2020 and 23 november 2021, [mr kellidis] deposed to his financial circumstances he has not filed a further updating financial statement and he does not provide sufficient details to determine:
a. the balance of his savings, b. what income he is earning other than $750 per week that he is earning doing handyman work for his brother. this is more than the salary he disclosed receiving in his 2019 financial statement.  6] the following costs orders have been made in my favour and not paid by [mr kellidis]:
a. order 3 of the orders dated 16 april 2021, which provides that [mr kellidis] pay me the sum of $3,852 by way of the costs of that day's proceedings, and b. order 3e of the orders dated 25 november 2021, which provides that [mr kellidis] pay me the sum of $4,236.59 in full satisfaction of the costs order made on 16 april 2021 (referred to in the preceding subparagraph), plus interest calculated to 25 november 2021.  ] in respect of the [g street, suburb h] property, that property is our former matrimonial home. [mr kellidis] moved out of this property in june 2019, and i have continued to reside in the [g street, suburb h] property. i am liaising with [mr kellidis] with a view to reaching an agreed value for the trial. there is a loan secured by mortgage over the property. the loan is in my sole name but guaranteed by my father. the current loan balance is $1,252,787. [21] [mr kellidis] has an interest in a property at [d street, suburb e] (the [d street, suburb e] property). this property is owned as tenants in common by [mr kellidis] and his brother, [mr m] ([mr m]) as 50/100 shares each. [mr kellidis] inherited his share of the [d street, suburb e] property from his father in or around 2020 after probate was granted [in] 2019. to the best of my knowledge, this property is unencumbered.   the child support registrar did not have adjusted taxable income for the father for the prior period of 2019-2020 or for 2020-2021, so used a provisional income of $0 and $52,638 respectively to calculate the assessments. (b) the assessment for the period 1 december 2021 to 28 february 2023 was for the father to pay to the mother child support in relation to the children of $76.25 per month.   the assessment for the period 1 december 2021 to 28 february 2023 was for the father to pay to the mother child support in relation to the children of $76.25 per month.   he has not paid any child support, medical expenses or orthodontic expenses since separation, (b) he made one payment towards school fees soon after separation, (c) he unilaterally sought to delay z’s enrolment at b school, (d) around the time of separation, he swore a financial statement that said there was $156,000 that he had in his bank account, (e) he could not have paid the school fees or any other children’s expenses because he had lawyers’ bills to pay.   he made one payment towards school fees soon after separation, (c) he unilaterally sought to delay z’s enrolment at b school, (d) around the time of separation, he swore a financial statement that said there was $156,000 that he had in his bank account, (e) he could not have paid the school fees or any other children’s expenses because he had lawyers’ bills to pay.   he unilaterally sought to delay z’s enrolment at b school, (d) around the time of separation, he swore a financial statement that said there was $156,000 that he had in his bank account, (e) he could not have paid the school fees or any other children’s expenses because he had lawyers’ bills to pay.   around the time of separation, he swore a financial statement that said there was $156,000 that he had in his bank account, (e) he could not have paid the school fees or any other children’s expenses because he had lawyers’ bills to pay.   he could not have paid the school fees or any other children’s expenses because he had lawyers’ bills to pay.   in the last 12 months, he has worked part time: (i) for his brother - at his residential house and at his commercial properties, (ii) for his mother - lawns, mulching, weeding, stuff inside the house, (iii) for his two friends mr p and mr q in their shops - filling up shelves and facing up shelves, (b) without checking his bank account, he couldn’t say on average or at all how much he’d earnt over the past 12 months, but it might be $10,000, (c) he believes that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children were spending in his care, (d) he doesn’t pay child support because he doesn’t have a regular income, (e) the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with, (f) he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (g) the mother wasn’t doing a great deal of work during the relationship. she was doing some, and he was working at the shop earning $40,000 per annum, (h) the vast majority of his personal income was coming from investment in properties. rental income received from the house at d street, suburb e within which he now lives was “over the years, maybe 100, maybe 120, maybe at the end, probably 130, 140, maybe 150,” (i) it is the case that he is selling off assets in order to live, (j) his plans for income for the future are “fix my back, lose some weight and get a job.”   for his brother - at his residential house and at his commercial properties, (ii) for his mother - lawns, mulching, weeding, stuff inside the house, (iii) for his two friends mr p and mr q in their shops - filling up shelves and facing up shelves,  ) for his mother - lawns, mulching, weeding, stuff inside the house, (iii) for his two friends mr p and mr q in their shops - filling up shelves and facing up shelves,  i) for his two friends mr p and mr q in their shops - filling up shelves and facing up shelves,   without checking his bank account, he couldn’t say on average or at all how much he’d earnt over the past 12 months, but it might be $10,000, (c) he believes that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children were spending in his care, (d) he doesn’t pay child support because he doesn’t have a regular income, (e) the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with, (f) he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (g) the mother wasn’t doing a great deal of work during the relationship. she was doing some, and he was working at the shop earning $40,000 per annum, (h) the vast majority of his personal income was coming from investment in properties. rental income received from the house at d street, suburb e within which he now lives was “over the years, maybe 100, maybe 120, maybe at the end, probably 130, 140, maybe 150,” (i) it is the case that he is selling off assets in order to live, (j) his plans for income for the future are “fix my back, lose some weight and get a job.”   he believes that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children were spending in his care, (d) he doesn’t pay child support because he doesn’t have a regular income, (e) the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with, (f) he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (g) the mother wasn’t doing a great deal of work during the relationship. she was doing some, and he was working at the shop earning $40,000 per annum, (h) the vast majority of his personal income was coming from investment in properties. rental income received from the house at d street, suburb e within which he now lives was “over the years, maybe 100, maybe 120, maybe at the end, probably 130, 140, maybe 150,” (i) it is the case that he is selling off assets in order to live, (j) his plans for income for the future are “fix my back, lose some weight and get a job.”   he doesn’t pay child support because he doesn’t have a regular income, (e) the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with, (f) he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (g) the mother wasn’t doing a great deal of work during the relationship. she was doing some, and he was working at the shop earning $40,000 per annum, (h) the vast majority of his personal income was coming from investment in properties. rental income received from the house at d street, suburb e within which he now lives was “over the years, maybe 100, maybe 120, maybe at the end, probably 130, 140, maybe 150,” (i) it is the case that he is selling off assets in order to live, (j) his plans for income for the future are “fix my back, lose some weight and get a job.”   the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with, (f) he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (g) the mother wasn’t doing a great deal of work during the relationship. she was doing some, and he was working at the shop earning $40,000 per annum, (h) the vast majority of his personal income was coming from investment in properties. rental income received from the house at d street, suburb e within which he now lives was “over the years, maybe 100, maybe 120, maybe at the end, probably 130, 140, maybe 150,” (i) it is the case that he is selling off assets in order to live, (j) his plans for income for the future are “fix my back, lose some weight and get a job.”   he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (g) the mother wasn’t doing a great deal of work during the relationship. she was doing some, and he was working at the shop earning $40,000 per annum, (h) the vast majority of his personal income was coming from investment in properties. rental income received from the house at d street, suburb e within which he now lives was “over the years, maybe 100, maybe 120, maybe at the end, probably 130, 140, maybe 150,” (i) it is the case that he is selling off assets in order to live, (j) his plans for income for the future are “fix my back, lose some weight and get a job.”   the mother wasn’t doing a great deal of work during the relationship. she was doing some, and he was working at the shop earning $40,000 per annum, (h) the vast majority of his personal income was coming from investment in properties. rental income received from the house at d street, suburb e within which he now lives was “over the years, maybe 100, maybe 120, maybe at the end, probably 130, 140, maybe 150,” (i) it is the case that he is selling off assets in order to live, (j) his plans for income for the future are “fix my back, lose some weight and get a job.”   the vast majority of his personal income was coming from investment in properties. rental income received from the house at d street, suburb e within which he now lives was “over the years, maybe 100, maybe 120, maybe at the end, probably 130, 140, maybe 150,” (i) it is the case that he is selling off assets in order to live, (j) his plans for income for the future are “fix my back, lose some weight and get a job.”   it is the case that he is selling off assets in order to live, (j) his plans for income for the future are “fix my back, lose some weight and get a job.”   his plans for income for the future are “fix my back, lose some weight and get a job.”
2.5. [ms simiko] reported that the children are doing well in school both academically and socially. 2.7. [ms simiko] reported that [z] “loves his new school” and is no longer avoiding school. he was seeing the school psychologist although this is now on an as­ required basis. 4.1. [x] is currently in year eight at [f school]. she described school as going well, with no major social issues. [x] said that she is getting grades “between 70 and 75%” across her subjects. she is engaged with "[several sports activities]." 4.7. [x]last spoke to her school psychologist in 2021 and she found this “helpful because she knew everything that was going on.” 5.1. [y] is now in year six and reports doing well at school. 5.2. since the last assessment, [y] has been diagnosed with dyslexia and has a number of in-school supports put in place. this condition relates to the manner in which written and visual information is received, processed and expressed. as a result, [y] is likely to require additional supports at home throughout her schooling. she was determined by the school psychologist to be adjusting relatively well to her parent' separation in 2021. 6.1. [z] is now in year three at [b] school. he notes some good friendships and “six cousins” at this school. 6.2. the report from the school psychologist indicates that [z] is "an anxious child," and this is confirmed by his presentation at both assessments. 6.3. there are a number of cognitive assessment elements related to [z] in the report that appear to have been incorrectly interpreted. he appears to be doing well in school and has a number of strengths, rather than any deficits.
non-disclosure
legal principles – child support proceedings  the principal object of this act is to ensure that children receive a proper level of financial support from their parents. (2) particular objects of this act include ensuring: (a) that the level of financial support to be provided by parents for their children is determined according to their capacity to provide financial support and, in particular, that parents with a like capacity to provide financial support for their children should provide like amounts of financial support, and (b) that the level of financial support to be provided by parents for their children should be determined in accordance with the costs of the children, and (c) that persons who provide ongoing daily care for children should be able to have the level of financial support to be provided for the children readily determined without the need to resort to court proceedings, and (d) that children share in changes in the standard of living of both their parents, whether or not they are living with both or either of them, and (e) that australia is in a position to give effect to its obligations under international agreements or arrangements relating to maintenance obligations arising from family relationship, parentage or marriage.   particular objects of this act include ensuring: (a) that the level of financial support to be provided by parents for their children is determined according to their capacity to provide financial support and, in particular, that parents with a like capacity to provide financial support for their children should provide like amounts of financial support, and (b) that the level of financial support to be provided by parents for their children should be determined in accordance with the costs of the children, and (c) that persons who provide ongoing daily care for children should be able to have the level of financial support to be provided for the children readily determined without the need to resort to court proceedings, and (d) that children share in changes in the standard of living of both their parents, whether or not they are living with both or either of them, and (e) that australia is in a position to give effect to its obligations under international agreements or arrangements relating to maintenance obligations arising from family relationship, parentage or marriage.   that the level of financial support to be provided by parents for their children is determined according to their capacity to provide financial support and, in particular, that parents with a like capacity to provide financial support for their children should provide like amounts of financial support, and (b) that the level of financial support to be provided by parents for their children should be determined in accordance with the costs of the children, and (c) that persons who provide ongoing daily care for children should be able to have the level of financial support to be provided for the children readily determined without the need to resort to court proceedings, and (d) that children share in changes in the standard of living of both their parents, whether or not they are living with both or either of them, and (e) that australia is in a position to give effect to its obligations under international agreements or arrangements relating to maintenance obligations arising from family relationship, parentage or marriage.   that the level of financial support to be provided by parents for their children should be determined in accordance with the costs of the children, and (c) that persons who provide ongoing daily care for children should be able to have the level of financial support to be provided for the children readily determined without the need to resort to court proceedings, and (d) that children share in changes in the standard of living of both their parents, whether or not they are living with both or either of them, and (e) that australia is in a position to give effect to its obligations under international agreements or arrangements relating to maintenance obligations arising from family relationship, parentage or marriage.   that persons who provide ongoing daily care for children should be able to have the level of financial support to be provided for the children readily determined without the need to resort to court proceedings, and (d) that children share in changes in the standard of living of both their parents, whether or not they are living with both or either of them, and (e) that australia is in a position to give effect to its obligations under international agreements or arrangements relating to maintenance obligations arising from family relationship, parentage or marriage.   that children share in changes in the standard of living of both their parents, whether or not they are living with both or either of them, and (e) that australia is in a position to give effect to its obligations under international agreements or arrangements relating to maintenance obligations arising from family relationship, parentage or marriage.   that australia is in a position to give effect to its obligations under international agreements or arrangements relating to maintenance obligations arising from family relationship, parentage or marriage.
121. additional particular objects of this division include ensuring:   that children have their proper needs met from reasonable and adequate shares in the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of both their parents, and (b) that parents share equitably in the support of their children.
122. this division applies where a carer entitled to child support wants a liable parent to provide, or a liable parent wants to provide, child support for a child otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the carer entitled to child support.
123. (1) an application may be made to a court having jurisdiction under this act for:   an order that a liable parent provide child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to carer entitled to child support, or (b) an order that a liable parent provide child support in the form of a lump sum payment to be credited against the amount payable under the liability under the relevant administrative assessment.   an application under subsection (1):   may only be made if an administrative assessment is in force in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (b) may be made by the carer entitled to child support or the liable parent.   before hearing the application, the court must hear and determine any pending application made to the court for an order under division 3 (administrative assessments more than 18 months old) or division 4 (departure orders) in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent. (4) subject to section 145 (registrar may intervene in proceedings), the parties to the application are the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent.
“124. (1) where:   a carer entitled to child support or a liable parent makes an application to a court under paragraph 123(1)(a), and (b) the court is satisfied that it would be:  just and equitable as regards the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (ii) otherwise proper,
to make an order that the liable parent provide child support for the child otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the carer entitled to child support, the court may make the order. (2) in determining the application, the court must have regard to:   the administrative assessment in force in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (aa) any determination in force under part 6a (departure determinations) in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (b) any order in force under division 4 (departure orders) in relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (c) whether the carer entitled to child support is in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit or, if the carer entitled to child support is not in receipt of such a pension, allowance or benefit, whether the circumstances of the carer are such that, taking into account the effect of the order proposed to be made by the court, the carer would be unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   in determining whether it would be just and equitable as regards the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent to make an order under subsection (1), the court must have regard to the matters mentioned in subsections 117 (4), (6), (7), (7a) and (8). (3a) in having regard to the earning capacity of a parent of the child under paragraph 117(4)(da), the court may determine that the parent’s earning capacity is greater than is reflected in his or her income for the purposes of this act only if the court is satisfied as mentioned in subsection 117(7b) (4) in determining whether it would be otherwise proper to make an order under subsection (1), the court must have regard to the matters mentioned in subsection 117 (5) subsections (2), (3), (3a) and (4) do not limit the matters to which the court may have regard.”
“117. (1) where:   an application is made to a court having jurisdiction under this act for an order under this division in relation to a child in the special circumstances of the case, and (b) the court is satisfied:  that one or more of the grounds for departure mentioned in subsection (2) exists or exist, and (ii) that it would be:  just and equitable as regards the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (b) otherwise proper,
to make a particular order under this division,
the court may make the order. grounds for departure order (2) for the purposes of subparagraph (1) (b) (i), the grounds for departure are as follows:   that, in the special circumstances of the case, the capacity of either parent to provide financial support for the child is significantly reduced because of:  the duty of the parent to maintain any other child or another person, or (ii) special needs of any other child or another person that the parent has a duty to maintain, or (iii) commitments of the parent necessary to enable the parent to support:  himself or herself, or (b) any other child or another person that the parent has a duty to maintain,   high costs involved in enabling a parent to have access to any other child or another person that the parent has a duty to maintain,  ) that, in the special circumstances of the case, the capacity of either parent to provide financial support for the child is significantly reduced because of the responsibility of the parent to maintain a resident child of the parent (see subsection (10)), (b) that, in the special circumstances of the case, the costs of maintaining the child are significantly affected:  because of high costs involved in enabling a parent to spend time with, or communicate with the child, or (ia) because of special needs of the child, or (ib) because of high child care costs in relation to the child, or (ii) because the child is being cared for, educated or trained in the manner that was expected by his or her parents (c) that, in the special circumstances of the case, application in relation to the child of the provisions of this act relating to administrative assessment of child support would result in an unjust and inequitable determination of the level of financial support to be provided by the liable parent for the child: (i) because of the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child, or (ia) because of the income, property and financial resources of either parent, or (ib) because of the earning capacity of either parent, or (ii) because of any payments, and any transfer or settlement of property, made or to be made (whether under this act, the family law act 1975 or otherwise) by the liable parent to the child, to the carer entitled to child support or to any other person for the benefit of the child.
high costs involved in enabling a parent to care for a child (2b) a parent’s costs involved in enabling the parent to care for a child can only be high for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(a)(iv) or (2)(b)(i) if the costs that have been, or will be incurred, during a child support period, total more than 5% of the amount worked out by:   dividing the parent’s adjusted taxable income for the period by 365, and (b) multiplying the quotient by the number of days in the period.  ) if a parent has at least regular care of a child, then the only costs that can be taken into account for the purposes of subsection (2b) are costs related to travel to enable the parent to spend time with, or communicate with, the child. high child care costs (3a) the ground for departure mentioned in subparagraph (2)(b)(ib) is taken not to exist unless:   the costs are incurred by a parent or a non-parent carer, and (b) the child is younger than 12 at the start of the child support period.  ) child care costs for a parent can only be high for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(b)(ib) if, during a child support period, they total more than 5% of the amount worked out by:  ) child care costs for a non-parent carer can only be high for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(b)(ib) if, during a child support period, they total at least 25% of the costs of the child for that period. matters to consider for the purposes of subparagraph (1)(b)(ii) (4) in determining whether it would be just and equitable as regards the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent to make a particular order under this division, the court must have regard to:   the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child (as stated in section 3), and (b) the proper needs of the child, and (c) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child, and (d) the income, property and financial resources of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (da) the earning capacity of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (e) the commitments of each parent who is a party to the proceeding that are necessary to enable the parent to support:  himself or herself, or (ii) any other child or another person that the person has a duty to maintain, and  the direct and indirect costs incurred by the carer entitled to child support in providing care for the child, and (g) any hardship that would be caused:  to:  the child, or (b) the carer entitled to child support,
by the making of, or the refusal to make, the order, and (ii) to:  the liable parent, or (b) any other child or another person that the liable parent has a duty to support,
by the making of, or the refusal to make, the order, and (iii) to any resident child of the parent (see subsection (10)) by the making of, or the refusal to make, the order.  in determining whether it would be otherwise proper to make a particular order under this division, the court must have regard to:   the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child (as stated in section 3) and, in particular, the fact that it is the parents of a child themselves who have the primary duty to maintain the child, and (b) the effect that the making of the order would have on:  any entitlement of the child, or the carer entitled to child support, to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit, or (ii) the rate of any income tested pension, allowance or benefit payable to the child or the carer entitled to child support.
proper needs of the child (6) in having regard to the proper needs of the child, the court must have regard to:   the manner in which the child is being, and in which the parents expected the child to be, cared for, educated or trained, and (b) any special needs of the child.
income, earning capacity, property and financial resources (7) in having regard to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child, the court must:   have regard to the capacity of the child to earn or derive income, including any assets of, under the control of, or held for the benefit of, the child that do not produce, but are capable of producing, income, and (b) disregard:  the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of any person who does not have a duty to maintain the child, or who has such a duty but is not a party to the proceeding, unless, in the special circumstances of the case, the court considers that it is appropriate to have regard to them, and (ii) any entitlement of the child or the carer entitled to child support to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. ) in having regard to the income, property and financial resources of a parent of the child, the court must:   have regard to the capacity of the parent to derive income, including any assets of, under the control of, or held for the benefit of, the parent that do not produce, but are capable of producing, income, and (b) disregard:  ) in having regard to the earning capacity of a parent of the child, the court may determine that the parent's earning capacity is greater than is reflected in his or her income for the purposes of this act only if the court is satisfied that:   one or more of the following applies:  the parent does not work despite ample opportunity to do so, (ii) the parent has reduced the number of hours per week of his or her employment or other work below the normal number of hours per week that constitutes full-time work for the occupation or industry in which the parent is employed or otherwise engaged, (iii) the parent has changed his or her occupation, industry or working pattern, and  the parent's decision not to work, to reduce the number of hours, or to change his or her occupation, industry or working pattern, is not justified on the basis of:  the parent's caring responsibilities, or (ii) the parent's state of health, and  the parent has not demonstrated that it was not a major purpose of that decision to affect the administrative assessment of child support in relation to the child.
direct and indirect costs in providing care (8) in having regard to the direct and indirect costs incurred by the carer entitled to child support in providing care for the child, the court must have regard to the income and earning capacity foregone by the carer entitled to child support in providing that care. subsections not to limit consideration of other matters (9) subsections (4) to (8) (inclusive) do not limit other matters to which the court may have regard. definition of resident child (10) for the purposes of this section, a child is a resident child of a person only if:   the child normally lives with the person, but is not a child of the person, and (b) the person is, or was, for 2 continuous years, a member of a couple, and (c) the other member of the couple is, or was, a parent of the child, and (d) the child is aged under 18, and (e) the child is not a member of a couple, and (f) one or more of the following applies in respect of each parent of the child:  the parent has died, (ii) the parent is unable to support the child due to the ill-health of the parent, (iii) the parent is unable to support the child due to the caring responsibilities of the parent, and   the court is satisfied that the resident child requires financial assistance.”
“125. (1) if the court makes an order under section 124, the court must state in the order whether the child support ordered to be provided by the liable parent is to be credited against the liable parent's liability under any administrative assessment (in this division called a "relevant administrative assessment") of the child support payable by the liable parent to the custodian entitled to child support that relates to the period, or a part of the period, for which the order has effect. (2) the court may state that the child support is not to be credited against the liable parent's liability under any relevant assessment only if it is satisfied that, in the special circumstances of the case, it would be:   just and equitable as regards the child, the custodian entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (b) otherwise proper,
that the child support should not be credited. (3) if the court states in the order that the child support is to be credited against the liable parent's liability under any relevant administrative assessment, the court must also state in the order either:   that the child support has an annual value of a specified amount and that the annual rate of the child support payable under any relevant administrative assessment is to be reduced by that amount, or (b) that the child support is to count for a specified percentage of the annual rate of child support payable under any relevant administrative assessment.   the court may, under subsections (1) and (3), make different provision in relation to different child support years and in relation to different parts of a child support year. (5) in determining whether it would be just and equitable as regards the child, the custodian entitled to child support and the liable parent to make a statement of the kind referred to in subsection (2), the court must have regard to the matters mentioned in subsections 117 (4), (6), (7) and (8). (6) in determining whether it would be otherwise proper to make a statement of the kind referred to in subsection (2), the court must have regard to the matters mentioned in subsection 117 (5). (7) subsections (5) and (6) do not limit the matters to which the court may have regard.”
consideration – child support  this federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) has jurisdiction under s 99 of the child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth). (b) pursuant to s 122, division 5 applies as the mother wants the father to provide child support for the children otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts. (c) the mother makes her application pursuant to section 123(1)(a) for an order that a liable parent provide child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the carer entitled to child support, (d) the father is a liable parent being a parent by whom child support is payable for the children under an administrative assessment, (e) an administrative assessment occurred on 21 october 2021 for the period 1 december 2021 to 28 february 2023 and is in force in relation to the children, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, (f) the child support sought is financial support under the assessment act and is not to be paid as a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic amount, (g) the mother is a carer entitled to child support because she is a parent who, under the administrative assessment, is entitled to be paid child support in relation to the children.   pursuant to s 122, division 5 applies as the mother wants the father to provide child support for the children otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts. (c) the mother makes her application pursuant to section 123(1)(a) for an order that a liable parent provide child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the carer entitled to child support, (d) the father is a liable parent being a parent by whom child support is payable for the children under an administrative assessment, (e) an administrative assessment occurred on 21 october 2021 for the period 1 december 2021 to 28 february 2023 and is in force in relation to the children, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, (f) the child support sought is financial support under the assessment act and is not to be paid as a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic amount, (g) the mother is a carer entitled to child support because she is a parent who, under the administrative assessment, is entitled to be paid child support in relation to the children.   the mother makes her application pursuant to section 123(1)(a) for an order that a liable parent provide child support otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the carer entitled to child support, (d) the father is a liable parent being a parent by whom child support is payable for the children under an administrative assessment, (e) an administrative assessment occurred on 21 october 2021 for the period 1 december 2021 to 28 february 2023 and is in force in relation to the children, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, (f) the child support sought is financial support under the assessment act and is not to be paid as a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic amount, (g) the mother is a carer entitled to child support because she is a parent who, under the administrative assessment, is entitled to be paid child support in relation to the children.   the father is a liable parent being a parent by whom child support is payable for the children under an administrative assessment, (e) an administrative assessment occurred on 21 october 2021 for the period 1 december 2021 to 28 february 2023 and is in force in relation to the children, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, (f) the child support sought is financial support under the assessment act and is not to be paid as a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic amount, (g) the mother is a carer entitled to child support because she is a parent who, under the administrative assessment, is entitled to be paid child support in relation to the children.   an administrative assessment occurred on 21 october 2021 for the period 1 december 2021 to 28 february 2023 and is in force in relation to the children, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, (f) the child support sought is financial support under the assessment act and is not to be paid as a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic amount, (g) the mother is a carer entitled to child support because she is a parent who, under the administrative assessment, is entitled to be paid child support in relation to the children.   the child support sought is financial support under the assessment act and is not to be paid as a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic amount, (g) the mother is a carer entitled to child support because she is a parent who, under the administrative assessment, is entitled to be paid child support in relation to the children.   the mother is a carer entitled to child support because she is a parent who, under the administrative assessment, is entitled to be paid child support in relation to the children.   the mother and the father are the parents of the children and they have the primary duty to maintain the children with priority over all commitments of the parents other than commitments necessary to enable the parents to support themselves, (b) the children’s education is a proper need of the children, in particular, the manner in which the children are being educated and in which the parents expected the children to be educated, (c) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the parents, and disregarding the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the maternal grandfather, (d) any hardship that would be caused to the children and to the mother by the refusal to make the order, and (e) any hardship that would be caused to the father by the making of the order.   the children’s education is a proper need of the children, in particular, the manner in which the children are being educated and in which the parents expected the children to be educated, (c) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the parents, and disregarding the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the maternal grandfather, (d) any hardship that would be caused to the children and to the mother by the refusal to make the order, and (e) any hardship that would be caused to the father by the making of the order.   the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the parents, and disregarding the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the maternal grandfather, (d) any hardship that would be caused to the children and to the mother by the refusal to make the order, and (e) any hardship that would be caused to the father by the making of the order.   any hardship that would be caused to the children and to the mother by the refusal to make the order, and (e) any hardship that would be caused to the father by the making of the order.   any hardship that would be caused to the father by the making of the order.   the mother and the father are the parents of the children and they have the primary duty to maintain the children themselves.
section 125  i am satisfied the mother’s earning capacity is not greater than the assessable income of $96,399. (b) i am satisfied the father’s earning capacity is greater than the provisional income of $0 used for the period 2019-2020 and the provisional income of $52,638 used for the period 2020-2021 in the administrative assessments.   i am satisfied the father’s earning capacity is greater than the provisional income of $0 used for the period 2019-2020 and the provisional income of $52,638 used for the period 2020-2021 in the administrative assessments.   the father has reduced the number of hours per week of his employment or other work below the normal number of hours per week that constitutes full-time work for the occupation or industry in which he is engaged, and (b) the father’s decision to reduce the number of hours is not justified on the basis of his caring responsibility or state of health, and (c) the father has not demonstrated that it was not a major purpose of that decision to affect the administrative assessment of child support in relation to the child.   the father’s decision to reduce the number of hours is not justified on the basis of his caring responsibility or state of health, and (c) the father has not demonstrated that it was not a major purpose of that decision to affect the administrative assessment of child support in relation to the child.   the father has not demonstrated that it was not a major purpose of that decision to affect the administrative assessment of child support in relation to the child.  5] [mr kellidis] admitted that he has sustained a back injury at work and has been unable to work “since covid.” he is “scared of having an operation” and has been using panadol osteo to manage his pain. [mr kellidis] stated that he had not attended physiotherapy appointments as “i don’t want to interact with other people yet because i've just had covid and i still have symptoms.” he obtained a referral from his general practitioner “six weeks ago.” when asked when his back injury occurred, [mr kellidis] admitted “july or august last year.”   my findings at paragraph 94 above that the father’s non-compliance with his disclosure obligations was deliberate, (b) the father has a significant history in these proceedings of not complying with directions and orders, including trial directions for final hearing, (c) the father has paid no child support nor contributed to any of the expenses of the children since separation, but for one payment towards school fees, (d) the father has not provided the necessary information to the child support registrar to enable administrative assessment using his taxable income, (e) the likelihood that the father will not sufficiently cooperate or disclose his circumstances and affairs such that an administrative assessment will produce a periodic amount of significance, (f) the present administrative assessment of $76.25 per month is an inconsequential amount that offends the objects of the assessment act and the additional particular objects of division 5, (g) the father’s concession under cross examination that the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with and he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (h) the father’s gross misbeliefs as to the purposes and objects of child support generally, illustrated by his belief that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children spend in in his care, (i) the likelihood that the looming proceeds from the sale of the d street, suburb e property will be the only opportunity whereby the father will be in a position to provide security towards his child support obligations.   the father has a significant history in these proceedings of not complying with directions and orders, including trial directions for final hearing, (c) the father has paid no child support nor contributed to any of the expenses of the children since separation, but for one payment towards school fees, (d) the father has not provided the necessary information to the child support registrar to enable administrative assessment using his taxable income, (e) the likelihood that the father will not sufficiently cooperate or disclose his circumstances and affairs such that an administrative assessment will produce a periodic amount of significance, (f) the present administrative assessment of $76.25 per month is an inconsequential amount that offends the objects of the assessment act and the additional particular objects of division 5, (g) the father’s concession under cross examination that the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with and he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (h) the father’s gross misbeliefs as to the purposes and objects of child support generally, illustrated by his belief that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children spend in in his care, (i) the likelihood that the looming proceeds from the sale of the d street, suburb e property will be the only opportunity whereby the father will be in a position to provide security towards his child support obligations.   the father has paid no child support nor contributed to any of the expenses of the children since separation, but for one payment towards school fees, (d) the father has not provided the necessary information to the child support registrar to enable administrative assessment using his taxable income, (e) the likelihood that the father will not sufficiently cooperate or disclose his circumstances and affairs such that an administrative assessment will produce a periodic amount of significance, (f) the present administrative assessment of $76.25 per month is an inconsequential amount that offends the objects of the assessment act and the additional particular objects of division 5, (g) the father’s concession under cross examination that the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with and he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (h) the father’s gross misbeliefs as to the purposes and objects of child support generally, illustrated by his belief that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children spend in in his care, (i) the likelihood that the looming proceeds from the sale of the d street, suburb e property will be the only opportunity whereby the father will be in a position to provide security towards his child support obligations.   the father has not provided the necessary information to the child support registrar to enable administrative assessment using his taxable income, (e) the likelihood that the father will not sufficiently cooperate or disclose his circumstances and affairs such that an administrative assessment will produce a periodic amount of significance, (f) the present administrative assessment of $76.25 per month is an inconsequential amount that offends the objects of the assessment act and the additional particular objects of division 5, (g) the father’s concession under cross examination that the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with and he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (h) the father’s gross misbeliefs as to the purposes and objects of child support generally, illustrated by his belief that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children spend in in his care, (i) the likelihood that the looming proceeds from the sale of the d street, suburb e property will be the only opportunity whereby the father will be in a position to provide security towards his child support obligations.   the likelihood that the father will not sufficiently cooperate or disclose his circumstances and affairs such that an administrative assessment will produce a periodic amount of significance, (f) the present administrative assessment of $76.25 per month is an inconsequential amount that offends the objects of the assessment act and the additional particular objects of division 5, (g) the father’s concession under cross examination that the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with and he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (h) the father’s gross misbeliefs as to the purposes and objects of child support generally, illustrated by his belief that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children spend in in his care, (i) the likelihood that the looming proceeds from the sale of the d street, suburb e property will be the only opportunity whereby the father will be in a position to provide security towards his child support obligations.   the present administrative assessment of $76.25 per month is an inconsequential amount that offends the objects of the assessment act and the additional particular objects of division 5, (g) the father’s concession under cross examination that the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with and he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (h) the father’s gross misbeliefs as to the purposes and objects of child support generally, illustrated by his belief that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children spend in in his care, (i) the likelihood that the looming proceeds from the sale of the d street, suburb e property will be the only opportunity whereby the father will be in a position to provide security towards his child support obligations.   the father’s concession under cross examination that the children’s education benefits the children regardless of whom they’re with and he intends to contribute to the children’s education in the future when he gets some money, (h) the father’s gross misbeliefs as to the purposes and objects of child support generally, illustrated by his belief that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children spend in in his care, (i) the likelihood that the looming proceeds from the sale of the d street, suburb e property will be the only opportunity whereby the father will be in a position to provide security towards his child support obligations.   the father’s gross misbeliefs as to the purposes and objects of child support generally, illustrated by his belief that the mother should be paying him child support for the time that the children spend in in his care, (i) the likelihood that the looming proceeds from the sale of the d street, suburb e property will be the only opportunity whereby the father will be in a position to provide security towards his child support obligations.   the likelihood that the looming proceeds from the sale of the d street, suburb e property will be the only opportunity whereby the father will be in a position to provide security towards his child support obligations.
orthodontic expenses
security – legal principles  in exercising its powers under this act, a court may do all or any of the following: (d) order that payment of an amount ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured as the court specifies, (e) make any other order (whether or not of the same kind as those referred to in paragraphs (a) to (m) (inclusive)) that the court considers appropriate,   order that payment of an amount ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured as the court specifies, (e) make any other order (whether or not of the same kind as those referred to in paragraphs (a) to (m) (inclusive)) that the court considers appropriate,   make any other order (whether or not of the same kind as those referred to in paragraphs (a) to (m) (inclusive)) that the court considers appropriate,  85] the husband has shown, since the separation, a marked reluctance to pay child support or to contribute to any of the costs borne by the wife in relation to the education and other necessary expenses for the children. the wife in her submissions has pointed to evidence which suggests strongly that the husband has determined he will not (he said cannot) contribute to the payment of child support and to that end remains outside of australia. it is the wife’s case that in all of the circumstances it is fair and just to all the relevant persons concerned, including the children for the court to require the husband to provide security for the payment of any child support which he may be required to pay as a result of the orders of the court. [2086] the wife submitted, in effect, that if there is no security the husband will continue to be obstructive in steps taken by the child support registrar in attempts to recover the arrears. i agree with the wife in relation to her forecast that unless the husband is required to put up some of his funds which can be accessed to meet arrears of child support, the wife and the child support registrar will be faced with problematic attempts to recover arrears. the requirement to provide security will either provide the husband with necessary incentive to pay any assessment of child support levied against him in a timely manner, or alternatively allow him to use that fund as a source to meet his commitment and thereby allow him to use other income to apply in a manner of his choosing. [2087] i am satisfied that a ground has been made out for the court to order that the requirement of the husband to pay child support, by periodic payment pursuant to a child support (assessment) act, should be secured by the provision of a modest fund to be retained for a period of up to 1 july 2018 to be drawn upon should the husband fail to meet his monthly payment required. such a provision is just and equitable as regards the children, the carer entitled to child support (in the foreseeable future) and the liable parent. i am satisfied it is otherwise proper to make such a provision.
security – consideration
the property proceedingsthe orders sought  the wife retain sole title to the former matrimonial home at g street, suburb h and obtain all associated liabilities, (b) the husband retain sole title to his interests in his current residence at d street, suburb e, (c) the parties each retain all other property currently in their name or possession.   the husband retain sole title to his interests in his current residence at d street, suburb e, (c) the parties each retain all other property currently in their name or possession.   the parties each retain all other property currently in their name or possession.   the husband obtain sole title to the former matrimonial home at g street, suburb h along with all associated liabilities, (b) the husband pay to the wife the sum of $1,500,000, (c) the parties each retain all other property currently in their name or possession (without specifically mentioning the d street, suburb e property).   the husband pay to the wife the sum of $1,500,000, (c) the parties each retain all other property currently in their name or possession (without specifically mentioning the d street, suburb e property).   the parties each retain all other property currently in their name or possession (without specifically mentioning the d street, suburb e property).   the g street, suburb h property be sold and the net proceeds be divided 70% to him and 30% to the wife, (b) their superannuation entitlements be equalised, (c) a list of specific goods and chattels that are inferred to be in the possession or control of the wife to be returned to him, (d) categorised but unspecified goods and chattels be passed to him (“half of wedding gift. half of engagement gift. happy christening gift”).   their superannuation entitlements be equalised, (c) a list of specific goods and chattels that are inferred to be in the possession or control of the wife to be returned to him, (d) categorised but unspecified goods and chattels be passed to him (“half of wedding gift. half of engagement gift. happy christening gift”).   a list of specific goods and chattels that are inferred to be in the possession or control of the wife to be returned to him, (d) categorised but unspecified goods and chattels be passed to him (“half of wedding gift. half of engagement gift. happy christening gift”).   categorised but unspecified goods and chattels be passed to him (“half of wedding gift. half of engagement gift. happy christening gift”).
property - facts, matters and circumstances ] i assert the existence of two loans to my father, which i seek be included in the balance sheet. [32] i say that in relation to the [g street, suburb h] property, [mr kellidis] and i owe my father, [mr w] (dad), $2,401,250. [33] i particularise that amount as follows:   dad paid $1,680,000 for the purchase of the [g street, suburb h] property on 16 february 2010, (b) dad paid $95,150 for payment of stamp duty on the purchase of the [g street, suburb h] property, (c) dad loaned us $100,000 on 22 april 2013, (d) dad loaned us $100,000 on 13 may 2015, (e) dad loaned us $100,000 on 30 may 2013, (f) dad loaned us $100,000 on 18 june 2013, (g) dad loaned us $100,000 to 10 october 2013, (h) dad loaned us $30,000 on 28 february 2014, (i) dad loaned us $16,100 on 1 june 2014, (j) dad loaned us $80,000 on 30 june 2014.  ] after we bought the [g street, suburb h] property, we did a knock down rebuild. all of the amounts listed at paragraphs 33 (c) to 28 [sic] (j) above were money spent by us building a home at the [g street, suburb h] property. the only loan that was for a specific tradesperson or cost was the $16,100 deposed to at paragraph 33 (i), which was paid by dad directly to the builder who constructed the fence. [35] prior to and in 2009, [mr kellidis] and i had discussed buying and building a home in the [region ab] area of canberra. we attended open homes and auctions in 2009. we attended the [g street, suburb h] property on several occasions, i estimate around six times. it was listed for sale by auction. we said to my dad, after inspecting it, “we really like the property at [g street, suburb h].” he said to us, “i will loan you the money to help you purchase it,” or words to that effect. i was aware that in approximately 2005, my father had loaned my sister, [ms ac], money to purchase a home for herself. i became aware of this around the time i was thinking of purchasing a house, when dad said to me words to the effect of, "i can loan you some money for the purchase, i did the same with [ms ac] when she bought her house." [36] i have another sister, [ms ad], and to the best of my knowledge dad has never loaned any money to [ms ad]. it is my expectation that on the death of my mother and my father, their estate would be left to the three of us equally. in that respect, if the monies loaned to [ms ac] and i were not repaid there would be prejudice to [ms ad]. i intend to repay all of the amounts dad has loaned to me (or me and [mr kellidis]) and i expect [ms ac] to do the same. [37] typically, in my family, it isn't common for my parents to provide me or any one of my siblings with cash gifts. other than paying around 50% of the costs of the wedding, when my parents did give me gifts, it was usually items rather than cash. for example, after [mr kellidis] and i were married, my parents purchased furniture for us and white goods. for christmas, birthdays and other special occasions, my parents provide me with items as gifts rather than cash, except for the odd occasion when they would give me around $100. [38] after we purchased the [g street, suburb h] property, we rented it out and then had plans drawn up for the build. the starting balance of the loan on 14 september 2012 was $1,000,000. [mr kellidis] and i both said to the other at that time, "that will be enough to build the house we want," or words like that. [39] we then drew down on the loan as required to fund the build. we did so until the loan facility was exhausted. the house was not finished. [40] [mr kellidis] then started approaching 'loan sharks' to obtain further funds to continue to fund the build. i know this because [mr kellidis] asked me to sign several documents in order to fomralise the [sic] [41] we then asked my dad for funds on several occasions, which led to the loans described above (from 33 (c) to 33 (j)). we also applied for several refinances of the loan as follows:   8 august 2013 - extended to $1,350,000, (b) 2 december 2013 - extended to $1,500,000, (c) 30 april 2015 - reduced to $1,200,000, (d) 6 may 2015 - extended to $1,500,000, (e) 15 march 2019 - reduced to $1,400,000.  ] by 2019, the loan was in joint names. i refinanced the loan in my sole name on 15 march 2019, with a limit of $1,400,000. i had to do this because:   there were several missed repayments on the loan from around late 2018 until early 2019, which caused the loan to default on the conditions. at the time, [mr kellidis] had been making the loan repayments since the loan commenced by managing our internet banking accounts at the time, (b) the bank manager who was managing our loan at the time said to us words to the effect of, "you've got to refinance again to keep the loan", (c) [mr kellidis] had stopped working at the time, and i was the only one generating an income. as best as i can recall, we were told the only way for us to refinance the loan was to put it in my sole name, with dad remaining as guarantor on the loan. the bank manager said to us words to the effect of, “if [mr kellidis’] name continues to be on the loan, the bank won't approve it.”  ] around the same time that we were refinancing the loan into my sole name, [mr kellidis] said to me words to the effect of, “why don’t we just sell the house?” i responded, “we can consider that. but we’ll have to repay dad from the sale proceeds.” i cannot recall exactly what [mr kellidis] said in response but he didn't press further the sale. [mr kellidis] didn’t raise selling the [g street, suburb h] property again until after we separated. [44] the current amount owing to the bank is approximately $1,252,787. dad is a guarantor on the loan. i have made all repayments on that loan since 8 july 2019, which is when [mr kellidis] and i agreed that i would take over the loan repayments, but i have borrowed monies from my dad in order to do so. [45] dad registered a caveat over the [g street, suburb h] property on 4 june 2019. [46] each time [mr kellidis] and i asked dad for more money to fund the build, he said, “i’ll loan you more money,” or, “i’ll add it to the loan,” or words like that, and [mr kellidis] and i agreed. i do not recall dad ever offering to gift us money or representing that he would gift us money. [47] in june 2019, i cannot recall the specific date, [mr kellidis] handed me a handwritten note of all the payments dad loaned to us from 2013 until 2014 in addition to the upfront costs for the purchase of the [g street, suburb h] property. [mr kellidis] said to me, “this is what i borrowed off your father.” annexed hereto and marked “-2” (pages 4 to 19) is a copy of this document. it does not include all of the amounts i say were outstanding at that time. [48] since separation, i have borrowed a further $535,000 from my dad.   i say that [mr kellidis] and [ms simiko] together owe me and [ms ac] a total of $2,401,250. i particularise that amount as follows:   on 16 february 2010, i paid $1,680,000 for the purchase of the property at [g street, suburb h] in the australian capital territory (“the [g street, suburb h] property”) on behalf of [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis]. this property is registered in [ms simiko]’s sole name. the payment was made by way of cheque directly to the vendor or to the conveyancing solicitor to be paid to the vendor, (b) i paid $95,150 for payment of stamp duty on the purchase of the [g street, suburb h] property. the payment was made by way of cheque to act revenue, (c) i loaned [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] $100,000 on 22 april 2013, (d) i loaned [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] $100,000 on 13 may 2013, (e) i loaned [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] $100,000 on 30 may 2013, (f) i loaned [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] $100,000 on 18 june 2013, (g) i loaned [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] $100,000 to 10 october 2013, (h) i loaned [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] $30,000 on 28 february 2014, (i) i loaned [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] $16,100 on 1 june 2014, (j) i loaned [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] $80,000 on 30 june 2014.   prior to and in 2009, [mr kellidis] and [ms simiko] said to me words the effect, “we would like to live in the [region ab]. we would like to buy a property and build a new home on it,” or words like that. [6] they attended open homes and auctions in 2009 and i accompanied them. [7] we attended the [g street, suburb h] property on several occasions. it was listed for sale by auction. [8] i had some knowledge of [mr kellidis’] and [ms simiko]’s financial circumstances at the time. i was aware of this from conversations that i had with [mr kellidis] and [ms simiko] around the time that they said to me that they wanted to buy the [g street, suburb h] property. i also knew what [ms simiko]’s financial circumstances were as she was working for me at the time. from what i knew, their financial circumstances were as follows: (a) [mr kellidis] and [ms simiko] were renting a house in [suburb s] owned by [mr kellidis’s] father, (b) [mr kellidis] was in partnership with his parents and his brother running a [shop] in [suburb s]. i do not know how much he was earning, (c) [ms simiko] was working for me at [r store], and was earning around $100,000 per annum. [9] while the [g street, suburb h] property was listed for sale, [mr kellidis] and [ms simiko] said to me, “we would like to buy the property at [g street, suburb h].” i said to [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis], “i will loan you the money to purchase it,” or words to that effect. i was happy to lend [ms simiko] the funds that she required to purchase the [g street, suburb h] property. i do not know if they could have loaned an equivalent amount from a bank and i didn’t care. [10] i did the same for [ms ac] when i loaned her money between 2005 and 2008, for the purchase of land in [suburb n], and subsequent construction of a home on the land. [11] i did not provide a loan to [ms ad] as she did not ask me for a loan or any assistance. from what i understand from discussions that i had with [ms ad] at the time she was purchasing herself, her husband was in a good financial position, so they didn’t require a loan from us. if she had asked me to loan her money and i was able to do so i would have done so on the same terms as i did her sisters. [12] i loaned [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] the money to pay for the [g street, suburb h] property ($1,680,000) and the stamp duty of $95,150. at the time, i said to them words to the effect of, “repay it when you can” but beyond that, we did not have any specific discussions about the terms of the agreement. [13] [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] started building on the [g street, suburb h] property in or about 2012. around this time [ms simiko] said to me words to the effect, “we are going to take out a loan from the bank for around $1,500,000 secured against the property to use to build a house. [mr kellidis] will pay that loan. but we need you to be guarantor on the loan.” i agreed and became the guarantor on the loan. [14] subsequently when the loan was approved, [ms simiko] said to me words to the effect of, “the loan has been approved.” [15] in or about april 2013, [ms simiko] said to me words to the effect, “we have run out of money for the build. can we borrow more money from you to complete the build?” in the context of the conversation we had, she was asking for “more money” in addition to the money i had loaned them to purchase the property. [mr kellidis] was around during that conversation as well. said, “yes i can loan you some more money,” or words like that. [16] i subsequently paid the amounts described above (from 4 (c) to 11(j)) by way of cheques made out to [ms simiko], except for the payment at 4(c)(i) which was a cheque payable directly to a tradesperson who constructed the fence on the property. [17] following the last payment being made to [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] on 30 june 2014, i typed up in a word document, a list of the payments made to [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] between 22 april 2013, so that i had a record of all the payments made to them at the time. i reviewed my bank statements, in order to assist with the preparation of that document. annexed hereto and marked “-1” (pages 9 to 14) is a copy of this document. [18] in or about march 2019, [ms simiko] said to me words to the effect of, “[mr kellidis] is talking about selling the property. i told him we’ll have to repay your loan if we sell. i don’t really want to sell it. but we have to refinance the bank loan. the bank won’t refinance it in [mr kellidis’s] name anymore because he’s not working. it has to be in my name. can you keep being the guarantor?” i said yes and extended my guarantee or provided a new guarantee, guaranteeing the loan. i also registered a caveat over the [g street, suburb h] property around this time. [19] that discussion was the first time [ms simiko] (or [mr kellidis]) had mentioned a possible sale of the [g street, suburb h] property. i was minded to ensure if that happened that i was repaid the amount i had loaned them. that is the reason i lodged the caveat. that also prompted me to formalise the loan agreement between me and [ms simiko]. in the course of doing so i also decided it would also be a good time to formalise the loan agreement i had with my other daughter, [ms ac]. [20] in or around late march 2019, i approached my lawyer, [mr ae], to prepare a deed of loan (“the deed”) documenting the loan agreement between me and [ms simiko] in relation to the funds loaned by me to [ms simiko] for the [g street, suburb h] property. [21] in or around early april 2019, after reviewing the deed, [ms simiko] said to me words to the effect of, “i’m happy with those terms”. we subsequently signed the deed in the presence of my other daughter [ms ad] on 10 april 2019 as deposed to in the paragraph below. [22] the deed provided that:   the loan amount was $2,500,000, (b) the interest rate payable was 0% provided there was no default, and in the event of a default, it would be 10% per annum, compounding monthly, (c) the payment day was on the first of the following occurring:
i. the day before the 25th anniversary of the date of the deed, ii. the day on which settlement of any sale of the [g street, suburb h] property occurs, iii. the date that is 28 days following written demand from me to [ms simiko] in the event of a default  annexed hereto and marked “-2” (pages 15 to 17) is a copy of the deed.  ] as i understand [ms simiko]’s application is to retain the [g street, suburb h] property in these proceedings i am content for the loan agreement between us to continue. if it is the case that the [g street, suburb h] property is to be sold i will call in the loan as per the terms of the deed. recent loan [24] [ms simiko] also has a separate loan to me of $744,227, which i’ve advanced to her since [ms simiko] and [mr kellidis] separated in june 2019. they relate to the following:   payments made directly to [ms simiko] for the payment of her various living expenses and legal fees. i provide further detail of this below, (b) payments made directly to the nab bank loan account ending [...97], for the payment of the loan secured on the [g street, suburb h] property (“the [g street, suburb h] loan”). i have made these payments on a monthly basis since july 2019
payments direct to [ms simiko] post-separation [48] since separation, i have borrowed a further $535,000 from my dad. the mother lists 43 transactions from 11 july 2019 to 28 march 2022 ranging from $5,000 to $30,000, the majority of which are for $10,000. [the list of transactions totalling $535,000 described at paragraph 25 of [mr w’s] affidavit is repeated here]. [26] each of the amounts above were paid to [ms simiko] by way of bank transfers from my account to [ms simiko]’s account. [27] after [ms simiko]’s and [mr kellidis’s] separation, in or around june 2019, [ms simiko] said to me words to the effect of, “i’m just really worried about how i’m going to pay for everything. [mr kellidis] doesn’t pay for any of the children's expenses. i said to [ms simiko] words to the effect of, “it’s alright, don’t worry. i’m happy to help you out. i can continue to loan you money as you need it. you can pay me back when you can.” [28] each of the above transfers were made to [ms simiko] following her calling me and asking for money. the “default” amount became $10,000 but sometimes she would say she needed more or less for something specific. [29] from conversations that i have had with [ms simiko], i understand that she uses the funds that i transfer to her to pay for the following expenses:   children's expenses including day-to-day costs, school fees, extracurricular activities, medical expenses, entertainment and holiday costs, (b) household expenses, including payment of rates, utilities, water and repairs, (c) her legal fees for her family law matter.  ] i do not know exactly how much she has paid for each of the above expenses. payments towards [g street, suburb h] loan [31] the total amount i have paid directly towards the [g street, suburb h] loan is $209,227. i provide the following particulars:   i have made a total payment of $93,013 by way of principal loan repayments, (b) i have made a total payment of $116,214 by way of interest repayments, (c) the above payments have been made between 1 july 2019 and 28 march 2022.  ] i anticipate having to lend [ms simiko] more money between now and the final hearing, as she is likely to require more funds to pay for her living expenses. i will also continue to make payments towards the [g street, suburb h] loan, as i have done since july 2019.   the facts, matters and circumstances as stated earlier in these reasons with reference to parenting proceedings and child support proceedings that are relevant to property matters, (b) the findings i have already made with respect to the husband’s non-disclosure, and the consequential approach i have taken, set out at paragraph 94 and 130 above, (c) the findings i have already made with respect to the husband’s non-compliance with trial directions, and the consequential approach i have taken, set out at paragraphs 20 and 91 above.   the findings i have already made with respect to the husband’s non-disclosure, and the consequential approach i have taken, set out at paragraph 94 and 130 above, (c) the findings i have already made with respect to the husband’s non-compliance with trial directions, and the consequential approach i have taken, set out at paragraphs 20 and 91 above.   the findings i have already made with respect to the husband’s non-compliance with trial directions, and the consequential approach i have taken, set out at paragraphs 20 and 91 above.
property proceedings – legal principles.  in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or ... (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring: (i) either or both of the parties to the marriage, or ... to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines. ... (2) the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   identify and determine the value of the asset pool of the parties as at the date of the hearing (this necessarily involves identifying both the assets and liabilities), (ii) identify and assess each of the parties’ financial and other contributions up until the date of the hearing (this can include the financial contributions made before, during and after the marriage), (iii) assess how future and other events may have a financial impact on either of the parties, such as their age and state of health and their income and property or financial resources (known as the s 75(2) factors), and (iv) step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.  ) identify and assess each of the parties’ financial and other contributions up until the date of the hearing (this can include the financial contributions made before, during and after the marriage), (iii) assess how future and other events may have a financial impact on either of the parties, such as their age and state of health and their income and property or financial resources (known as the s 75(2) factors), and (iv) step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.  i) assess how future and other events may have a financial impact on either of the parties, such as their age and state of health and their income and property or financial resources (known as the s 75(2) factors), and (iv) step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.  ) step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.
within the family law context, those comments [in respect to the adequacy of reasons] should be seen as reinforced by the fact that the nature of the s 79 inquiry is, in essence, a broad discretionary assessment, which is neither an accounting nor mathematical exercise and which, effectively as a corollary, requires a “broad-brush approach”.(citations omitted)
is it just and equitable to make a property adjustment?
the balance sheet
ownership
applicant value
respondent’s position at hearing
properties
1
wife
g street, suburb h valuation dated 3 may 2022
valuation dated 3 may 2022
$4,000,000
disagrees
2
husband
50% interest in d street, suburb e valuation dated 3 may 2022
$1,400,000
shares
3
asx shares husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
$15,000
doesn’t know
4
24 company an shares letter from husband’s lawyer dated 28 october 2019
letter from husband’s lawyer dated 28 october 2019
e $448
sold since separation. amounts sound right.
5
24 company af shares letter from husband’s lawyer dated 28 october 2019
$1,185
6
1449 company ag shares letter from husband’s lawyer dated 28 october 2019
$47,000
business interests & vehicles
7
kellidis family trust being unpaid trust distributions for 2018 and 2019, pursuant to financial statement 30 june 2019 for kellidis family trust
being unpaid trust distributions for 2018 and 2019, pursuant to financial statement 30 june 2019 for kellidis family trust
e $112, 913
8
u pty ltd being net equity as reported in 2019 financial statement
being net equity as reported in 2019 financial statement
e $2,694
now nil
9
t pty ltd husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
unknown
10
motor vehicle 2 (owned by t pty ltd) husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
$21,000
agrees
11
motor vehicle 3 (owned by t pty ltd) husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
$12,000
12
company v company included in orders dated 28 october 2019
company included in orders dated 28 october 2019
13
motor vehicle 1 wife’s financial statement 30 march 2022
wife’s financial statement 30 march 2022
$7,000
accounts
14
joint
nab gold banking #...73 as at 30 march 2022 wife’s financial statement 30 march 2022
$0
15
nab smart reward saver #...30 as at 30 march 2022 wife’s financial statement 30 march 2022
$40
16
nab classic banking #...90 wife’s financial statement 30 march 2022
$3,164
17
westpac business cheque #...58 husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
$156,539
now hundreds of dollars
18
cba account #...22 letter from husband’s lawyer dated 28 october 2019 – no further disclosure
letter from husband’s lawyer dated 28 october 2019 – no further disclosure
19
nab private tailored flexi-plus #...98
20
westpac mr kellidis account #...29 being interest accrued pursuant to husband’s tax return 30 june 2019
being interest accrued pursuant to husband’s tax return 30 june 2019
$2.835
21
westpac x account #...54 (held as trustee for children)
excluded
22
westpac y account #...37 (held as trustee for children)
23
westpac z account #...21 (held as trustee for children)
other
24
watches and jewellery husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
$10,000
agrees. but says wife also has jewellery.
25
d street, suburb e household contents husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
26
realised interest in the estate of mr kellidis 1/3 interest pursuant inventory
1/3 interest pursuant inventory
e $12,333
total
$5,819,151
liabilities
assumes correct
cba mastercard #......28 husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
amex #......03 husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
post-separation loan to mr ah and mr m husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
post-separation debt to aj law firm and ak law firm (legal fees) husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
post-separation debt to company al husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
nab private package home loan #...32
$4,398,264
superannuation
kellidis superannuation fund – smsf wife’s financial statement 30 march 2022
$474,507
am pty ltd –smsf husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
$203,607
$677,574
financial resources
interest in the estate of mr kellidis (husband’s father, since realised and in balance sheet as interest in d street, suburb e property and realised estate) husband’s financial statement 25 october 2019
net total assets (excluding superannuation)
$1,420,887
net total assets (including superannuation)
$2,098,461   $2,401,250 between 16 february 2010 and 30 june 2014 being the entire balance of the purchase price and associated acquisition expenses of the g street, suburb h property plus contributions towards the redevelopment costs (the balance of the redevelopment costs being the cause of the nab loan), (ii) $209,227 between 1 july 2019 and 28 march 2022 being principal and interest payments against the nab loan post separation, (iii) $535,000 between 11 july 2019 to 28 march 2022 being towards the mother’s living expenses and legal fees post separation.  ) $209,227 between 1 july 2019 and 28 march 2022 being principal and interest payments against the nab loan post separation, (iii) $535,000 between 11 july 2019 to 28 march 2022 being towards the mother’s living expenses and legal fees post separation.  i) $535,000 between 11 july 2019 to 28 march 2022 being towards the mother’s living expenses and legal fees post separation.   the affidavit evidence of the wife and her father to the contrary which the husband was able to cross examine them on, (b) the deed of loan executed by the wife and her father, the key terms being: (i) it is dated 10 april 2019, (ii) the loan amount is $2,500,000, (iii) the limited purpose is ‘the purchase of land and the construction of a residential dwelling and associated improvements on the land,’ (iv) it is repayable upon sale of the g street, suburb h property, (v) it provides to the lender an equitable interest in the land sufficient to ground a registered caveat.   the deed of loan executed by the wife and her father, the key terms being: (i) it is dated 10 april 2019, (ii) the loan amount is $2,500,000, (iii) the limited purpose is ‘the purchase of land and the construction of a residential dwelling and associated improvements on the land,’ (iv) it is repayable upon sale of the g street, suburb h property, (v) it provides to the lender an equitable interest in the land sufficient to ground a registered caveat.   it is dated 10 april 2019, (ii) the loan amount is $2,500,000, (iii) the limited purpose is ‘the purchase of land and the construction of a residential dwelling and associated improvements on the land,’ (iv) it is repayable upon sale of the g street, suburb h property, (v) it provides to the lender an equitable interest in the land sufficient to ground a registered caveat.  ) the loan amount is $2,500,000, (iii) the limited purpose is ‘the purchase of land and the construction of a residential dwelling and associated improvements on the land,’ (iv) it is repayable upon sale of the g street, suburb h property, (v) it provides to the lender an equitable interest in the land sufficient to ground a registered caveat.  i) the limited purpose is ‘the purchase of land and the construction of a residential dwelling and associated improvements on the land,’ (iv) it is repayable upon sale of the g street, suburb h property, (v) it provides to the lender an equitable interest in the land sufficient to ground a registered caveat.  ) it is repayable upon sale of the g street, suburb h property, (v) it provides to the lender an equitable interest in the land sufficient to ground a registered caveat.   it provides to the lender an equitable interest in the land sufficient to ground a registered caveat.
contributions
future needs
justice and equity  the nil effect of the property orders on the earning capacity of either party, (b) the other orders made under the act in these proceedings affecting the parties and the notations to the orders made on 25 november 2021, (c) the child support order made under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that the father is to provide and is liable to provide in the future for the children of the marriage.   the other orders made under the act in these proceedings affecting the parties and the notations to the orders made on 25 november 2021, (c) the child support order made under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that the father is to provide and is liable to provide in the future for the children of the marriage.   the child support order made under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that the father is to provide and is liable to provide in the future for the children of the marriage.
wife’s proposal
g street, suburb h property
4,000,000
nab loan
-1,252,787
mr w loan
-2,500,000
d street, suburb e property proceeds
1,400,000
247,213
husband’s proposal
settlement
1,500,000
-1,500,000
147,213
husband's other proposal
g street, suburb h property proceeds
net proceeds
74,164 (30%)
173,049 (70%)
74,164
1,573,049
associate: dated: 28 july 2022
dated: 28 july 2022