last updated: 8 september 2022
federal circuit and family courtof australia ision 2)
spellmann & mallett [2022] fedcfamc2f 1051
orders
the court orders that:
september 2022 school holidays  in week one for five (5) nights as agreed and failing agreement from 5.00pm on the first monday until 5.00pm saturday, (b) in week two for six (6) nights as agreed and failing agreement from 5.00pm on the second monday until 5.00pm on the last sunday.   in week two for six (6) nights as agreed and failing agreement from 5.00pm on the second monday until 5.00pm on the last sunday.
december 2022/january 2023 school holidays:  for seven (7) nights as agreed and failing agreement from 5.00pm on 23 december until 5.00pm on 30 december 2022 and for a further seven (7) nights as agreed and failing agreement from 5.00pm on 4 january until 5.00pm on 11 january 2023.
part 1 of the event will occur by video, using microsoft teams, on a date to be advised in late january/early february with:  the applicant to attend at 9.00am, and (b) the respondent to attend at 10.30am.   the respondent to attend at 10.30am.
microsoft teams links will be provided to the parties by the court child expert prior to the event.
part 2 of the event will occur on a date and time to be advised in the sydney registry. specific details regarding the attendance of the parties and the child on this date will be provided to the parties in part 1 of the event.  any agreement reached between the parties, (b) identification of key issues requiring resolution, (c) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   identification of key issues requiring resolution, (c) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   the impact of the issues/dispute before the court, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   registrar to list any relevant material presently before the court in admissible form (may require consideration of status of material from child welfare department or police).
reasons for judgmentex tempore
judge jenkins
when you read this, know that i did everything that i could...
it is plain from those emails, that the father is frustrated, and, indeed, appears to threaten that he will ensure that at some point x has an understanding of how, according to him, he has tried to see her and that this has been thwarted by the mother.
associate: dated: 29 july 2022
dated: 29 july 2022