last updated: 8 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gambetto & farrelli (no 6) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1007
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background
documents relied upon
the september orders
pending further order, it is ordered that: 1. the child ... born [in] 2013 ... live with his mother. 2. [the child] spend time with his father as follows: until such time as the father moves to his new accommodation and has a separate bed and bedroom for [the child]: each thursday from 10am until 6pm, each alternate weekend commencing 2 october 2021 from 8am until 6pm on saturday and from 8am until 6pm on sunday, and such further or other times as agreed upon the father moving to his new accommodation with a separate bed and bedroom for [the child], continuing in the same cycle as established in order (a) above: each thursday from 10am until 6pm, each alternate weekend from 8am on saturday until 8am on sunday, after four occasions of the time spent in order (b): each thursday from 10am until 6pm, each alternate weekend from 8am on saturday until 6pm on sunday, after four occasions of the time spent in order(c) and thereafter: each thursday from 10am until 6pm, each alternate weekend from 3pm on friday until 6pm on sunday, and such further or other times as agreed between the parents in writing. the father ensure that during all periods of time that [the child] spends with him he continue to attend his activities as per the schedule attached to the mother’s affidavit filed 24 september 2021. 4. [the child] shall spend time with father on: [the child’s] birthday from 3pm to 6pm if it is a day that [the child] is not otherwise spending with him, and on father’s day from 10am to 6pm if it is a day that [the child]is not otherwise spending with him (with no make-up time the mother envisaged). [the child’s] time with the father pursuant to these orders shall be suspended between 10am and 6pm if it coincides with mother’s day (with no make-up time to the father envisaged). notwithstanding any other order to the contrary in these orders, that at christmas of 2021, [the child] shall spend time with the mother from 6pm christmas eve to 10am on boxing day and with the father from 10am to 6pm on boxing day. except as otherwise agreed, the mother shall deliver [the child] to the father’s residence at the start of time and the father to return [the child] to the mother at the mother’s residence... at the conclusion of his time. each party shall facilitate telephone or facetime calls between [the child] and the other parent at times reasonably requested by [the child]. each party will inform and keep the other informed of their current telephone number, email address and home address. each party shall promptly notify the other of any serious illness, injury or accident suffered by [the child] at times that [the child] in in that party’s care including the nature of the condition, and the name of any hospital or medical centre to which [the child] has been taken for treatment. by this order, each party is authorized and permitted to contact any medical practitioner, health professional or member of the nsw education standards (or their delegate) to ascertain such information about [the child’s] welfare progress and development as he or she reasonably requests (without derogation from such professional’s discretion as to what information is provided. that without admitting the necessity for this order [the child] shall be known as “[the child’s full name]” and the father is restrained by injunction from taking any steps to formally change his name or any part of with the nsw registrar of births, deaths and marriages or otherwise engaging in the use of a different name or any part of it, pending a determination of the court on a final basis of the father’s application to change his name. by not later than 5pm on friday, 8 october 2021, to the extent she has not already done so, the mother shall provide to the father copies of all school reports, documents recording [the child’s] home schooling registration, and (if any) medical or allied health reports or assessments about [the child] for the past two years that are in her possession. 14. each parent be restrained from: denigrating, belittling or otherwise rebuking the other parent in the presence or hearing of [the child] or allowing [the child] to remain in the presence or hearing of any third party who is engaging in such behaviour. discussing these proceedings or any issues in dispute in these proceedings in the presence or hearing of [the child], or allowing [the child] to remain in the presence or hearing of any third party who is engaging in such behaviour using any form of physical discipline towards [the child].
the march orders
the father’s orders sought on 3 june 2022
2. orders 1 and 2 made on 28 september 2021 be replaced with:
“living arrangements school terms 1. during school terms: a) the child live with each of the parties on the equal time week about basis with changeover to occur on fridays 3pm. b) after each school holiday period the equal time week about basis is to recommence after school on the first school day of the school term, with effect that the balance of that school week be spent with the party with whom the child has not spent the second half of the school holiday period, regardless of whether the child has spent the last week of the preceding school term with the mother or the father, with friday after school changeover to recommence on the first friday of each school term.
a) the child live with each of the parties on the equal time week about basis with changeover to occur on fridays 3pm. b) after each school holiday period the equal time week about basis is to recommence after school on the first school day of the school term, with effect that the balance of that school week be spent with the party with whom the child has not spent the second half of the school holiday period, regardless of whether the child has spent the last week of the preceding school term with the mother or the father, with friday after school changeover to recommence on the first friday of each school term.
b) after each school holiday period the equal time week about basis is to recommence after school on the first school day of the school term, with effect that the balance of that school week be spent with the party with whom the child has not spent the second half of the school holiday period, regardless of whether the child has spent the last week of the preceding school term with the mother or the father, with friday after school changeover to recommence on the first friday of each school term.
school holidays 2. during the school holiday periods: a) the equal time week about basis be suspended, b) the child spend the first half in or commencing in even years and the second half in or commencing in odd years with the mother and the second half in or commencing in even years and the first half in or commencing in odd years with the father, c) the first half commence after school on the last school day of each school term, and the second half commence at 9.00am on the middle day of the school holiday period or if no middle day at 9.00am on the day following the midpoint and end on the morning of the first school day of the school term.” applicant and mr [v] be both granted leave pursuant to s. 338 (1) (c) of the crimes act 1900 nsw to commence private prosecution of [the mother], [ms j] and [ms z] for the offences of perjury and subornation of perjury allegedly committed as part of their conduct in these proceedings.
a) the equal time week about basis be suspended, b) the child spend the first half in or commencing in even years and the second half in or commencing in odd years with the mother and the second half in or commencing in even years and the first half in or commencing in odd years with the father, c) the first half commence after school on the last school day of each school term, and the second half commence at 9.00am on the middle day of the school holiday period or if no middle day at 9.00am on the day following the midpoint and end on the morning of the first school day of the school term.”
b) the child spend the first half in or commencing in even years and the second half in or commencing in odd years with the mother and the second half in or commencing in even years and the first half in or commencing in odd years with the father, c) the first half commence after school on the last school day of each school term, and the second half commence at 9.00am on the middle day of the school holiday period or if no middle day at 9.00am on the day following the midpoint and end on the morning of the first school day of the school term.”
c) the first half commence after school on the last school day of each school term, and the second half commence at 9.00am on the middle day of the school holiday period or if no middle day at 9.00am on the day following the midpoint and end on the morning of the first school day of the school term.”
the private prosecution
leave to apply for review
256 review of power exercised by delegate   a party to proceedings in which a delegate has exercised any of the powers of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) under section 254 may:   within the time prescribed by the rules of court, or (b) within any further time allowed in accordance with the rules of court, apply to the court for review of that exercise of power.   the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) may, on application under subsection (1) or on its own initiative, review an exercise of power by a delegate under section 254, and may make any order or orders it thinks fit in relation to the matter in respect of which the power was exercised.
14.05 application for review of order or decision   a party may apply for a review of an exercise of a power referred to in the table in clause 2 of schedule 4 by a senior judicial registrar or judicial registrar by filing an application for review and a copy of the order or decision sought to be reviewed in the filing registry within 21 days after the order or decision is made. (2) a party may apply for a review of any other exercise of a power under these rules by a senior judicial registrar or judicial registrar by filing an application for review and a copy of the order or decision sought to be reviewed in the filing registry within 21 days after the order or decision is made. (3) the applicant must serve a sealed copy of the application on each other party to the proceeding as soon as practicable and in any event not later than 7 days after it is filed. (4) an application for review must be listed for a hearing as soon as possible and, unless it is not practicable to do so, within 28 days after the date of filing.   a party may apply for a review of any other exercise of a power under these rules by a senior judicial registrar or judicial registrar by filing an application for review and a copy of the order or decision sought to be reviewed in the filing registry within 21 days after the order or decision is made. (3) the applicant must serve a sealed copy of the application on each other party to the proceeding as soon as practicable and in any event not later than 7 days after it is filed. (4) an application for review must be listed for a hearing as soon as possible and, unless it is not practicable to do so, within 28 days after the date of filing.   the applicant must serve a sealed copy of the application on each other party to the proceeding as soon as practicable and in any event not later than 7 days after it is filed. (4) an application for review must be listed for a hearing as soon as possible and, unless it is not practicable to do so, within 28 days after the date of filing.   an application for review must be listed for a hearing as soon as possible and, unless it is not practicable to do so, within 28 days after the date of filing.
... 14.07 procedure for review   a court must hear an application for review of an exercise of power by a senior judicial registrar or judicial registrar as an original hearing.
note: in an original hearing, the court rehears the whole matter and does not simply review the decision of the original court.   the court may receive as evidence: (a) any affidavit or exhibit tendered in the first hearing, or (b) any further affidavit or exhibit, or (c) the transcript (if any) of the first hearing, or (d) if a transcript is not available—an affidavit about the evidence that was adduced at the first hearing, sworn by a person who was present at the first hearing. [emphasis added]   any affidavit or exhibit tendered in the first hearing, or (b) any further affidavit or exhibit, or (c) the transcript (if any) of the first hearing, or (d) if a transcript is not available—an affidavit about the evidence that was adduced at the first hearing, sworn by a person who was present at the first hearing.   any further affidavit or exhibit, or (c) the transcript (if any) of the first hearing, or (d) if a transcript is not available—an affidavit about the evidence that was adduced at the first hearing, sworn by a person who was present at the first hearing.   the transcript (if any) of the first hearing, or (d) if a transcript is not available—an affidavit about the evidence that was adduced at the first hearing, sworn by a person who was present at the first hearing.   if a transcript is not available—an affidavit about the evidence that was adduced at the first hearing, sworn by a person who was present at the first hearing.
15.06 shortening or extension of time   the court may at any time, on the application of a party or the court’s own initiative, shorten or extend a time that is fixed under these rules or by a procedural order. (2) a party may apply under subrule (1) for an order extending a time even though the time fixed by the rule or procedural order has passed. (3) a party who makes an application under subrule (1) for an extension of time may be ordered to pay any other party’s costs in relation to the application.   a party may apply under subrule (1) for an order extending a time even though the time fixed by the rule or procedural order has passed. (3) a party who makes an application under subrule (1) for an extension of time may be ordered to pay any other party’s costs in relation to the application.   a party who makes an application under subrule (1) for an extension of time may be ordered to pay any other party’s costs in relation to the application.
his honour: i will take into account that you have the benefit of a mckenzie friend with the experience of mr v, but, nonetheless, that duty [re: a litigant in person] still applies to me, so don’t hesitate to ask me a procedural question if you wish.
and, in that context, i want to raise with you that ordinarily the review of the senior judicial registrar’s decision is what we call in law a hearing de novo, and you’ve gone to a lot of trouble to point out what the problems and facts with the senior judicial registrar’s decision was, but my job on a review is to hear the matter as a fresh matter. the other aspect is that this is an inquiry into the best interests of your son, but the parties themselves shape the issues so i don’t just start at a blank sheet of paper. so, in that sense, what you point out to me as the difficulties or errors in the senior judicial registrar’s decision may assist me in determining the disputes between you...
... 82. in an interim case that would involve the following: (a) identifying the competing proposals of the parties, (b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing, (c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, (d) considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   identifying the competing proposals of the parties, (b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing, (c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, (d) considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing, (c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, (d) considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, (d) considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.  2] in ss v ah [2010] famcafc 13 the majority (boland and thackray jj) discussed at [88] of their reasons the care necessary to be exercised in making findings in interim parenting proceedings. their honours said:
[88] in our view, findings made at an interim hearing should be couched with great circumspection, no matter how firmly a judge’s intuition may suggest that the finding will be borne out after a full testing of the evidence. 3] later, at [100] their honours amplified their comments and said:
[100] the intuition involved in decision-making concerning children is arguably of even greater importance when a judge is obliged to make interim decisions following a hearing at which time constraints prevent the evidence being tested. apart from relying upon the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative than to weigh the probabilities of competing claims and the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected. it is not always feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in issue.
applicable law
the standard of proof
140. civil proceedings: standard of proof   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
the father’s case
a. all my filings in the matter to date. b. all respondent’s filings in the matter to date. c. materials produced to and held by the court under subpoenas. d. official transcript of the hearing on 9 march 2022. i am seeking orders detailed at the end of this submission on the basis that: the respondent made false allegations of violence to obtain interim orders. the respondent fabricated her evidence in relation to the child’s activities to obtain interim orders. materials produced under the subpoenas confirm that the child spent equal time with both parents. respondent’s conduct over the course of these proceedings confirms that the respondent’s goal is either to destroy the relationship of the applicant with the child or to control the applicant through the child. the applicant is a non-violent exemplary father fully committed to his child’s future, with no criminal record and no history of violence. the child and the applicant were subjected to severe emotional distress due to a), b) and d). the respondent has been uncooperative for almost 2 years while represented by the same lawyer. the respondent continues to withhold disclosures and together with her lawyer actively obstructs production of evidence. the respondent’s lawyer regularly attempts to intimidate me including most recently, by filing amended response seeking that the child have no time and no contact with me.
his honour: ...where there is a request to do something outside the time limit that’s set by the court rules, the first matter that is called upon is an explanation for the delay. and the other aspect that i would be assisted on is – that’s linked to the explanation for the delay is the fact that, on one view, though in slightly different circumstances, you’ve already had a crack at altering the 28 september orders. and if you are unsuccessful on the review of the 9th of – in other words, if i leave senior judicial registrar jenkinson’s decision of 9 march alone, you’re pretty skinny on your grounds to get up on the review out of time... you could address me on that would help me in that sense.
can i also raise this with you, for example, reading [the mother’s] outline of case of the september last year proceedings, by the end of the case she was entirely unsuccessful in limiting your time to daytime only. now, were she to then say, “look, i’ve thought about that and i don’t like the order and it’s three months later but i want to re-argue the case”, you would be pointing – or at least a judge in the case would be saying, “hang on. what do you mean. that was decided back in september. we don’t just re-argue things over and over”. so that’s the context to why once a decision is made – or part of the context, it’s left alone.
... his honour: ...the sydney practice – and i will stand corrected by mr l – is you’re not going to get a date for your final hearing until the case is ready and the interim skirmishes have stopped. so that worries me as well in this case, because here i am telling you you can challenge these things at final hearing, and i’m worried about when this case will ever get to final hearing if we’re constantly reviewing things and you never get there and you never get to ask – or your counsel gets to ask [the mother] questions in cross-examination. ... the father: sure, your honour. well, if i may start with your point about final hearing, my main concern is that by the time we have final hearing the respondent would have successfully destroyed my meaningful relationship and then would claim that it is so now and that, you know, i shouldn’t have any time with him. now, i will address your points one by one but if i miss something could you please ... the father: so in terms of the application itself, what i – i would like to correct both ms lawson and [mr l] that i am not seeking to improve my position. i am seeking a restoration of my position to the start of these – of the proceedings. at the start of the proceedings my time with the child was monday and tuesday afternoons, thursday days and alternate weekends plus equal time during school holidays... ... the father: so what happened in august 2021... after i initiated proceedings and after the respondent was served with the proceedings... but didn’t respond... they unilaterally cut my mondays and tuesday afternoons... despite protests and alternative proposals. and, what’s more important, in her affidavit the respondent, witnessed by her lawyer who was present for that communication as well, on 24 september, said that the only time the child spent with me was thursday days and alternate weekends which is factually incorrect. i spent half of school holidays. there was an agreement between – broken by ms worland in september last year where i spent half of school holidays... so essentially, his honour: hang on. half of school holidays during the day. the father: correct. correct. yes. but she wouldn’t agree to overnight time.... so what i’m saying in the first instance is that the orders of 28 september were obtained by fraud and senior judicial registrar jenkinson was misled as to the time that i spent but also was misled in terms of [the mother] presenting the case as me not wanting the time and that she was always open to me having the time. so registrar jenkinson just made an order, 2(e), that school holidays are not mandated and everything must be by agreement. but of course [the mother] refuses to make any agreement in relation to the holidays. ... the father: i didn’t know that i could apply for a review. i had no idea and it wasn’t brought up to me, so instead i was notified that the court scheduled a mediation session in november and i thought that was the procedure.
on 8 december, just before school holidays, the respondent filed her draft final orders which would have almost equal time during school holidays but then the respondent refused to consent to her own draft orders and i was left with no school – you know, three days in the first three weeks of school holidays in december/january. so i – then i filed my application on 22 december seeking clarification of holiday time and also pointing out that orders were obtained by fraud. so that application was heard on 9 march, almost three months later.
... the father: your honour, before we go any further i would also like to understand from the point of view of procedure. you mentioned that i require leave to review the orders of 28 september... his honour: there’s a 21-day time limit, you see. and what you’re really asking is that i extend that time limit. the father: i also – i’m currently looking at rule 10.13 and specifically (1)(b). his honour: yes, so 10.13(1):
at any time the court may set aside the order if it’s obtained by fraud...
the father: so that is my argument. his honour: yes. the father: but essentially when you say that – or correct me if i understood it wrong but you said you’re not going to deal with findings today, so how would i be able to prove fraud to you and vary the orders on that basis?... his honour: can i put it this way. the burden would be on you to do that – the burden on you would be to satisfy me of the fraud and when i say “can’t make findings”, when it’s your word against her word, they’re the sort of findings i can’t make. but sometimes i can make findings, for example, someone has got a document or a contemporaneous business record that demonstrates the particular point that they’re making. and, as i understand it, the fraud alleged is the – you say that the senior judicial registrar proceeded on the basis – or wasn’t told about your monday and tuesday afternoons. the father: and potentially also school holidays so i’m just looking at it now. his honour: okay. what i want to know is...why didn’t you tell the registrar – i find it difficult to accept that you went through the whole hearing on 28 september and didn’t tell the registrar about what your time actually was. the father: well, i specified my – what do you call it – regular time... his honour: yes. i’m just trying to find, in your affidavit, where you dealt with this at all... the father: so page 68. his honour: yes. hang on. page 68 of 69. yes... and annexure [28] and that was annexed to – yes, to paragraph 83. okay. there it is, monday one to 3 pm, [school a]. okay. tuesday two to 2.30. [music lessons], time with father, [sports] etcetera. yes. okay. all right. okay. so the senior judicial registrar had that evidence in front of her. yes. go on. the father: there is also – so before the hearing – i believe school holidays began on 23 september, so before that hearing there was an agreement in writing between myself and the respondent via her lawyers, worland, that those school holidays would be split equally. and also based on the – july school holidays were split equally. now his honour: hang on. split equally but not overnight. the father: correct. correct. yes.
the mother’s case
... i have asked [the father] to commit to having [the child] regularly, instead of when the mood takes him, but this has led to continuous arguments whenever [the child] has extra-curricular or social activities as [the father] doesn’t want to drive [the child] around. ... i have applied for sole parental responsibility as there has been no sign of [the father] being willing to co-operate with me regarding arrangements for our child: (a) [the father] and i never sit down and talk calmly about our child. issues arising from our breakup usually come to the surface and we end up with raised voices, or [the father] trying to dictate terms of [the child’s] development, instead of engaging in a discussion. ... [the father] has requested 50/50 care, but he regularly changes his mind in relation to [the child’s] arrangements, i have offered to be flexible with both my work and [the child’s] timetable to accommodate [the father’s] ever-changing requests, but whenever i disagree with him, [the father] just gets louder. he has yelled at me in front of [the child] on numerous occasions. i have suggested we both attend counselling to improve how we communicate, but he says he will not go. ... [the child] has not been introduced to overnight stays with his father due to [the father’s] irregular schedule, current living arrangements and changing moods. ... [the child] has only once stayed overnight at his father’s house, when [the child] was unwell on 10 january 2021. when i called [the father], there was no answer. he then sent me a slew of text messages that culminated in “please do not disturb”. i was concerned for [the child’s] welfare as he has always come to me for comfort when he is ill... on the days [the father] agrees to have [the child], [the father] brings him home within a few hours. when [the child] is with [the father], he frequently calls me and says he wants to go home. once [the child] is home, he is very unsettled and asks if “other dads are mean like him.” the benefit to child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents i accept the benefit to [the child] of having his father meaningfully involved in his life, but not if the time he spends with [the father] involves him in parental conflict. i doubt [the child] is capable of coping with any further changes to his school week, such as moving between our two homes or having his routine further loaded with activity.   [the father] and i never sit down and talk calmly about our child. issues arising from our breakup usually come to the surface and we end up with raised voices, or [the father] trying to dictate terms of [the child’s] development, instead of engaging in a discussion.
... the mother contends that, while it is in [the child’s] best interests to have a meaningful relationship with the father, there are several barriers to overcome before that can occur in a way that is emotionally and psychologically safe and productive for [the child]. this especially relates to the father’s lack of attunement to [the child’s] emotional and developmental needs, the father’s disrespectful attitude towards the mother to which [the child] is exposed, and seemingly proprietary stance that he adopts in relation to [the child]. importantly, the mother perceives that this impacts her ability to parent [the child]. the mother proposes that there be a regularization of modest day-only time with the father in accordance with the current arrangement, until the court has the benefit of some expert evidence, subpoenas can be issued and documents obtained (eg from [the child’s] former counsellor to whom he has spoken about his feelings about spending time with his father). without such evidence, the court is not equipped with the information it needs to determine the issues in a more granular way, especially as it must know that effect of a change of arrangement on [the child] and how he may respond to such a change.
outline of contentions 1. no substantive or significant change to circumstances (rice & asplund). applicant father has already had orders he is seeking heard and determined in previous hearings. applicant father’s order seeking leave to commence contempt &/or perjury against the respondent mother are misconstrued and mischievous. ... minute of orders sought applicant father’s review application filed 15.04.2022 be dismissed and orders made by senior judicial registrar jenkinson are confirmed. applicant father pays respondent mother’s costs on an indemnity basis.
ms lawson: ... can i say this though, dealing with the leave component and it being out of time. so your honour has highlighted it, six and a-half months essentially since those orders of sjr jenkinson. now, the father’s lengthy affidavit material, with respect, doesn’t actually enunciate real reasons for the delay in seeking that review.
leave of course is discretionary and the on the topic of the court’s discretion i say the following. this is a matter, if ever the court ought shut down litigation it’s this case. so it has been on foot since june 2021. there have been, on my solicitor’s calculation, 14 applications in the proceedings, one of which has been brought by my client, 14. it’s the antithesis, this case, of the tenets of the central practice direction, which the court will be familiar with, essentially dealing with matters quickly, inexpensively and efficiently. now, of course the father is self-represented but the court will be all too well aware that my client is not and there are repercussions to this. so on each and every occasion my client has to engage with her solicitor and/or counsel and prepare the case. a cost notice has been circulated. she has spent... over $142,000. and if we look where we are in the proceedings, with a great deal of respect, there has been no advancement. rudimentary matters such as the appointment of an expert and payment of an expert have become essentially stagnant. so i say to the court this, unfortunately – i use the terminology “lawfare” and it’s designed to buckle the mother. and the reason why that ordinarily without prejudice document has some import in this case is that exhibit, which the court has now admitted by consent, that exhibit shows, i say, what the father is doing, this repeated litigation... look at the number of applications. and not only have they been brought against [mr l], they have been brought against my client personally. they have been brought against my instructing solicitor and they’ve been brought against the previous barrister, ms [u]... my submission in that regard is leave in the court’s discretion ought not be granted. the court ought not err in favour of the father and use its discretion to grant leave in circumstances where the conflict between these parties is so exceptionally high... the number of applications, with respect, speak for themselves. so i say to the court, in respect of the leave component, err on the side of not granting leave because at least that shuts down one aspect of the conflict. turning to the rice & asplund argument, and the rice & asplund argument relates to 25 march 2022 orders of jenkinson. and that’s essentially where this court is – as the father has been made aware of – is essentially hearing a de novo of what happened before sjr jenkinson on that date. now, the father has indicated to the court his familiarity with the rice & asplund decision but rice & asplund actually can’t just be given lip service. it actually means something and what it means is it’s a filter, a filter against children being unnecessarily embroiled in repeated litigation about the same matters. not only that, also the litigants and essentially the care givers. and rice & asplund tells us this, and it’s the comments of evatt cj:
it should not lightly entertain an application to reverse an earlier custody order.
and the father in this case is asking you essentially to lightly entertain an earlier custody order. langmeil & grange, which is a 2013 decision, again confirms what is said in rice & asplund that continuous litigation is essentially not in the children’s best interests. it states the obvious. and that has been found to apply in interim parenting applications such as this. your honour will find the matter of hedley & hedley [2019] famca particularly helpful in its application of rice & asplund to interim proceedings... so it’s not clear from anything the father has said to you today in court and it’s not clear from anything he has pleaded in his material what is the significant change in circumstance that he relies upon... it’s a shame today we’re not seeking a final hearing date before this court. it’s a matter that is probably crying out for determination on a final basis to help the litigation cease. we can’t do that absent an expert report which, as we know, has been bogged down in repeated endless litigation. it’s interesting – and i make this as a passing observation – the father is clearly intelligent. he is clearly articulate. if only he could apply his many talents to bettering his position in the family law case by ceasing the litigation. the material he has filed actually militates against what he wants. if he wants ultimately to share parental responsibility – and i pause there to say that’s currently opposed – but if he ultimately wants it, the answer is not to file endless applications. the answer is to actually show that he can get along with the mother and not resort to court orders at the drop of a hat.
the icl’s case
lawson & glenning [2021] fedcffamc2f 118 (delivered ex tempore) reithmuller j (division 2) – 15 september 2021 at [9] – [15], reithmuller h discusses the central practice direction as well as the effective use of court resources. his honour considers that “[t]he review application, it seems to me, was pointless... from the perspective that the order made by the registrar was obviously a reasonable order to make in the circumstances.” at [27], his honour stated as follows:
the new court system of having registrars undertake interlocutory work should not be treated as an invitation to simply lodge review applications without careful consideration of the need for a review application, and the importance of properly using the court’s resources. a registrar’s hearing should not be used as a ‘dry run’ or a ‘practice run’ at a case, but rather the main event, with a review application there in the background, in a similar way to that of an appeal if it were a judge dealing with the matter. if the system is not approached in this manner, then litigants and practitioners can expect costs and other consequential orders, to ensure that the processes of the court are not misused or wasted.
the father’s rule 10.13 case to set aside the september orders
10.13 varying or setting aside orders   the court may at any time vary or set aside an order, if: (a) it was made in the absence of a party, or (b) it was obtained by fraud, or (c) it is interlocutory, or (d) it is an injunction or for the appointment of a receiver, or (e) it does not reflect the intention of the court, or (f) the party in whose favour it was made consents, or (g) there is a clerical mistake in the order, or (h) there is an error arising in the order from an accidental slip or omission. (2) subrule (1) does not affect the power of the court to vary or terminate the operation of an order by a further order.   it was made in the absence of a party, or (b) it was obtained by fraud, or (c) it is interlocutory, or (d) it is an injunction or for the appointment of a receiver, or (e) it does not reflect the intention of the court, or (f) the party in whose favour it was made consents, or (g) there is a clerical mistake in the order, or (h) there is an error arising in the order from an accidental slip or omission.   it was obtained by fraud, or (c) it is interlocutory, or (d) it is an injunction or for the appointment of a receiver, or (e) it does not reflect the intention of the court, or (f) the party in whose favour it was made consents, or (g) there is a clerical mistake in the order, or (h) there is an error arising in the order from an accidental slip or omission.   it is interlocutory, or (d) it is an injunction or for the appointment of a receiver, or (e) it does not reflect the intention of the court, or (f) the party in whose favour it was made consents, or (g) there is a clerical mistake in the order, or (h) there is an error arising in the order from an accidental slip or omission.   it is an injunction or for the appointment of a receiver, or (e) it does not reflect the intention of the court, or (f) the party in whose favour it was made consents, or (g) there is a clerical mistake in the order, or (h) there is an error arising in the order from an accidental slip or omission.   it does not reflect the intention of the court, or (f) the party in whose favour it was made consents, or (g) there is a clerical mistake in the order, or (h) there is an error arising in the order from an accidental slip or omission.   the party in whose favour it was made consents, or (g) there is a clerical mistake in the order, or (h) there is an error arising in the order from an accidental slip or omission.   there is a clerical mistake in the order, or (h) there is an error arising in the order from an accidental slip or omission.   there is an error arising in the order from an accidental slip or omission.  phasis added at (b)]
1. deception, use of false representation to gain an unjust advantage. 2 dishonest artifice or trick. 3 person who, or thing which, is other that he, she, or it claims to be.   obtained by fraud: his honour kirby p observed in wentworth v rogers (no 5) (1986) 6 nswlr 534, bc8601289 that:
... the burden of establishing the components necessary to warrant the drastic step of setting aside a judgment, allegedly affected by fraud or other relevant taint, lies on the party impugning the judgment. it is for that party to establish the fraud and to do so clearly. in summary, he or she must establish that the case is based on newly discovered facts, that the facts are material and such as to make it reasonably probable that the case will succeed, that they go beyond mere allegations of perjury on the part of witnesses at the trial, and that the opposing party who took advantage of the judgment is shown, by admissible evidence, to have been responsible for the fraud in such a way as to render it inequitable that such party should take the benefit of the judgment.
secondly, it must be shown, by the party asserting that a judgment was procured by fraud, that there has been a new discovery of something material, in the sense that fresh facts have been found which, by themselves or in combination with previously known facts, would provide a reason for setting aside the judgment. ... tations omitted)
secondly, it must be shown, by the party asserting that a judgment was procured by fraud, that there has been a new discovery of something material, in the sense that fresh facts have been found which, by themselves or in combination with previously known facts, would provide a reason for setting aside the judgment... this rule has an ancient lineage... it is based upon a number of grounds. there is a public interest in finality of litigation. parties ought not, by proceeding to impugn a judgment, to be permitted to relitigate matters which were the subject of the earlier proceedings which gave rise to the judgment. especially should they not be so permitted, if they move on nothing more than the evidence upon which they have previously failed. if they have evidence of fraud which may taint a judgment of the courts, they should not collude in such a consequence by refraining from raising their objection at the trial, thereby keeping the complaint in reserve. it is their responsibility to ensure that the taint of fraud is avoided and the integrity of the court's process preserved. [citations omitted, emphasis added]
the evidence of the father’s time phasis added]
mother – 3.5 days / 7 nights (as per your request and [child 1’s] habit) father – 3.5 days (mon, wed, sat, tue 4-6pm, fri 4-6.30pm). if [child 1] wants to stay longer or overnight father will accommodate...
monday... 3pm-6pm- time with father (mostly [sporting activities], movies, etc)... tuesday... 3pm-6pm- time with father (mostly [sporting activities] etc) ... thursday... 9am-3.30pm- time with father.... saturday... 3pm-6pm – time with (mother)/father (alternating weekly) ... sunday ... 8am-5.30pm – time with (mother)/father (alternating weekly) [emphasis added]
a. each monday – from around 1pm until late, b. each tuesday – 2pm until late, c. each thursday – from around 8.30am until late, d. alternating saturday and sunday.
hi [the father], [the child] is now enrolled in after school [classes]... he has asked to enrol from this week so he will now be doing these classes on mondays and tuesdays until 5.30pm, and the in-person class will be until 6pm in [suburb a]. ... [the child] asked to do these afternoons with you, so from this week he is going to be spending thursdays and with you during the week, which also minimises any conflicts we have between us during handovers which [the child] witnesses...   the position that the mother intentionally omitted reference to the monday & tuesday time in her affidavit’s and in running the case, and falsely asserted she supported the relationship between the father and the child, and (b) the sjr was actually misled and made the determination unaware of the monday & tuesday time facts and the failure to support the relationship, and (c) the sjr would have made a different decision had she known of the monday & tuesday time and the mother’s attitude to the relationship, and (d) hence the decision of 28 september 2021 was “obtained by fraud”.   the sjr was actually misled and made the determination unaware of the monday & tuesday time facts and the failure to support the relationship, and (c) the sjr would have made a different decision had she known of the monday & tuesday time and the mother’s attitude to the relationship, and (d) hence the decision of 28 september 2021 was “obtained by fraud”.   the sjr would have made a different decision had she known of the monday & tuesday time and the mother’s attitude to the relationship, and (d) hence the decision of 28 september 2021 was “obtained by fraud”.   hence the decision of 28 september 2021 was “obtained by fraud”.
leave to extend time to review the september orders
60ca: child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests
determining child's best interests (1) subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and  ) to spend time with the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
ms worland, i notify you 7 days in advance of the hearing on 3 june 2022, that: i will seek orders substantially the same as at the hearing on 28 september 2021 and in my subsequent applications on 22 dec 2021 and 4 february 2022. i am willing to dissolve the hearing by consent in the best interests of all parties. 3. following are non-negotiables: equal time during school holidays (by way of suspension of order 2 (28 sep 2021) during those holidays). 1 extra day and extra night per week during non-school holiday time. setting aside orders 3 and 12 (28 sept 2021). discharge of [mr l]. i am open to dropping perjury charges if your client agrees to all of my non-negotiables by the end of this week. i will not engage in any other discussions if your client does not agree to my non-negotiables. offer expires this friday at 3pm. regards. [emphasis added]   at the time of seeking leave out of time in the filed 15 april 2022 review application the standard time period of 21 days had been passed by 5 ½ months, or many times the standard 21 days. (b) at the time of seeking an extension of time to review the father had already agitated to vary the orders he seeks to review on four previous points. firstly, by the filing of the december application in a case, secondly by filing the february application in a case, thirdly by filing the minute of orders sought as ordered on 23 february 2022 and fourthly by his submissions on 9 march 2022. (c) the lack of apparent objective injustice or objective firm indications that the orders maybe contrary to the welfare of the child. (d) the impugned orders actually provide for more time, including overnight time, and in a regime that rolls through the school holidays, than what the father enjoyed prior to the orders and are contrary to the orders sought by the mother in her affidavit and outline of case for the september hearing.   at the time of seeking an extension of time to review the father had already agitated to vary the orders he seeks to review on four previous points. firstly, by the filing of the december application in a case, secondly by filing the february application in a case, thirdly by filing the minute of orders sought as ordered on 23 february 2022 and fourthly by his submissions on 9 march 2022. (c) the lack of apparent objective injustice or objective firm indications that the orders maybe contrary to the welfare of the child. (d) the impugned orders actually provide for more time, including overnight time, and in a regime that rolls through the school holidays, than what the father enjoyed prior to the orders and are contrary to the orders sought by the mother in her affidavit and outline of case for the september hearing.   the lack of apparent objective injustice or objective firm indications that the orders maybe contrary to the welfare of the child. (d) the impugned orders actually provide for more time, including overnight time, and in a regime that rolls through the school holidays, than what the father enjoyed prior to the orders and are contrary to the orders sought by the mother in her affidavit and outline of case for the september hearing.   the impugned orders actually provide for more time, including overnight time, and in a regime that rolls through the school holidays, than what the father enjoyed prior to the orders and are contrary to the orders sought by the mother in her affidavit and outline of case for the september hearing.
the review of the march orders
...should not lightly entertain an application to reverse an earlier custody order. to do so would be to invite endless litigation for change is an ever present factor in human affairs. therefore, the court would need to be satisfied by the applicant that, to quote barber j, there is some changed circumstance which will justify such a serious step, some new factor arising or, at any rate, some factor which was not [disclosed] at the previous hearing which would have been material the purpose of the principle is to discourage endless litigation. in in the marriage of mcenearney [1980] famca 43 nygh j noted: the last thing, of course, that this court would wish to see would be a perennial football match between parents, who, because the strict principles of res judicata are not applicable might seek to canvass again and again the question of custody of a child with the enormous psychological harm which they would be inflicting not only upon each other but especially upon the child. in in the marriage of f and n [1987] famca 40, nygh j (with evatt cj and burton j agreeing) said: rice and asplund in fact makes the point that this court should be reluctant in assuming jurisdiction too soon after there has been a full and adequate hearing of the custodial dispute between the parties. generally speaking, a court as a matter of practice should not assume such jurisdiction unless there is a change of circumstances that has occurred since the last determination. in in the marriage of newling & mole [1987] famca 21, (1987) 11 fam lr 974 at 976-7 nygh j, with whom barblett & fogarty jj agreed, said: what this rule really illustrates is that it is, generally speaking, not in the interests of the child to have repeated applications concerning its custody and access before the court...
60 at [81], his honour continued:
where an application is dismissed at a preliminary stage, it is not dismissed for some technical reason, such as the failure of a party to appear or some lack of compliance with form and procedure but rather because, assuming the evidence of the applicant is accepted, there is an insufficient change of circumstance shown to justify embarking on a hearing. though sometimes unstated, the underlying conclusion will or ought be that the interests of the child in not being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s welfare than to allow the application to continue. although the principle is commonly referred to as the rice v asplund principle, the principle itself and the tests for applying it have evolved over time. whilst many of the relevant cases refer.
62 in sps & pls (2008) flc 93-363 sets out that the principle is one that:
...where there has already been a final order in respect of parenting issues, before the court embarks upon a rehearing of those issues, the applicant must establish a significant change of circumstances
63 however, the full court noted in sps & pls that:
at whatever stage of a hearing the rule is applied, its application should remain merely a manifestation of the “best interests principle”
and
[52] while it was a matter of discretion as to whether a judge embarked upon a full hearing of a matter or determined the threshold question as to a change in circumstances, that in no way derogated from the general principle expressed in rice & asplund “that fresh applications for custody should not be entertained unless there exists a substantial change in circumstances”
64 in walter & walter [2016] famcafc 56 murphy j noted that
109. the decisions will include a consideration of nature and cogency of the evidence as to material change and the nature and extent of the orders sought to be changed. the decisions will also ordinarily involve a consideration of the notorious fact – accepted as such both by authority and by mr north in his arguments – that continued litigation and the re-agitation of contested issues about children has the potential to cause significant harm to them.
65 in in the marriage of zabaneh [1986] famca 18 evatt cj observed:
the welfare of children may ultimately demand that issues concerning access, custody and so forth, and so on, be reconsidered, but only when there is some evidence of an underlying change in the circumstances, whether that be in the attitudes of the parties, or the needs or circumstances of the children. the fact that time has elapsed or a considerable time, may be relevant, but it is not the only factor to take into account.
66 in carriel & lendrum [2015] famcafc 43 the full court considered:
[57] in a case where the principle in rice & asplund arises for consideration, there are two circumstances which are central to the decision. first, there will already exist a parenting order and, axiomatically, the terms of that order will reflect the best interests of the child/ren at the time of its making. second, the fact that an order has been made reflects that disputation between parties to a parenting dispute, such dispute being inherently contrary to the best interests of the child/ren whilst it exists, has been brought to an end by a curial order. those twin circumstances dictate the conclusion that it cannot logically be in the best interests of the child/ren to embark upon further litigation enquiring as to the child/ren’s best interests unless it is first demonstrated that a sufficient change in circumstances has occurred since the parenting order was made.
67 in marsden & winch [2009] famcafc 152, the full court said:
48. in summary, the best interests issue arises because there are so many changes in the lives of families that the changed circumstances that will permissibly allow re-litigation of a decision must be circumscribed, otherwise there would exist in some cases the spectre of endless litigation finalising only when the child attains 18 years of age and the courts no longer have jurisdiction. 49. however, even that simple formulation must be subservient to the nature of the application itself. this is the genesis of the “rule” in rice & asplund and as warnick j says it is founded on the notion that continuous litigation over the child or children is not generally in their interests. it is usually hoped that the determination of a controversy concerning children by a court will result in at least a reasonable period of stability of those arrangements and freedom from the stressful and conflictual effects of litigation on both parents and children. in addition, recent research demonstrates that conflict between parties is itself harmful to children. 50. nevertheless, there are significant changes that occur and which do require a court to reconsider decisions previously made. whether in a particular case a court should be willing to embark upon another hearing concerning the child and parent, or whether to do so would itself be demonstrably contrary to the best interests of the child, is a decision to be made in each particular case. how is that decision to be made? the court must look at: the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based. (2) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. (3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation. searson & searson [2017] famcafc 119 makes it clear that the onus is on the party seeking to vary the orders to establish that there has been a sufficient change of circumstances to warrant re opening the parenting matters, and for the purposes of the exercise the evidence must be assumed to be accepted. shan & prasad [2020] famcafc 189 makes it clear that when a hearing on this issue is conducted on the papers, the evidence of the party seeking the change must be taken at its highest when deciding whether a sufficient change of circumstances has occurred. in miller & harrington [2008] famcafc 150 the full court noted that a consideration of the rice & asplund principle is conducted pursuant to division 12a of the act. the full court noted:
included among the mandatory requirements upon a court are: the obligations to (as seen) “decide which of the issues in the proceedings require full investigation and which may be disposed of summarily” (s 69zq(1)(a)) and to “deal with as many aspects of the matter as it can on a single occasion” (s 69zq(1)(g)). the provisions of s 69zr(1), empower the court to “make a finding of fact in relation to the proceedings”, to “determine a matter arising out of the proceedings” and to “make an order in relation to an issue arising out of the proceedings” if the court considers that “it may assist in the determination of the proceedings”. the section goes on to provide (s 69zr(2)) that the court may do any of the matters mentioned “... at the same time as making final orders”. the terms of s 69zn of the act, which set out the “principles for conducting child-related proceedings” also apply to a hearing in which the rule in rice and asplund is applied at a preliminary stage. in particular, s 69zn(3) and (5) provide: (3) the first principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings. ... (5) the third principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted in a way that will safeguard: (a) the child concerned against family violence, child abuse and child neglect, and (b) the parties to the proceedings against family violence. in cdw & lve [2015] wasca 247 the supreme court of western australia held, on appeal, that there ‘can be no doubt’ that the dismissal of an application to vary parenting orders by following the principle in rice v asplund is an interlocutory order. whilst the principle originating in rice & asplund has been in existence for some time, it remains good law. in elmi & munro [2019] famcafc 138 the full court held: there is no scope for doubting the correctness of rice and asplund in any event. it has been explained and applied in many full court decisions.
... the court in its orders made on 28 september 2021 made a provision for the parties to agree on any further time in writing. multiple informal requests have been made by [the child] and i to the mother about reinstating monday and tuesday time as well as agreeing on half of this summer school holidays time. this was done verbally and via a fun video request, which the mother, her lawyer and the icl have been in possession of since late november. [the child] really wanted to go for an educational adventure trip to [region w] with me for a week, to go camping with me for a further week and spend another week attending school holiday workshops with me. mother ignored all requests by [the child]. i also made multiple requests in writing to reflect para 35 citing order 2(e) made on 28th september. mother and her lawyer ignored and subsequently denied all requests for [the child] to spend any further time with me during school holidays explaining that they thought time provided was more than sufficient. fixed time provided in the orders amounts to 3 weekends and daytime on thursdays over almost 8-week school holiday period (inclusive of starting and ending weekends). ... in the past month, [the child] stopped volunteering information about his days, to me and to other people. for example, i didn’t see him for a week and was very curious how he was. i asked how his swim class was and he responded that he didn’t know. i asked whether he went to his swim class, and he responded that he didn’t know. later he told me that he missed 2 of his latest swim classes because his mother couldn’t take him there and the nanny had to look after both [the child] and another child. i said to him that next time he could tell mum that they should call me, and i would try to take him there. it is my concern that the mother is attempting to block a normal communication between the father and the child by telling the child that he is not to share information about his life with the father.
review of application to discharge the icl
36. i seek a discharge of [mr l] from the role of the icl for the child for the following reasons. [mr l] has shown lack of competence in parenting and psychological matters, displayed poor organisational and record keeping skills, showed complete disinterest in the child’s welfare and wishes, ignored most of the substantive issues addressed to him, displayed bias towards the applicant on several occasions, refused to confirm his independence from the respondent’s solicitor when questioned about it based on third party evidence. specific examples include:
a. at the beginning of his involvement [mr l] confused the addresses of the parties and sent all correspondence for both parties to the respondent for several days until alerted just before mediation day. b. [mr l] communicated with the respondent’s solicitor via her private email. that email was not on court record or known to me. c. [mr l] did not have all relevant documents for the mediation on 24 november 2021 yet chose to attend unprepared. d. respondent’s solicitor regularly overloads [mr l] and me with numerous emails aimed to confuse and divert from important issues. [mr l] informed me on several occasions including on the morning of the last directions hearing on 8 december 2021, that he in fact had not had the time to go over any documents. yet he didn’t make the court aware of it and made recommendations at that hearing affecting the child. e. on the morning of the hearing on 8 december 2021, i called [mr l] at 8.50am on his mobile (as per his email signature details) to enquire what his position would be on the filings, since he had not responded in writing. [mr l] berated me for calling him outside of business hours and on his mobile. [mr l] further stated he had no time to read any of the material supplied to him under order 11 from 15 september 2021. f. [mr l] berated me for being several days late with the payment while not raising even the slightest issue with the respondent even though the respondent did not pay their portion of the fee. g. [mr l] misled legal aid as to my position on a certain matter despite him having my position in writing at least a day earlier. [mr l] refused to acknowledge that he misled legal aid and berated me for setting the record straight with legal aid. h. [mr l] ignored all evidence from the child. i. [mr l], despite authority to do so, did not attempt to contact the elderly nanny, who is the only other person substantially involved in the child’s life or anyone else in relation to the child. j. [mr l] showed lack of competence in parenting matters including not understanding the difference in skillsets of paediatricians and psychologists. k. [mr l] displayed bias against the applicant based on allegations of domestic violence by the respondent, despite applicant alleging past violence from the respondent, and despite there being no evidence to support respondent’s claims against the applicant which the applicant vehemently has been denying since day 1. the icl denied any conduct that would cause him to be discharged. the father made submissions expanding upon those points. i ultimately determined not to discharge the icl and i gave brief reasons for that during the course of the hearing, so that the matter could progress to dealing with the other matters raised by the father. my more fulsome reasons for that decision follow.
allegations of misconduct or unprofessional conduct by the icl the role and responsibilities of an icl are set out in section 68la of the act. specifically, section 68la(2)(a) requires the icl to form an independent view, based on the evidence available to the independent children’s lawyer, of what is in the best interests of the child. section 68la(5)(a) requires the icl to act impartially in dealings with the parties. the full court, in the matter of in the marriage of bennett (1990) famlr 397, held:
we think that the role of the separate representative is broadly analogous to that of counsel assisting the royal commission in the sense that his or her duty is to act impartially but, if thought appropriate, to make submissions suggesting the adoption by the court of a particular course of action, if he or she considers that the adoption of such a course is in the best interests of the child. unless the separate representative does this it seems to us that there is little purpose in having a separate representative in langmeil v grange (no.3) [2011] famca 171 dawe j reviewed some of the authorities on this point. at [30], her honour said: the authorities upon which i rely include the judgment of chisholm j, as he then was in t v l [2000] famca 351, (2000) flc 93-056. that decision has subsequently been referred to with approval by the other judges of the court. the full court in the matter of w and m and w [2006] famca 512, (a decision of the chief justice and warnick and may jj in 2006) relied upon the decision of lloyd and lloyd and child representative (2000) flc 93-045 and his honour’s decision of t v l (supra). they said, quoting chisholm j:
an application to remove a child representative is not strictly covered by the principle that the child’s best interests must be treated as the paramount consideration. those interests will normally be a matter of great and probably overwhelming importance. while a child representative should be removed if there are proper reasons for doing so, it would be quite wrong for a court to remove such a representative merely because a litigant has taken the view that the representative is acting contrary to that litigant’s position or from that litigant’s point of view, contrary to the child’s best interests. in gillen & lindo [2021] fedcfamc1f 7 gill j considered the role of the independent children’s lawyer as follows:
however, it must also be acknowledged that the icl is called upon to discharge her functions in a context of factual uncertainty. she is also called upon, in exercising her independent judgment, to do so in a legislative context where the considerations often point in different directions, particularly the primary considerations. it should be acknowledged that even where determinations made within this context are made judicially, as distinct from the exercise of professional judgment required of an icl, case law emphasises that the one set of facts leads to no single correct answer. in lloyd & lloyd and child representative (2000) flc 93-045 holden cj considered circumstances that may warrant the removal of an icl (at [11]): without attempting to be exhaustive, there are certain circumstances, which, in my view, would lead the court to consider discharging a separate representative. some of those circumstances are: (i) if there is evidence that the separate representative had, in any way, acted contrary to the children’s interests, (ii) if there is evidence before the court that the separate representative had acted incompetently in a professional sense, (iii) if it is apparent that the separate representative has demonstrated a lack of professional objectivity, or (iv) if to continue to act would involve a breach of a fiduciary duty or a conflict of interest.   if there is evidence that the separate representative had, in any way, acted contrary to the children’s interests, (ii) if there is evidence before the court that the separate representative had acted incompetently in a professional sense, (iii) if it is apparent that the separate representative has demonstrated a lack of professional objectivity, or (iv) if to continue to act would involve a breach of a fiduciary duty or a conflict of interest.  ) if there is evidence before the court that the separate representative had acted incompetently in a professional sense, (iii) if it is apparent that the separate representative has demonstrated a lack of professional objectivity, or (iv) if to continue to act would involve a breach of a fiduciary duty or a conflict of interest.  i) if it is apparent that the separate representative has demonstrated a lack of professional objectivity, or (iv) if to continue to act would involve a breach of a fiduciary duty or a conflict of interest.  ) if to continue to act would involve a breach of a fiduciary duty or a conflict of interest.
24 in gillen & lindo [2021] fedcfamc1f 7 gill j expanded upon that, saying:
what is necessary to bear out this criticism is that the position taken by the icl be so clearly unreasonable to be no exercise of the icl’s role. that is an inherently difficult position to make good where, as here, there are considerations that point in either direction... it may, in due course, differ from the ultimate determination of the case. similarly, it may in due course differ from any further position articulated by the icl. however, that does not render it amenable to the extreme criticism brought against it which is essentially a criticism of the manner in which the icl weighed competing considerations in forming a view as to best interests. on 9 february 2022 there was a directions hearing before judicial registrar maitland. the icl submitted draft orders in relation to a family report. the father noted that the icl had had two months since the previous hearing to submit those draft orders. it was not expressly submitted by the father, but in the interests of exploring all possible grounds upon which there might be a basis to discharge the icl, i will consider that the father may have been suggesting that the delay in providing the proposed orders means that [mr l] has not properly discharged his duties in this matter. to the extent that the father is making that argument, i reject it. it is not at all uncommon for parties, including independent children’s lawyers, to provide a minute of proposed orders shortly prior to, or at times at, a directions hearing. it may be the case that a party or an icl is awaiting further information before settling upon a position. it may be that the party or icl has amended their position during the course of a hearing based upon things said by the other parties or by the court. the orders proposed by the icl were not substantive parenting orders, they were orders, as i understand it, for the appointment of an expert and other orders of a procedural nature that ought be the subject of a directions hearing before a judicial registrar. providing a minute of those types of orders, at that type of hearing, is not of itself misconduct by the icl or acting in a manner that is consistent with his obligations in section 68la. at that directions hearing, it is common ground that the judicial registrar stood the matter down and asked the icl to speak with the father before making orders. however what the father initially said occurred was that the judicial registrar asked the icl to “come back to her next week”. the father submitted that the icl did not discuss with him a proposed order for him to pay the entire costs of the single expert, and had previously submitted to the court that both parents had the capacity to pay. according to the father, a week or so later he received orders that required him to pay the entire costs of the single expert. i asked the father to clarify what he was saying occurred, and whether he was submitting that [mr l] and judicial registrar maitland had a conversation that he was not a party to. the following exchange took place:
the court: i just want to be clear on what you’re suggesting occurred. are you saying that [mr l] had a conversation with judicial registrar maitland that you weren’t a party to? the father: correct. the court: that didn’t occur in open court? the father: correct. the court: that’s a very serious allegation, [the father], not just against [mr l], but also against judicial registrar maitland that you’re making. to suggest that a judicial officer of this court and a lawyer of this court have gone behind your back and had a secret conversation, that’s a very serious allegation. the father: it wasn’t secret, so [mr l] after the hearing on the 9th of february at about four o’clock in the afternoon [mr l] made a call to me and said that such conversation was gonna happen some time next week. the court: what, a conversation between him and the registrar without you? the father: correct. the court: this is the question that i am asking, you’re saying that there was a conversation between [mr l] and judicial registrar maitland behind your back? the father: yes. the court: and when do you say that conversation took place? the father: i understand it happened the uh, the week, uh, i understand it happened the week beginning monday 14th of february. the court: and how did you become aware of this conversation that took place, if you weren’t a party to it? the father: well, [mr l] notified me at 4 o’clock on the 9th of february that he would have that conversation, and also the orders-- the court: how did he notify you, was that orally or by email? the father: orally. i can check my emails if i do not— the court: no, no, i’m just trying to ascertain what it is – because as i say this is very serious, it’s serious professional misconduct that you’re alleging, so if that is what is going to be alleged i need to be very sure that i understand precisely what it is that you’re saying occurred. so, what, are you suggesting that, what, there was no hearing? there was no court hearing so are you suggesting that he got on the phone to the registrar or spoke to her on the street or something like that? is that what you’re saying happened? i’m just a little bit confused about how this conversation was supposed to have taken place. the father: well, in fact the registrar at the hearing on the 9th of february suggested that, at the end of the hearing she suggested that [mr l] speak to me that same day -- the court: yeah, and that happened -- the father: and that he speak to her again next week. the court: [mr l] can you assist me? i have, according to the court file, there was a hearing on the 9th of february before judicial registrar maitland where that order was made about the report, i then don’t have any hearings between then and the hearing that i conducted on the 23rd of february. was there some mention or some involvement of judicial registrar matiland between the 9th of february and the 23rd? mr l: not that i’m aware of. on the date that he’s talking about a minute from this office was circulated to the case manager, [the father] and ms warlond, just a standard order, form of appointing an expert and list of potential experts, that was the only document circulated. i was asked by the registrar to have a discussion with the parties. i rang [the father] i also tried to get onto ms warlond who wasn’t available and i had a discussion with him about the proceedings in general, a generic conversation and suggested strongly that he go and see a lawyer and get advice about the way these matters proceed, that’s it. there was no conversation about me picking or choosing or other conversation with the registrar about the expert. the order for the expert subsequently was published on the portal with no further or no actual involvement by me. a letter regarding a list of experts was circulated, [the father] has amended his choice based on the first available in time, an expert letter was forwarded to the parties on monday of this week and i have just restrained from sending that because part of the application today was the cost. so i’m not sure if he’s confused, but there was no conversation by me to [the father] saying that i was going to talk to registrar matiland about the way the matter was going to proceed in the terms or choice of expert.
... allegations of bias on the part of the icl in his oral submissions i asked the father to expand upon what he meant in his affidavit when he said the icl was biased. the example given by the father was that [mr l]’s case outline said that the father had engaged in “prodigious communication with the other party”. the father asserts that this is not supported by the facts. the father asserts that all his communication is what is required by law, whereas the mother bombarded him with messages sometimes five times per day. according to the father, the icl has chosen to portray only one side of the argument. no party provided me any evidence of the correspondence in question. the father also submitted that the icl is biased because of the way he went about engaging the single expert. prior to the orders of 9 february being made, according to the father the icl circulated a list of seven or eight proposed experts, and from his perspective, there was broad agreement on the expert. on 9 february 2022 the following orders were made: that unless the single expert is otherwise agreed, the independent children’s lawyer shall provide to the parties within seven (7) days of the publication of these orders: the names of three (3) proposed single experts including their fees and availability for the interviews. within seven (7) days of receipt of the panel, the applicant and respondent shall each: nominate one (1) of the proposed single experts to undertake the report. the independent children’s lawyer is to then nominate on the single expert out of the preferences provided by the parties. in the event the parties fail to nominate a single expert within seven (7) days of receiving the list of proposed experts, the icl shall nominate the single expert. the father submits that the icl, in accordance with that order, circulated a list of three proposed experts. the expert the father had initially preferred from the previous panel of seven or eight was not on the icl’s proposed list of three. the father wrote to the icl objecting to the expert the mother had agreed to as he was not satisfied with her qualifications. the father proposed going back to the original expert he had agreed to, or for the icl to “pick someone independent”. the father did not choose one of the three experts on the list given by the icl. the icl then chose the expert nominated by the mother. the father further alleges bias by the icl in his making a submission to the court at the directions hearing that the father should focus on the future, and that in a few years’ time this family may not have to follow any orders... ... in terms of the law relating to bias, holden cj in lloyd & lloyd & the child representative (2000) flc 93-045 said:
a court should treat allegations of lack of impartiality with caution. to do otherwise would leave every [icl] in the perilous position of facing an application that he or she be discharged because of unfounded allegations or perceptions made by one or other of the parties. there is a need on the part of a [icl] to retain his or her impartiality, that is, to be fair to all concerned. however that does not mean he or she must take or not take steps in the proceedings simply because one or other of the parties does or does not want her or him to take that step. it would be an intolerable situation if a party could successfully apply to have a [icl] removed simply because that party perceived that the [icl] was not “on side” or that the tide was not running in his or her favour.
39 forrest j in dean & susskind [2012] famca 897 said at [24]:
o’reilly j in bondai and bretton (no 2) ...express[ed] the view that not only in cases of actual impartiality of an icl but also in cases of perceived or apprehended impartiality of an icl should consideration be given to discharging that icl. her honour, comparing the principles that should apply to those principles as apply to the consideration of the question of whether a judge has demonstrated actual or apprehended bias, went on to say: it is fundamental, however, that even in cases of alleged apprehended bias, some actual conduct of the person sought to be impugned be identified, and that there be a finding that such conduct, in the view of the objective bystander, realistically could give rise to the opinion that the person is not impartial.
40 in pagliarella [1993] famca 64, (1993) 16 fam lr 688, hannon j noted that:
it is also important to observe that, while the discussion of principles from the case law in relation to apprehended bias invariably involves judicial officers, the principles are applied analogously in relation to applications of the kind currently before the court that involve other protagonists in a proceeding, such as an icl. as stated by the high court in michael wilson & partners limited v nicholls [2011] hca 48, at [31] – [33] (internal references omitted), the relevant test is: [31] it has been established by a series of decisions of this court that the test to be applied in australia in determining whether a judge is disqualified by reason of the appearance of bias (in this case, in the form of prejudgment) is whether a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that the judge might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the question the judge is required to decide. [32] as the plurality in johnson v johnson explained, [“t]he hypothetical reasonable observer of the judge's conduct is postulated in order to emphasise that the test is objective, is founded in the need for public confidence in the judiciary, and is not based purely upon the assessment by some judges of the capacity or performance of their colleagues. [33] because the test is objective it is important to keep an inquiry about apprehension of bias distinct from any inquiry about actual bias. an inquiry about actual bias in the form of prejudgment would require assessment of the state of mind of the judge in question. no doubt that would have to be done, at least for the most part, on the basis of what the judge had said and done. but to allow an inquiry about whether the judge had in fact prejudged some issue to enter into a debate about what a fair-minded lay observer might apprehend is to introduce considerations that are irrelevant to the issue that is to be decided when a party submits that there is or was a reasonable apprehension of bias.
the mother’s application for costs
application to make further submissions  i have determined that the rule 10.13(1)(b) application to set aside the september orders fails and should be dismissed, (b) i have dismissed the application for leave, or to extent time, to review the september orders, (c) the father has not demonstrated new facts and circumstances sufficient to answer the rule in rice & asplund.   i have dismissed the application for leave, or to extent time, to review the september orders, (c) the father has not demonstrated new facts and circumstances sufficient to answer the rule in rice & asplund.   the father has not demonstrated new facts and circumstances sufficient to answer the rule in rice & asplund.
associate: dated: 2 august 2022
dated: 2 august 2022