last updated: 23 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mendez & navarro [2022] fedcfamc2f 1149
orders
the court orders that:
conciliation conference:  ensure that all documents required to be exchanged between parties pursuant to chapter 6 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) have been exchanged, (b) ensure that any private expert report that is relevant to the proceedings has been filed, (c) provide to the court by email to the relevant case manager at ...@fcfcoa.gov.au and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   ensure that any private expert report that is relevant to the proceedings has been filed, (c) provide to the court by email to the relevant case manager at ...@fcfcoa.gov.au and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   provide to the court by email to the relevant case manager at ...@fcfcoa.gov.au and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  i) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  i) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.
adjournment:
and the court notes that:  the total costs and disbursements incurred by the party in the proceeding to date, (b) an estimate of the anticipated costs expected to be incurred in each remaining stage of the proceeding, and (c) an estimate of the likely duration of the final hearing and the total anticipated costs and disbursements expected to be incurred for the remainder of the proceeding.   an estimate of the anticipated costs expected to be incurred in each remaining stage of the proceeding, and (c) an estimate of the likely duration of the final hearing and the total anticipated costs and disbursements expected to be incurred for the remainder of the proceeding.   an estimate of the likely duration of the final hearing and the total anticipated costs and disbursements expected to be incurred for the remainder of the proceeding.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
legal principles
44 institution of proceedings... proceedings in relation to de facto relationships   subject to subsection (6), a party to a de facto relationship may apply for an order under section 90se, 90sg or 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, only if: (a) the application is made within the period (the standard application period) of: (i) 2 years after the end of the de facto relationship, or (ii) 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or   the application is made within the period (the standard application period) of: (i) 2 years after the end of the de facto relationship, or (ii) 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or   2 years after the end of the de facto relationship, or (ii) 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or  ) 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or   both parties to the de facto relationship consent to the application.
... (6) the court may grant the party leave to apply after the end of the standard application period if the court is satisfied that: (a) hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.
the defended threshold hearing
de facto partnerships
the asset pool
assets in 2014
the timeshare
the b street, suburb c home
contributions
evidence in a defended threshold hearing
post-separation
the caveat
other assets
the applicable law
... if the court is satisfied that hardship would be caused if leave were not granted, the court may exercise the discretion which is conferred upon it by sec. 44(3) to grant leave or it may refuse such leave. section 44(4) inhibits the granting of leave unless the requisite case is made out, but it does not provide that leave must be granted if the court is satisfied that hardship would be caused. the determination how this discretion should be exercised, must depend on the facts of the particular case. due weight must be given to the expressed legislation intendment that ordinarily, proceedings should be commenced within a year from a date of the decree nisi, and the general policy of the act which appears from sec. 44(3) and sec. 81 that financial relationships between the spouses should, wherever possible be brought to finality within a reasonable time after the dissolution of the marriage. hence, such matters as the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay and prejudice occasioned to the respondent by reason of the delay, and the strength on the merits of the applicant's case, and the degree of the hardship which would be suffered unless leave were granted, are matters affecting the exercise of the discretion. these matters are not necessarily the only ones. on the other hand, sec. 44(3) and 44(4) point to the conclusion that the legislature intended to confer power on the court to grant leave to institute proceedings in order to avoid hardship. having regard to the nature of the jurisdiction which this court exercises, this power should be exercised liberally in order to avoid hardship, but nevertheless in a manner, which would not render nugatory the requirement that proceedings should be instituted within a year from the decree nisi.
fundamental to that is the determination of the quality or character of the potential claim.
the asset pool
extent of hardship considerations
discretionary considerations in tamaniego & tamaniego [2010] famcafc 254 o’ryan j said at paragraph 162:
as to the second part of the exercise, the fundamental issue in any application for extension of time is whether this will enable the court to do justice between the parties: see gallo v dawson [1990] hca 30, (1990) 93 alr 479. in gallo v dawson mchugh j referred to the need to have regard to the history of the proceedings, the conduct of the parties, the nature of the litigation and the consequences to the parties of the grant or refusal of the extension of time ... in summary, in considering the second question the court may have regard to a number of factors that include whether the applicant has an adequate explanation for the delay in bringing the proceedings and whether to grant leave would prejudice or impose hardship on the respondent to the application for leave or other persons. in althaus & althaus (1982) flc 91-233 at 77,267 to 77,268, evatt cj stated, and the full court held that: the requirement that the applicant under sec. 44(3) give an explanation of the delay in bringing proceedings in my view requires a consideration of the whole period from the date of the decree nisi to the lodging of the application. it requires the court to consider whether the wife took all reasonable steps to pursue her claim or whether, on the other hand, she acted at any time as if she had no intention of proceeding or pursuing any claim at all against the husband. it requires the court to consider whether it can reach conclusions as to why the proceedings were started beyond the time lodged and whether those proceedings are attributable to default on the part of the applicant. (our emphasis)
77. of interest in this case evatt cj added at 77,268:
“where hardship to the applicant is established and there is no question of prejudice to the respondent, the court should not seek to raise artificial barriers if the applicant has behaved in a reasonably diligent manner in prosecuting her claim.” (our emphasis)
... as was found by the federal magistrate, the delay in instituting proceedings occurred first because the husband did not want to receive money from any property division while he was bankrupt as the money might then be claimed by his creditors and secondly at a time when his second wife might make a claim on some of the money. that the husband took a deliberate course of avoiding finalising any financial settlement with the wife to avoid his creditors and his second wife are significant matters that weigh against the exercise of discretion. further, as we have indicated, despite the letter written to the trustee in bankruptcy by the husband’s solicitor in which he disavowed ever having an interest in the two blocks of land on t, the husband now asserts a claim to an interest in that land in this court. to permit the husband to pursue such a claim would be to allow this court to assist the husband in effecting his avoidance of the claims of his creditors. this is a significant consideration. [emphasis added]
prejudice considerations
conclusion
associate: dated: 29 august 2022
dated: 29 august 2022