last updated: 8 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
robb & harper [2022] fedcfamc2f 1047
orders
the court orders that:  the father to pay the costs of his sessions and x’s sessions, (b) the mother to pay the costs of her sessions, and (c) the parties to share equally in the costs of any report,   the mother to pay the costs of her sessions, and (c) the parties to share equally in the costs of any report,   the parties to share equally in the costs of any report,
and the parties shall follow all directions of the therapist in relation to therapy, including but not limited to x’s attendance and treatment, including engagement with any alternate or additional treaters.  copies of the court documents filed in these proceedings since 1 april 2019 including the affidavit of dr c dated 25 october 2019, (b) the family reports of mr d dated 22 february 2021 and 6 april 2021, (c) the child impact report of ms e dated 8 april 2022, (d) the section 69zw report prepared by child protection and dated 1 may 2022, (e) the family report of ms f dated 6 june 2022, and (f) all orders made in these proceedings since 1 april 2019.   the family reports of mr d dated 22 february 2021 and 6 april 2021, (c) the child impact report of ms e dated 8 april 2022, (d) the section 69zw report prepared by child protection and dated 1 may 2022, (e) the family report of ms f dated 6 june 2022, and (f) all orders made in these proceedings since 1 april 2019.   the child impact report of ms e dated 8 april 2022, (d) the section 69zw report prepared by child protection and dated 1 may 2022, (e) the family report of ms f dated 6 june 2022, and (f) all orders made in these proceedings since 1 april 2019.   the section 69zw report prepared by child protection and dated 1 may 2022, (e) the family report of ms f dated 6 june 2022, and (f) all orders made in these proceedings since 1 april 2019.   the family report of ms f dated 6 june 2022, and (f) all orders made in these proceedings since 1 april 2019.   all orders made in these proceedings since 1 april 2019.   the father shall exercise sole parental responsibility for x, and shall notify the mother of any decisions he has made with respect to x’s long-term care, welfare and development as soon as practicable after the decision has been made, (b) in the event x contacts or communicates with the mother, the mother shall not respond to such contact or communication and shall report such communications to the father via email forthwith, (c) in the event x attends upon the mother at her home or any other location save as explicitly outlined in these orders, the mother shall report same to the father and shall do all things necessary to facilitate x’s return to the father, (d) the father shall provide a weekly written email update to the mother by 10:00pm each thursday outlining any issues in how x is managing the change to her residential arrangements and any other pertinent matters, (e) the mother be at liberty to contact x’s school by way of email, to obtain updates in relation to x’s progress, and the parties or either of them shall provide a copy of this order to the school as authorisation for same, and (f) the mother otherwise be restrained from contacting or personally attending upon x’s school.   in the event x contacts or communicates with the mother, the mother shall not respond to such contact or communication and shall report such communications to the father via email forthwith, (c) in the event x attends upon the mother at her home or any other location save as explicitly outlined in these orders, the mother shall report same to the father and shall do all things necessary to facilitate x’s return to the father, (d) the father shall provide a weekly written email update to the mother by 10:00pm each thursday outlining any issues in how x is managing the change to her residential arrangements and any other pertinent matters, (e) the mother be at liberty to contact x’s school by way of email, to obtain updates in relation to x’s progress, and the parties or either of them shall provide a copy of this order to the school as authorisation for same, and (f) the mother otherwise be restrained from contacting or personally attending upon x’s school.   in the event x attends upon the mother at her home or any other location save as explicitly outlined in these orders, the mother shall report same to the father and shall do all things necessary to facilitate x’s return to the father, (d) the father shall provide a weekly written email update to the mother by 10:00pm each thursday outlining any issues in how x is managing the change to her residential arrangements and any other pertinent matters, (e) the mother be at liberty to contact x’s school by way of email, to obtain updates in relation to x’s progress, and the parties or either of them shall provide a copy of this order to the school as authorisation for same, and (f) the mother otherwise be restrained from contacting or personally attending upon x’s school.   the father shall provide a weekly written email update to the mother by 10:00pm each thursday outlining any issues in how x is managing the change to her residential arrangements and any other pertinent matters, (e) the mother be at liberty to contact x’s school by way of email, to obtain updates in relation to x’s progress, and the parties or either of them shall provide a copy of this order to the school as authorisation for same, and (f) the mother otherwise be restrained from contacting or personally attending upon x’s school.   the mother be at liberty to contact x’s school by way of email, to obtain updates in relation to x’s progress, and the parties or either of them shall provide a copy of this order to the school as authorisation for same, and (f) the mother otherwise be restrained from contacting or personally attending upon x’s school.   the mother otherwise be restrained from contacting or personally attending upon x’s school.   from the expiration of the contact moratorium period for a period of three months: (i) on each alternate weekend from 12:00pm saturday until 2:00pm sunday, and (ii) on each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, (b) thereafter, for a further period of three months: (i) on each alternate weekend from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, and (ii) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, (c) thereafter: (i) on each alternate weekend from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ii) for half of each school term holiday period as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the second sunday of the holiday period, and (iii) during the long summer holiday period 2022/2023 (provided that the contact moratorium period does not fall within such holiday period) as agreed and failing agreement, from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the first tuesday of the holiday period and thereafter on a week-about basis commencing 2:00pm on sunday 25 december 2022, (iv) during the long summer holiday period 2023/2024 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm christmas day, and from 12:00pm on 2 january until 2:00pm on 16 january, and (v) during the long summer holiday period 2024/2025 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on 8 january and from 12:00pm on 18 january until 2:00pm on 25 january, (vi) on x’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (vii) on the mother’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (viii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on each alternate weekend from 12:00pm saturday until 2:00pm sunday, and (ii) on each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm,  ) on each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm,   thereafter, for a further period of three months: (i) on each alternate weekend from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, and (ii) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, (c) thereafter: (i) on each alternate weekend from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ii) for half of each school term holiday period as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the second sunday of the holiday period, and (iii) during the long summer holiday period 2022/2023 (provided that the contact moratorium period does not fall within such holiday period) as agreed and failing agreement, from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the first tuesday of the holiday period and thereafter on a week-about basis commencing 2:00pm on sunday 25 december 2022, (iv) during the long summer holiday period 2023/2024 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm christmas day, and from 12:00pm on 2 january until 2:00pm on 16 january, and (v) during the long summer holiday period 2024/2025 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on 8 january and from 12:00pm on 18 january until 2:00pm on 25 january, (vi) on x’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (vii) on the mother’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (viii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on each alternate weekend from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, and (ii) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm,  ) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm,   thereafter: (i) on each alternate weekend from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ii) for half of each school term holiday period as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the second sunday of the holiday period, and (iii) during the long summer holiday period 2022/2023 (provided that the contact moratorium period does not fall within such holiday period) as agreed and failing agreement, from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the first tuesday of the holiday period and thereafter on a week-about basis commencing 2:00pm on sunday 25 december 2022, (iv) during the long summer holiday period 2023/2024 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm christmas day, and from 12:00pm on 2 january until 2:00pm on 16 january, and (v) during the long summer holiday period 2024/2025 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on 8 january and from 12:00pm on 18 january until 2:00pm on 25 january, (vi) on x’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (vii) on the mother’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (viii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on each alternate weekend from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ii) for half of each school term holiday period as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the second sunday of the holiday period, and (iii) during the long summer holiday period 2022/2023 (provided that the contact moratorium period does not fall within such holiday period) as agreed and failing agreement, from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the first tuesday of the holiday period and thereafter on a week-about basis commencing 2:00pm on sunday 25 december 2022, (iv) during the long summer holiday period 2023/2024 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm christmas day, and from 12:00pm on 2 january until 2:00pm on 16 january, and (v) during the long summer holiday period 2024/2025 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on 8 january and from 12:00pm on 18 january until 2:00pm on 25 january, (vi) on x’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (vii) on the mother’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (viii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  ) for half of each school term holiday period as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the second sunday of the holiday period, and (iii) during the long summer holiday period 2022/2023 (provided that the contact moratorium period does not fall within such holiday period) as agreed and failing agreement, from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the first tuesday of the holiday period and thereafter on a week-about basis commencing 2:00pm on sunday 25 december 2022, (iv) during the long summer holiday period 2023/2024 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm christmas day, and from 12:00pm on 2 january until 2:00pm on 16 january, and (v) during the long summer holiday period 2024/2025 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on 8 january and from 12:00pm on 18 january until 2:00pm on 25 january, (vi) on x’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (vii) on the mother’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (viii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  i) during the long summer holiday period 2022/2023 (provided that the contact moratorium period does not fall within such holiday period) as agreed and failing agreement, from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm on the first tuesday of the holiday period and thereafter on a week-about basis commencing 2:00pm on sunday 25 december 2022, (iv) during the long summer holiday period 2023/2024 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm christmas day, and from 12:00pm on 2 january until 2:00pm on 16 january, and (v) during the long summer holiday period 2024/2025 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on 8 january and from 12:00pm on 18 january until 2:00pm on 25 january, (vi) on x’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (vii) on the mother’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (viii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  ) during the long summer holiday period 2023/2024 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 12:00pm on the first saturday of the holiday period until 2:00pm christmas day, and from 12:00pm on 2 january until 2:00pm on 16 january, and (v) during the long summer holiday period 2024/2025 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on 8 january and from 12:00pm on 18 january until 2:00pm on 25 january, (vi) on x’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (vii) on the mother’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (viii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   during the long summer holiday period 2024/2025 and each alternate year thereafter as agreed and failing agreement from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on 8 january and from 12:00pm on 18 january until 2:00pm on 25 january, (vi) on x’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (vii) on the mother’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (viii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  ) on x’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (vii) on the mother’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (viii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  i) on the mother’s birthday if not already spending time with the mother, as agreed and failing agreement as follows: if a school day: in city g from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, or via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 6:00pm, if a non-school day, from 12:00pm until 5:00pm, (viii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  ii) on the mother’s day weekend if not already spending time with the mother, from 5:30pm friday until 2:00pm sunday, (ix) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.  ) on each wednesday and each sunday that x is not spending time with the mother, via facetime, zoom, skype or such other form of electronic communication from 5:00pm until 5:30pm, and (x) at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   at such further and other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   for spend-time pursuant to orders 8(c)(vi)(a)(i) and 8(c)(vii)(a)(i), inside the mcdonald’s family restaurant at h road, city g, (b) for any changeovers on christmas day, inside the mcdonald’s family restaurant at j street, suburb k, and (c) otherwise, at l contact centre at m street, suburb n (“the changeover contact centre”), with both parties to do all things and sign all necessary documents to forthwith enrol with the changeover contact centre to ensure changeover can occur in accordance with these orders.   for any changeovers on christmas day, inside the mcdonald’s family restaurant at j street, suburb k, and (c) otherwise, at l contact centre at m street, suburb n (“the changeover contact centre”), with both parties to do all things and sign all necessary documents to forthwith enrol with the changeover contact centre to ensure changeover can occur in accordance with these orders.   otherwise, at l contact centre at m street, suburb n (“the changeover contact centre”), with both parties to do all things and sign all necessary documents to forthwith enrol with the changeover contact centre to ensure changeover can occur in accordance with these orders.   he father may do all things necessary to obtain police assistance to facilitate x’s return to his household and may provide the police with a copy of these orders if necessary, and (b) shall be at liberty to contact the chambers of judge glass without notice to the mother for the purposes of an urgent listing of an application for a recovery order.   shall be at liberty to contact the chambers of judge glass without notice to the mother for the purposes of an urgent listing of an application for a recovery order.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other to or in the presence or hearing of x and from permitting any other person so to do, (b) discussing these orders and/or any aspect of these proceedings with x or in her presence or within her hearing, and (c) showing x any documents produced for the purposes of these proceedings, or leaving such documents in a place where x might reasonably come into contact with them.   discussing these orders and/or any aspect of these proceedings with x or in her presence or within her hearing, and (c) showing x any documents produced for the purposes of these proceedings, or leaving such documents in a place where x might reasonably come into contact with them.   showing x any documents produced for the purposes of these proceedings, or leaving such documents in a place where x might reasonably come into contact with them.   the mother is restrained from attending level 5, 305 william street, melbourne for 24 hours, (b) the mother deliver x’s favourite clothes, book, toys and belongings as directed by the independent children’s lawyer, (c) the mother forthwith depart from 305 william street, melbourne, (d) the independent children’s lawyer meet with and explain the effect of these court orders to x, and (e) x may be released from the court children’s service only into the father’s care unless otherwise agreed between the parties, including the independent children’ lawyer.   the mother deliver x’s favourite clothes, book, toys and belongings as directed by the independent children’s lawyer, (c) the mother forthwith depart from 305 william street, melbourne, (d) the independent children’s lawyer meet with and explain the effect of these court orders to x, and (e) x may be released from the court children’s service only into the father’s care unless otherwise agreed between the parties, including the independent children’ lawyer.   the mother forthwith depart from 305 william street, melbourne, (d) the independent children’s lawyer meet with and explain the effect of these court orders to x, and (e) x may be released from the court children’s service only into the father’s care unless otherwise agreed between the parties, including the independent children’ lawyer.   the independent children’s lawyer meet with and explain the effect of these court orders to x, and (e) x may be released from the court children’s service only into the father’s care unless otherwise agreed between the parties, including the independent children’ lawyer.   x may be released from the court children’s service only into the father’s care unless otherwise agreed between the parties, including the independent children’ lawyer.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
glass, j:
general evidentiary issues
statutory framework
primary considerations
the need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence   an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child, or (b) a person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child. [11]   a person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child. [11]   causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child. [11]   serious neglect of the child. [11]   x’s behaviour and comments when she is due to communicate with her father pursuant to orders, (b) difficulties during zoom calls when x has been upset, crying, angry, (c) x’s resistance to communication with the father, (d) x’s refusal to get out of her mother’s car at changeover with her father and other difficulties at changeover, (e) mr robb filing a contravention application, (f) comments made by a registrar during a hearing, and (g) other difficulties at changeover.   difficulties during zoom calls when x has been upset, crying, angry, (c) x’s resistance to communication with the father, (d) x’s refusal to get out of her mother’s car at changeover with her father and other difficulties at changeover, (e) mr robb filing a contravention application, (f) comments made by a registrar during a hearing, and (g) other difficulties at changeover.   x’s resistance to communication with the father, (d) x’s refusal to get out of her mother’s car at changeover with her father and other difficulties at changeover, (e) mr robb filing a contravention application, (f) comments made by a registrar during a hearing, and (g) other difficulties at changeover.   x’s refusal to get out of her mother’s car at changeover with her father and other difficulties at changeover, (e) mr robb filing a contravention application, (f) comments made by a registrar during a hearing, and (g) other difficulties at changeover.   mr robb filing a contravention application, (f) comments made by a registrar during a hearing, and (g) other difficulties at changeover.   comments made by a registrar during a hearing, and (g) other difficulties at changeover.   other difficulties at changeover.
even though [ms harper] had expressed these concerns in a respectful manner, [mr robb] became increasingly angry, repeatedly and loudly calling [ms harper] a manipulative liar. i repeatedly and strongly urged him to contain himself and respond more collaboratively, particularly in the context of [x] sitting just outside in the waiting room. he refused to acknowledge or assist with (whether or not he agreed with) [ms harper]'s concerns. at that point, it was my view that further discussion was both pointless and counterproductive to [x] 's welfare, and i ended the session without arranging another. [14]
this is a history of family violence and abuse of the court system, of [x]'s father using the court system to exert control and force over myself and [x] and to punish me for reasons i have never comprehended.[17] [[mr robb]]'s presence and his forcing [x] into unwanted contact with him in [sic] has been the source of much trauma and distress for [x] across most of her life.[18]
allegations of sexual abuse  was taken to a doctor who was unable to form an opinion on the cause of the redness around the vaginal opening. the doctor consulted a paediatrician who was also unable to form an opinion. [town ac] socit were informed but advised they had no role as the child had made no disclosure and the gp and paediatrician and not formed an opinion that sexual abuse had occurred. [22]
other inconsistences
every element of [x]'s possible relationship with her father is re-examined and re-framed through the lens of [ms harper]'s discontent about [mr robb]. [ms harper] starts with the premise that [mr robb], in relationship was unable to address her emotional needs and she formulated a narrative that sought to discredit him in entirety making allegations of family violence with scant regard for the truth. [27]
the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both of her parents
history of x’s time with her father
ms harper’s current attitude
1.1 thank you for your invitation to attend this court to discuss further the matters related to [x] spending time with her father. ... 2.1 it is recognised that this court is a court of the private bar guild, exercising its private legal systems of statues [sic] and legislations upon the general populace, who are referred to as ‘the public’. 2.2. such statutes and legislations of the private bar guild may not be coherent with timeless maxims of law, which ensure the safety of everyone. 2.3. if a statute or legislation is incoherent with maxims of law, it is referred to as a legal fiction, and is null and void from the beginning. 2.4. it is understood that to conduct one's matters via a legal practitioner is to succumb to the jurisdiction of the private legal system of the private bar guild system, a system of commerce in which the joinders the living sentient man or woman to individual's birth certificate name which is then traded, as seen fit by the administrators. 2.5. and to be clear, joinder is created between the lower case and upper case names. the lower case being a name of a living sentient being. the upper case being a tradable bond in commerce. 2.6. this is well known and common knowledge. ... 3.4. i am a sentient being, not chattel, not property, and not under guardianship as an incompetent. 3.5. as mother of [x], i confirm i am the first custodian of [x] and her wellbeing. 3.6. i recognise that there is no one in this court who is of a higher standing in this matter, than myself. i confirm [x] is a living, sentient being, of sound mind, and is not chattel nor property of the court (and) to be administered as the court sees fit. ... no consent is granted for decisions to be made in these matters that are not in alignment with the free will and consent of [x] and myself. ... ... a removal of [x] from the home she feels safe in, against her free will, would of course be an act of slavery and kidnapping. ... ... there is no one in this private courtroom who is of higher standing in this matter, than myself. ... please be advised, due to the level of exhaustion experienced at finding these matters yet again in the court, should any decisions made by the court that are against these initial orders, i do reserve the right to dismiss them in the days following the trial. ... orders will be deemed null and void if not freely consented to in these proceedings. [28]
additional considerations
any views expressed by x and any factors (such as her maturity or level of understanding) relevant to the weight that should be given to those views  explained that “...it is not really fun at dad’s because i am so worried about mummy and i cry when mummy goes...i don’t like it there (at daddy’s) it is too rich.” invited to explain this [x] said “...mummy doesn’t want me to visit daddy yet,” when asked what [x] wanted she burst into tears, becoming extremely distressed running to sit in the consultant’s lap seeking comfort and [x] confided that “...i like to see dad...i like to go there.” [31]
i remember dad. i helped him with work. i have two half-brothers [r] and [s]. i haven't seen them for a long time. i don't know why and why i say i don't want to see them. i don't know why i don't want to see them. i used to have a good time with dad. i have good memories. i was happy to go and see him. sometimes i missed my mum and my dog, but now i don't have a dog and we have two cats. i don't remember crying about not wanting to see dad. i do have good memories of him. [39]   presented as bright and easily engaged, and continued to present an unexplained reluctance to see her father in parallel with good memories of him and a good experience of the saturday visit. .... there was no obvious explanation for [x]'s stated reluctance to engage with her father, which was at odds with the actual engagement between them. [42]
during the current interview, [x] maintained a strong resistance to any communication with her father. she lacked specificity and was unable to provide any substantive incidents or a coherent narrative to explain this position. ... this lack of apparent substance appears to support a view that there are no reasonable explanations for her present resistance and extended estrangement from her father. in absence of such an explanation, the dynamic was viewed as understandable as a result of the parental conflict and the mother child relationship. [44]   said she has not seen her dad for about two years, she didn’t really want to see him. when asked why she said she said [sic], “no reason, i don’t really feel comfortable, i guess”. .... [x] said if she was made to see her dad, she would be “sad and annoyed”, it’s also “upsetting”. child protection asked [x] if she felt this why [sic] because her mum gets upset about family law court. [x] said “my mum gets upset but doesn’t really mind if i go or not go, she is fine if i want to go, she will take me.” [46]
in terms of the parental dispute, [x]’s narrative was closely aligned with that of [ms harper]’s. she stated that although she hasn’t seen [mr robb] for over a year and that she has few memories of him. she also believes that he doesn’t listen to her and he does things that make her feel uncomfortable, like bringing her half siblings along to spend time with her. as in previous assessments, [x]’s responses in relation to [mr robb] were limited with broad statements such as not feeling “comfortable” with him. these feeling were explored further and she explained that her discomfort was not born from fear, unhappiness, boredom or embarrassment but rather that the thought of spending time with [mr robb] made her feel upset, shy and grumpy. [49]
i think it’s difficult to put much weight on [x]’s views about this because i did get the impression that it was difficult for [x] to express her own particular views independently, but she does genuinely consider her mother’s perspective and reactions to things before her own views come to the fore. so she – she – i get the impression that [x] weighs up her own needs against her mother’s needs and her mother’s reaction to that.
the nature of x’s relationship with each of her parents and other people, including any grandparent or other relative  harper] is a loving mother but she is enmeshed with her daughter and cannot separate her experiences from those of [x] even for simple issues such as driving, as she reflects her exhaustion and stress and insists this is applicable to [x]. neither mother nor daughter exhibit well defined boundaries as [ms harper] was observed seeking [x]’s opinion about matters, such as entering the child-care room, and she reported soliciting [x]’s opinion about spending time with her father. [ms harper] does not appear to comprehend the emotional pressure on [x] of such a discussion. [ms harper] lacks insight into this dimension of her parenting, and she genuinely believes she facilitates the relationship between father and daughter. [51]   harper]'s nuanced view of the father-daughter relationship is that she should determine and apportion [x]'s time with [mr robb] if and when she considers it to be appropriate that [x] spend time with her father. [56]
a more specific analysis might refer to an unhealthy level of co-dependence in the parent child relationship commonly referred to within professional literature as enmeshment. enmeshed relationships are commonly defined by a child learning to define themselves by compliance with their parents needs and need for parental approval. it manifests with children struggling to express their own emotions where they conflict with their parents' views. it to some extent can assist explain [x]'s manifestation of upset and resistance as reflecting her mother's own need for [x] to share her negative perspective of [mr robb]. the probability of such an explanation, is also supported by historical descriptions of observation sessions, where [x] is described as enthusiastic and without concern and then conversely described by [ms harper] as shortly after returning to her care as highly anxious and distressed. [61]   has said she does not want to see her father, however, [ms harper]’s [sic] has a well documented history of actively discouraging contact and alienation of [mr robb] from [x] life. this denies [x]’s right and the opportunity to reconnect with [mr robb] and freely develop her own views and wishes without consequence. this is evidenced by [x] not being open with her mother in relation to child protection’s conversation about contact with [mr robb] and family law court. it is concerning [ms harper] has directly exposed [x] to conspiracy theories that appear to be an attempt to obstruct legal processes and in turn contact with [mr robb].[63]
an alternate perspective may be that there is a deleterious enmeshed emotional dynamic between [ms harper] and [x] whereby [x] is acutely attuned to [ms harper]’s emotional needs and has learned to adjust her behaviour accordingly in order to maintain emotional safety within the parent / child dyad. [67]
the extent to which each of x’s parents have taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long term issues in relation to her, to spend time with her, and to communicate with her
the extent to which each of x’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain her
the likely effect of any changes to x’s circumstances, including the likely effect on her of any separation from either of her parents, or any other child or other person with whom she has been living
the practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficultly or expense will substantially affect her right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of x’s parents and other people to provide for her needs, including her emotional and intellectual needs.
living declaration in the form of an affidavit of truth notice to one is notice to all notice to agent is notice to principal, notice to principal is notice to agent affidavit/ statement of truth and verification from fruit of loin of [ms harper] of clann harper by i property i, [x], hereby declare that i am fruits of the loin of [ms harper] of clann [harper] and the property of [ms harper] of clann [harper], and it is i's living will(s) that [ms harper] of clann [harper] is appointed to office of the executor of i's estates. .... i, [x [[harper-robb]], as per the photograph presentment herein, verify that i am fruit of the loin and property of [ms harper] of clann [harper] .... non-transferable autograph. principal granter. beneficiary, list not exhaustive. all rights claimed, none waived ever. no assured value. no liability. ... notice: if no written rebuttal in substance is received, by registered post, within seven (7) days of receipt of this affidavit or you respond by silent communication, it is thereby agreed by all parties that there is acceptance by tacit agreement and that the matter is agreed upon therein and you will correct your records. an unrebutted affidavit stands as truth in commerce. [1838] ussc 37, (12 pet. 1:25, heb. 6:13-15,) claims made in my affidavit, if not rebutted, emerge as the truth of the matter. legal maxim: "he who does not deny, admits." [82]
probably that it might help to support us in having her voice heard because that has been her complaint through all this time that, “they don’t listen to me. i have told them – i tell them all the time,” like she did to [dr c], “i don’t want to see my father.” so she would have hoped that that would help support me to support her in that stance.   harper] described inadequate strategies to scaffold [x]’s emotional development and in particular her ability to build and develop resilience with [x]. [ms harper] demonstrated a limited understanding of childhood development and subsequently her responses to [x]’s emotional needs were observed to be pitched at a younger child, rather than a preteen child. additionally [ms harper] was observed to prioritise her own emotional needs above [x]’s and she struggled to regulate her own overwhelmed emotional state in [x]’s presence. [83]   has primarily relied on [ms harper] to learn and develop emotional responses and she has had few experiences outside this relationship to integrate alternate perspectives. she was observed to be less worried about her own feelings and fiercely protective of her mother’s emotional state. ... [ms harper] was reluctant to acknowledge her own influence on [x]’s responses, which results in [x] being unable to regulate and required external prompting and input to help her to settle. [x] was observed to express a sense of responsibility for [ms harper]’s emotional wellbeing and her refusal to spend time with [mr robb] may be a strategy she employs to ensure emotional safety in her relationship with [ms harper]. this is compounded by the negative perspective [ms harper] has of [mr robb], which [x] is acutely aware of. refusing to spend time with [mr robb] reinforces the mother / child bond and signals to [ms harper] that [x] is aligned with her perspective. [84]
dear [ms m] please inform your client, i will not be attending court on october 18 nor for this matter ever again and i will no longer be seeking any time with my daughter, whilst the mother is the primary carer. i request for your client to completely stop all forms of communication with us, no emails, no sms, no letters or phone calls, they will not be read or answered. after nearly seven years of court cases, the mother doing everything she can to keep me out of my daughters life and constantly stopping my daughter from seeing me and her extended family (the current mother enforced separation time more than 10 months), plus all the constant barrage of lies, allegations and wrongdoing suggested by the mother, creating a whirlwind of disgusting manipulation for [x] - i have had enough, i am done. after two days in court this week (my 19th attendance) it is now clearly obvious to me that the court has no intention or interest in making a change. nor were they willing to consider my second attempt for a request for a change in residence for my daughter. i was most disappointed that the court, my lawyer and yourself were more interested in coming up with another bandaid fix, pretending all was ok, · rather than sincerely considering previous family reports suggestions and ignoring what has actually been going on for the last six years. i will always believe that a change of residence would have been the best option for [x]. this breaks my heart but this crazy cycle we find ourselves in is stopping now. i am not putting [x] through any more of this rampant manipulation, this is obviously not healthy for her nor am i having my sons go through any further heartache of having their sister come back into their life intermittently only to have her disappear from their life once again based on [ms harper]'s mood or whims. how do you explain that to a 3 year old? its over. i sincerely hope that with me stepping away, [x]'s life will become more balanced and stable and she will be nurtured and loved as much as humanely possible. for the record, if the mother is no longer willing or able to care for [x], i will be the primary carer with complete dedication and commitment. i still believe its in [x]'s best interests for her to live with me. all i have ever wanted was to have a healthy loving relationship with my daughter. i live in hope she will reenter our lives when her maturity and self direction can bring us back together. i love [x] and always will. [mr robb].[86]
... [mr robb] was able to articulate a sound understanding of [x]’s passions and hobbies and her developmental needs at this age, despite having spent no time with [x] for over eighteen months. he was thoughtful when considering the impact his proposal would have on [x] but also concerned about the long term impact [ms harper]’s proposal may have on [x]. although he has been frustrated by the circumstances, he didn’t relay this to [x] during the brief observations and when the meeting ended he was compliant with the request to leave the playroom area. he was able to reflect on strategies that might be helpful to support [x] to spend time with him based on past interventions that had worked but didn’t insist that the observations should have been conducted differently. he was child focussed and regulated his own emotions to ensure that [x] was not distressed in his presence. he proposed ongoing support with [ms b], should [x] live with him and he was open to following any recommendations in order to progress the situation with [x]. [89]
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of x and either of her parents and any other relevant characteristics of x
there is a risk that the enmeshed parent / child dynamic may undermine [x]’s emotional development and this may have a significant impact on [x]’s identity development, psychological wellbeing and her social development as she nears her teenage years. this level of enmeshment can be challenging for adolescents to navigate as they begin to individuate and explore their identity. [x] has already begun to demonstrate some self-exploratory behaviour with regards to her identity and appearance with her reportedly shaving her head and transforming her style recently. [x] is approaching an important developmental stage, adolescence. she will begin to individuate from her primary caregiver and family relationships and her social network will expand with her peer relationships becoming more significant. [x] requires the opportunity to tackle these important developmental stages without the burden of the parental dispute or the impediment of an enmeshed mother / child relationship. [91]  ’s quick dismissal of the photographs in [mr robb]’s gift box may suggest a level of ambivalence towards her extended paternal family or it may also indicate a level of shame at not being able to recognise any of her relatives. neither option is positive given [x] is entering a period of development where her identity development is prefaced on the relationship she has with her family of origin. her choice to shave her head and transform her appearance indicates that she may already be embarking on a period of self-discovery and exclusion of the paternal extended family may become further entrenched as she prioritises less time with immediate family and begins preferring to spend time with her peers.[92]
...there could be substantial implications on [x]’s ability to develop peer relationships as she matures. [x] may feel compelled to avoid meaningful relationships with others to prevent scrutiny on the relationship by [ms harper]. she would likely have less emotional availability for other relationships which would limit her perspective, creating a rigid world view, not unlike the one [ms harper] has. this could limit her social development and place her at risk of poor mental health as an adult.[94]
if x is an aboriginal or torres straight islander child, her right to enjoy her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture and the likely impact of any proposed parenting order on that right
the attitude to x and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of x’s parents  harper] appears to have a low tolerance for any interventions aimed at introducing a relationship between [mr robb] and [x] and when inevitable difficulties arise in the therapeutic setting, [ms harper] withdraws [x] from therapy. this may hamper [x]’s capacity to develop resilience and work through difficult situations, creating a maladaptive template for managing challenging circumstances in life.
... i knew that [x] would be upset about your visit and see it as only another example of the negative way that this whole court process impacts on her otherwise happy life, regardless of how i might attempt to convince her otherwise or frame the visits. ... i chose to tell her this morning as i felt that doing so would at least eliminate the further fear of such things getting 'sprung' on her at school, and also give her time to process her feelings in a private and safe place. i was dreading it. the result was just as i feared. ... imagine my dilemma knowing that her ' best day ever ' was now going to be tainted with this visit from the icl, which in her mind and heart is just another negative association and obligation related to her fathers presence, court and all the negative impact these things have on her life- another time when she is forced to think and talk about and remember a part of her life she is wanting and trying to forget. .... now her school- the one place that this process and her father has not yet touched-a safe place-is also tainted. she is now angry at me for 'letting it happen' despite my having told her i had no choice and that it eliminated a trip to melbourne. another wedge between is [sic] created, related to just another unwanted thing i am forced to make [x] do and go through in this process. a very happy and excited child is now a sad, worried and angry child, hiding in her bedroom before school. another day of her little life is negatively tainted and impacted through, in her mind, her father and this whole court process. this has to stop. this litigation process and forced contact with the father impacts negatively in so many ways on [x]'s (let alone my own) life. it repeatedly impacts negatively on her relationship with me-the only parental relationship of trust and security that she has. [98]   harper] may wish to consider [x]’s experience of the negative perception she has of [mr robb], given that [x] may one day recognise traits in [mr robb] that resonate in her. ... [ms harper] may wish to reflect on whether her attempts to erase [mr robb] from [x]’s life are in her own long term interests, as [x] may perceive [ms harper]’s behaviour quite differently in adulthood. [101]
hey guys, my daughter [x] lives in [town al] and i have not seen her for more than two years ..... neither has she seen her half brothers, grandparents or cousins etc .. if anyone knows her can they please show her www...com which i created for her as her mum won’t let us be part of her life. perhaps someone kind can let her know we miss her and love her and would love to speak with her and can pass on this message thank you .com [x] [x] we love you and miss you, please call daddy on 0 ... [102]
"about bloody time! i have not seen my daughter for more than 2.5 years my ex has contravened orders constantly and the courts does nothing. she has been put on good behaviour bonds, fined by the court which she still hasn't paid back (the least of my concerns) and even threatened with jail but that doesn't stop her from contravening orders such as weekly phone calls, fortnightly weekends with dad or school holidays time are all ignored. i have no contraventions not one ... held hostage by mum, how does an eight year old reason why doesn't dad play with me anymore?" [103]
any family violence involving x or a member of her family
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to x or a member of her family, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account its nature, the circumstances in which it was made, the evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court or in the proceedings for the order, or any other relevant matter
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to x
any other relevant fact or circumstance
parental responsibility
conclusions
gatekeeping behaviours exist on a continuum and there is a significant risk in this case that if such behaviours continue or intensify [x] may lose this relationship with her father all together. [111]
associate: dated: 11 august 2022
dated: 11 august 2022
[1] ms harper’s ‘orders to be made’ affidavit filed 6 april 2022, page 3.[2] kramer and anor & ward [2017] famcafc 270, (2017) flc 93-817 at [10]. [3] department of families, fairness and housing report dated 1 may 2022, page 5.[4] family law act 1975 (cth), s 60b.[5] family law act 1975 (cth), s 60ca. [6] family law act 1975 (cth), s 61da. [7] family law act 1975 (cth), s 65daa.[8] family law act 1975 (cth), ss 60cc(2).[9] family law act 1975 (cth), ss 60cc(2a).[10] family law act 1975 (cth), s 4ab.[11] family law act 1975 (cth), ss 4(1).[12] ms harper’s affidavit filed 1 april 2021, paragraph 104(b)(xi).[13] ms harper’s affidavit filed 1 april 2021, paragraph 129(b). [14] dr c’s affidavit filed 25 october 2019, page 12, quoted in ms harper’s affidavit filed 1 april 2021 paragraph 71(e)(xiii).[15] ms harper’s trial affidavit filed 6 april 2022 (“ms harper’s trial affidavit”), annexure 3. [16] ms harper’s trial affidavit, annexure 4.[17] ms harper’s trial affidavit, paragraph 55.[18] ms harper’s trial affidavit, paragraph 67.[19] ms harper’s trial affidavit, page 16.[20] ms harper’s trial affidavit, paragraph 119.[21] ms harper’s trial affidavit, paragraph 144.[22] department of families, fairness and housing report dated 22 march 2022.[23] family report of mr d dated 22 february 2021, paragraph 43.[24] family report of mr d dated 22 february 2021, paragraph 44.[25] m v m (1988) 166 clr 69 at 76, isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97, (2022) flc 94-092 (“isles & nellisen”) at [2-3]. [26] isles & nellisen at [53]. [27] family report of ms ae dated 22 may 2014, paragraph 76.[28] ms harper’s trial affidavit.[29] ms harper’s ‘orders to be made’ affidavit filed 6 april 2022, page 3.[30] ms harper’s trial affidavit, paragraph 66.[31] child inclusive conference memorandum by consultant ms ae dated 20 september 2013 (“child inclusive conference memorandum dated 20 september 2013”), page 6.[32] family report by consultant ms ae dated 22 may 2014 (“family report dated 22 may 2014”), page 27. [33] family report dated 22 may 2014, page 27. [34] family report dated 22 may 2014, page 28. [35] family report dated 22 may 2014, page 28. [36] family report dated 22 may 2014, page 30.
[37] child inclusive conference memorandum by consultant ms ad dated 2 august 2017 (“child inclusive conference memorandum dated 2 august 2017”), page 2.[38] child inclusive conference memorandum dated 2 august 2017, page 2.[39] affidavit of dr c filed 25 october 2019, page 9.[40] affidavit of dr c filed 25 october 2019, page 10.[41] affidavit of dr c filed 25 october 2019, page 10.[42] affidavit of dr c filed 25 october 2019, page 15.[43] family report by consultant mr d dated 22 february 2021 (“family report dated 22 february 2021”).[44] family report dated 22 february 2021, paragraph 63.[45] child impact report by consultant ms e dated 8 april 2022 (“child impact report dated 8 april 2022”), paragraph 10.[46] department of families, fairness and housing report dated 1 may 2022, page 4.[47] department of families, fairness and housing report dated 1 may 2022, page 4.[48] department of families, fairness and housing report dated 1 may 2022, page 5.[49] family report by consultant f dated 6 june 2022 (“family report dated 6 june 2022”), paragraph 45.[50] child inclusive conference memorandum dated 20 september 2013, page 5.[51] child inclusive conference memorandum dated 20 september 2013, page 5 and 6.[52] child inclusive conference memorandum dated 20 september 2013, page 6.[53] child inclusive conference memorandum dated 20 september 2013, page 7.[54] family report dated 22 may 2014, page 9. [55] family report dated 22 may 2014, page 14. [56] family report dated 22 may 2014, page 18. [57] family report dated 22 may 2014, page 30. [58] family report dated 22 may 2014, page 30. [59] child inclusive conference memorandum dated 2 august 2017, page 2.[60] affidavit of dr c filed 25 october 2019, page 14.[61] family report dated 22 february 2021, paragraph 63.[62] child impact report dated 8 april 2022, paragraph 13.[63] department of families, fairness and housing report dated 1 may 2022, page 5.[64] family report dated 6 june 2022.[65] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 59.[66] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 59.[67] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 59.[68] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 56.[69] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 55.[70] child inclusive conference memorandum dated 2 august 2017, pages 2 and 3.[71] affidavit of dr c filed 25 october 2019, page 10.[72] affidavit of dr c filed 25 october 2019, page 15.[73] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 64.[74] affidavit of dr c filed 25 october 2019, page 14.[75] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 66.[76] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 70. [77] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 70.[78] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 71.[79] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 71.[80] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 72.[81] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 74. [82] mr robb’s trial affidavit, annexure -2.[83] family report 6 june 2022, paragraph 56.[84] family report 6 june 2022, paragraph 60.[85] family report 6 june 2022, paragraph 61.[86] mr robb’s trial affidavit filed 5 july 2022, annexure 18. [87] ms harper’s trial affidavit, paragraph 133.[88] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 61.[89] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 57.[90] department of families, fairness and housing report 1 may 2022, page 5.[91] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 62.[92] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 64.[93] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 68.[94] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 69.[95] affidavit of dr c filed 25 october 2019, page 16.[96] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 65.[97] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 65.[98] mr robb’s trial affidavit filed 5 july 2022, annexure 27.[99] ms harper’s affidavit filed 1 april 2021, paragraphs 17 and 18. [100] department of families, fairness and housing report dated 1 may 2022, page 3.[101] family report dated 6 june 2022, paragraph 74.[102] ms harper’s affidavit filed 1 april 2021, annexure -8.[103] ms harper’s affidavit filed 1 april 2021, paragraph 65. [104] ms harper’s affidavit filed 1 april 2021, paragraph 130. [105] family law act 1975 (cth), s 69zn.[106] affidavit of dr c filed 25 october 2019, paragraph 16.[107] family law act 1975 (cth), ss 61da(4). [108] manifold & alderton [2021] famcafc 61; (2021) flc 94-015 per austin j at [109][109]family law act 1975 (cth), s 65dac.[110] lennon & lennon [2011] famca 571 at [108].[111] child inclusive conference memorandum 2 august 2017, page 2.[112] family report 6 june 2022, paragraph 72.