last updated: 8 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
harcourt & costin [2022] fedcfamc2f 1053
orders
the court orders that:  the offering price or reserved price in relation to the d street, town e property not be less than the sum of $150,000.00, (b) the offering price or reserved price in relation to the b street, town c property not be less than $300,000.00, (c) the trustee may incur advertising expenses in relation to the properties up to the amount of $5,000.00 with respect to each property, (d) the trustee may incur costs for the purposes of redecorating or improvement of the presentation of the properties for the purposes of the sale to such amount as may be advised by the agents acting on the sale but not exceeding the amount of $2,500.00 for each property unless the parties agree in writing, (e) the trustee may retain mr f of company g for the purposes of acting as the agent for the sale of the d street, town e property, (f) the trustee may retain ms h of j property for the purposes of acting as the agent on the sale of the b street, town c property, (g) the trustee may enter into appropriate agency agreement with respect to an agent at an agreed sales commission of 2.7% or less for each of the properties, (h) the trustee may retain a solicitor and/or conveyancer of her choice to act for the vendor on the sale, (i) the trustee is authorise to enter into a contract for sale on such terms as advised by the solicitors acting upon the sale, (j) liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, (k) upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   the offering price or reserved price in relation to the b street, town c property not be less than $300,000.00, (c) the trustee may incur advertising expenses in relation to the properties up to the amount of $5,000.00 with respect to each property, (d) the trustee may incur costs for the purposes of redecorating or improvement of the presentation of the properties for the purposes of the sale to such amount as may be advised by the agents acting on the sale but not exceeding the amount of $2,500.00 for each property unless the parties agree in writing, (e) the trustee may retain mr f of company g for the purposes of acting as the agent for the sale of the d street, town e property, (f) the trustee may retain ms h of j property for the purposes of acting as the agent on the sale of the b street, town c property, (g) the trustee may enter into appropriate agency agreement with respect to an agent at an agreed sales commission of 2.7% or less for each of the properties, (h) the trustee may retain a solicitor and/or conveyancer of her choice to act for the vendor on the sale, (i) the trustee is authorise to enter into a contract for sale on such terms as advised by the solicitors acting upon the sale, (j) liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, (k) upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   the trustee may incur advertising expenses in relation to the properties up to the amount of $5,000.00 with respect to each property, (d) the trustee may incur costs for the purposes of redecorating or improvement of the presentation of the properties for the purposes of the sale to such amount as may be advised by the agents acting on the sale but not exceeding the amount of $2,500.00 for each property unless the parties agree in writing, (e) the trustee may retain mr f of company g for the purposes of acting as the agent for the sale of the d street, town e property, (f) the trustee may retain ms h of j property for the purposes of acting as the agent on the sale of the b street, town c property, (g) the trustee may enter into appropriate agency agreement with respect to an agent at an agreed sales commission of 2.7% or less for each of the properties, (h) the trustee may retain a solicitor and/or conveyancer of her choice to act for the vendor on the sale, (i) the trustee is authorise to enter into a contract for sale on such terms as advised by the solicitors acting upon the sale, (j) liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, (k) upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   the trustee may incur costs for the purposes of redecorating or improvement of the presentation of the properties for the purposes of the sale to such amount as may be advised by the agents acting on the sale but not exceeding the amount of $2,500.00 for each property unless the parties agree in writing, (e) the trustee may retain mr f of company g for the purposes of acting as the agent for the sale of the d street, town e property, (f) the trustee may retain ms h of j property for the purposes of acting as the agent on the sale of the b street, town c property, (g) the trustee may enter into appropriate agency agreement with respect to an agent at an agreed sales commission of 2.7% or less for each of the properties, (h) the trustee may retain a solicitor and/or conveyancer of her choice to act for the vendor on the sale, (i) the trustee is authorise to enter into a contract for sale on such terms as advised by the solicitors acting upon the sale, (j) liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, (k) upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   the trustee may retain mr f of company g for the purposes of acting as the agent for the sale of the d street, town e property, (f) the trustee may retain ms h of j property for the purposes of acting as the agent on the sale of the b street, town c property, (g) the trustee may enter into appropriate agency agreement with respect to an agent at an agreed sales commission of 2.7% or less for each of the properties, (h) the trustee may retain a solicitor and/or conveyancer of her choice to act for the vendor on the sale, (i) the trustee is authorise to enter into a contract for sale on such terms as advised by the solicitors acting upon the sale, (j) liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, (k) upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   the trustee may retain ms h of j property for the purposes of acting as the agent on the sale of the b street, town c property, (g) the trustee may enter into appropriate agency agreement with respect to an agent at an agreed sales commission of 2.7% or less for each of the properties, (h) the trustee may retain a solicitor and/or conveyancer of her choice to act for the vendor on the sale, (i) the trustee is authorise to enter into a contract for sale on such terms as advised by the solicitors acting upon the sale, (j) liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, (k) upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   the trustee may enter into appropriate agency agreement with respect to an agent at an agreed sales commission of 2.7% or less for each of the properties, (h) the trustee may retain a solicitor and/or conveyancer of her choice to act for the vendor on the sale, (i) the trustee is authorise to enter into a contract for sale on such terms as advised by the solicitors acting upon the sale, (j) liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, (k) upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   the trustee may retain a solicitor and/or conveyancer of her choice to act for the vendor on the sale, (i) the trustee is authorise to enter into a contract for sale on such terms as advised by the solicitors acting upon the sale, (j) liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, (k) upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   the trustee is authorise to enter into a contract for sale on such terms as advised by the solicitors acting upon the sale, (j) liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, (k) upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, (k) upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: (i) in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   in payment of the agent's commission on sale, (ii) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.  ) the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, (iii) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.  i) the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, (iv) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.  ) the amount required to discharge the wife’s personal loan with bank ad, (v) such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.   such sum to the johnston withers trust account for and on behalf of the wife representing sixty percentum (60%) of the parties total net non-superannuation assets after bringing to account the assets to be retained by the wife valued at $6,000.00, (vi) the balance remaining to the husband.  ) the balance remaining to the husband.   her motor vehicle 2, (b) her furniture and effects, (c) her personal savings and investments, and (d) her superannuation entitlements with k super fund,   her furniture and effects, (c) her personal savings and investments, and (d) her superannuation entitlements with k super fund,   her personal savings and investments, and (d) her superannuation entitlements with k super fund,   her superannuation entitlements with k super fund,   his motor vehicle 1, (b) his furniture and effects, (c) his tools, (d) his company l and company m shares, (e) his personal savings, (f) his boat, and (g) his superannuation entitlements with n super fund subject to paragraph 7 herein.   his furniture and effects, (c) his tools, (d) his company l and company m shares, (e) his personal savings, (f) his boat, and (g) his superannuation entitlements with n super fund subject to paragraph 7 herein.   his tools, (d) his company l and company m shares, (e) his personal savings, (f) his boat, and (g) his superannuation entitlements with n super fund subject to paragraph 7 herein.   his company l and company m shares, (e) his personal savings, (f) his boat, and (g) his superannuation entitlements with n super fund subject to paragraph 7 herein.   his personal savings, (f) his boat, and (g) his superannuation entitlements with n super fund subject to paragraph 7 herein.   his boat, and (g) his superannuation entitlements with n super fund subject to paragraph 7 herein.   his superannuation entitlements with n super fund subject to paragraph 7 herein.   the court allocate as required by section 90xt(4) of the family law act 1975 ("the act") a base amount of one hundred thirty five thousand nine hundred and ninety one dollars ($135,991.00) to the wife out of the husband's entitlement in the fund. (b) pursuant to 90xt(l)(a) of the act whenever the fund makes a splittable payment out of the husband's interest in the fund the trustee shall: (i) pay to the wife (ms harcourt) or to her legal personal representative the entitlement calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 using the base amount specified at paragraph 7(a), and (ii) make a corresponding reduction in the entitlement the husband would have had in the fund but for this order. (c) that paragraphs 7(a) and 7(b) of these orders have effect from the operative time. (d) the operative time for the purposes of order 7(c) of these orders is four (4) business days after the date of service of these orders upon the trustee of the fund. (e) that the trustee of the fund shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary so that in accordance with the obligations set out under the act and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 the trustee can calculate the entitlement of and make payment to the wife in accordance with paragraph 7 of these orders. (f) that the wife shall do all things necessary including but not limited to exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the husband's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the wife in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the wife pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the wife each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the husband's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the wife is not a splittable payment.   pursuant to 90xt(l)(a) of the act whenever the fund makes a splittable payment out of the husband's interest in the fund the trustee shall: (i) pay to the wife (ms harcourt) or to her legal personal representative the entitlement calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 using the base amount specified at paragraph 7(a), and (ii) make a corresponding reduction in the entitlement the husband would have had in the fund but for this order. (c) that paragraphs 7(a) and 7(b) of these orders have effect from the operative time. (d) the operative time for the purposes of order 7(c) of these orders is four (4) business days after the date of service of these orders upon the trustee of the fund. (e) that the trustee of the fund shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary so that in accordance with the obligations set out under the act and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 the trustee can calculate the entitlement of and make payment to the wife in accordance with paragraph 7 of these orders. (f) that the wife shall do all things necessary including but not limited to exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the husband's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the wife in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the wife pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the wife each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the husband's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the wife is not a splittable payment.   pay to the wife (ms harcourt) or to her legal personal representative the entitlement calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 using the base amount specified at paragraph 7(a), and (ii) make a corresponding reduction in the entitlement the husband would have had in the fund but for this order.  ) make a corresponding reduction in the entitlement the husband would have had in the fund but for this order.   that paragraphs 7(a) and 7(b) of these orders have effect from the operative time. (d) the operative time for the purposes of order 7(c) of these orders is four (4) business days after the date of service of these orders upon the trustee of the fund. (e) that the trustee of the fund shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary so that in accordance with the obligations set out under the act and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 the trustee can calculate the entitlement of and make payment to the wife in accordance with paragraph 7 of these orders. (f) that the wife shall do all things necessary including but not limited to exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the husband's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the wife in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the wife pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the wife each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the husband's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the wife is not a splittable payment.   the operative time for the purposes of order 7(c) of these orders is four (4) business days after the date of service of these orders upon the trustee of the fund. (e) that the trustee of the fund shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary so that in accordance with the obligations set out under the act and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 the trustee can calculate the entitlement of and make payment to the wife in accordance with paragraph 7 of these orders. (f) that the wife shall do all things necessary including but not limited to exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the husband's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the wife in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the wife pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the wife each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the husband's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the wife is not a splittable payment.   that the trustee of the fund shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary so that in accordance with the obligations set out under the act and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 the trustee can calculate the entitlement of and make payment to the wife in accordance with paragraph 7 of these orders. (f) that the wife shall do all things necessary including but not limited to exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the husband's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the wife in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the wife pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the wife each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the husband's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the wife is not a splittable payment.   that the wife shall do all things necessary including but not limited to exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the husband's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the wife in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the wife pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the wife each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the husband's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the wife is not a splittable payment.   in the event that the superannuation split to the wife pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the wife each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the husband's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the wife is not a splittable payment.   that pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the husband's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the wife is not a splittable payment.
reasons for judgment
judge dickson:
introduction
relationship background
history of proceedings
upon noting that: a. the matter was called in the precincts of the court and there being no appearance by or on behalf of the respondent, the court orders that: 1. the respondent file and serve his responding documents within sixty (60) days. the wife solicitors serve copy of these orders upon the respondent by way of email (if known) and registered post. in the event the respondent fails to comply with paragraph 1 hereof the wife have leave to apply to proceed on an undefended basis on the next occasion. 4. the proceedings are adjourned to 24 february 2020 at 9:15am for directions. 5. the wife’s costs of today are hereby reserved.
upon noting the wife has foreshadowed seeking an argument time in respect of the husband’s failure to pay the mortgage in respect of the sale of the [d street, town e] property, the court orders by consent that: 1. within twenty eight (28) days the parties provide mutual and informal discovery of all documents in their respective custody and control. 2. with respect to any asset the value of which is not agreed, the parties agree to a joint written valuation at their joint expense to be available at least fourteen (14) days prior to the conciliation conference. 3. the parties are restrained and an injunction is hereby granted restraining each of them from disposing of, encumbering or otherwise dealing with any assets in his or her sole name or the joint names of the parties. 4. the parties attend a conciliation conference with a registrar of the federal circuit court of australia on 17 april 2020 at 11.00am. 5. the wife pay the conciliation conference fee in accordance with the family law (fees) regulation 2012 at least twenty-eight (28) days prior to the conciliation conference unless otherwise exempted from payment. 6. the respondent reimburse the wife one half of the conciliation conference fee within fourteen (14) days thereafter. 7. all valuations or any other relevant documents that the parties wish to rely upon be exchanged fourteen (14) days prior to the conciliation conference. 8. further consideration of the proceedings is adjourned to 21 april 2020 at 9.15am. 9. the wife’s costs of today be reserved.
the court orders by consent that: within twenty-one (21) days the wife and respondent shall do all acts and things and sign all necessary documents to effect the sale of the property located at: 1.1. [b street, town c] in the state of south australia (“the [b street, town c] property”), and for that purpose the following shall apply: 1.2. the [b street, town c] property shall be listed for sale on such terms and conditions and with such agent as agreed within 21 days by the parties and in default of agreement as recommended by the president of the real estate institute of south australia. 1.3. the parties are to co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale including making the key readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring that the property is clean, neat and in good order at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer. 1.4. the respondent husband do forthwith commence paying the mortgage periodic payments in such amount as required by the financier on the [b street, town c] property. 1.5. upon the sale of the [b street, town c] property the net proceeds of sale after payment of the costs of sale and the mortgage be invested in a joint interest bearing account pending final order or agreement of the parties. 2. the proceedings are adjourned to 12 february 2021 at 9:30am for directions.
1. that the respondent husband vacate the property at [b street, town c] in the state of south australia ("the said property") within fourteen (14) days of the date of this order. 2. that the wife be solely responsible for the marketing and sale of the said property. 3. that the respondent husband continue to pay the mortgage instalments on the said property as and when they become due until the date of settlement of the sale of the said property 4. the respondent husband do pay the costs of and incidental to this application. 5. such further or other order as this honourable court deems fit.
5. the parties joint in obtaining a report on the progress of the sale of the [b street, town c] property from [ms h] on or before 1 october 2021. 6. the [b street, town c] property be listed for $350,000 noting the parties will entertain all reasonable offers.
upon further noting: a) the certificate of dispute resolution dated 26 november 2021 signed by deputy registrar [ag] confirming that the parties reached agreement at a recent conciliation conference, b) the failure by the husband to appear at today’s hearing, and c) in the event that the husband fails to attend at the adjourned date for hearing, the court will consider setting down the wife’s application for property settlement on an undefended basis the court orders that: 1. within 7 days, the wife do serve the husband with a sealed copy of the orders made this day together with a covering letter confirming that should the husband fail to attend, orders will be made in his absence. 2. the wife’s solicitor do file and serve an affidavit of service during the period of the adjournment. 3. the wife’s oral application for costs thrown away, fixed in the sum of $550, be adjourned for consideration to the adjourned date. 4. further consideration of the matter is adjourned to 9.30am on 17 december 2021 before judge dickson for directions.
documents relied upon at trial  further amended initiating application filed 9 may 2022, (2) amended financial statement filed 22 april 2022, (3) trial affidavit filed 22 april 2022, (4) trial affidavit filed 9 may 2022, and (5) outline of case document.   amended financial statement filed 22 april 2022, (3) trial affidavit filed 22 april 2022, (4) trial affidavit filed 9 may 2022, and (5) outline of case document.   trial affidavit filed 22 april 2022, (4) trial affidavit filed 9 may 2022, and (5) outline of case document.   trial affidavit filed 9 may 2022, and (5) outline of case document.   outline of case document.   response to application for final orders filed 21 february 2020, (2) affidavit filed 6 july 2022, and (3) outline of case document filed 11 july 2022.   affidavit filed 6 july 2022, and (3) outline of case document filed 11 july 2022.   outline of case document filed 11 july 2022.   letter dated 5 may 2022 from johnston withers to n super fund (exhibit a1), (2) bundle of emails from johnston withers to the husband (exhibit a2), (3) letter from n super fund dated 10 june 2022 in relation to the superannuation splitting order (exhibit a3), (4) impairment assessment report dated 5 november 2021 from associate professor mr aj in relation to the husband (exhibit a4), (5) bank ad home loan account statement ending #...00 for the period ending 5 october 2017 (exhibit a5), (6) return to work sa payment advice dated 6 october 2021 (exhibit a6), (7) company g payslip in the name of the husband dated 29 june 2021 (exhibit a7), and (8) affidavit of the wife filed 20 august 2019 (exhibit a8),   bundle of emails from johnston withers to the husband (exhibit a2), (3) letter from n super fund dated 10 june 2022 in relation to the superannuation splitting order (exhibit a3), (4) impairment assessment report dated 5 november 2021 from associate professor mr aj in relation to the husband (exhibit a4), (5) bank ad home loan account statement ending #...00 for the period ending 5 october 2017 (exhibit a5), (6) return to work sa payment advice dated 6 october 2021 (exhibit a6), (7) company g payslip in the name of the husband dated 29 june 2021 (exhibit a7), and (8) affidavit of the wife filed 20 august 2019 (exhibit a8),   letter from n super fund dated 10 june 2022 in relation to the superannuation splitting order (exhibit a3), (4) impairment assessment report dated 5 november 2021 from associate professor mr aj in relation to the husband (exhibit a4), (5) bank ad home loan account statement ending #...00 for the period ending 5 october 2017 (exhibit a5), (6) return to work sa payment advice dated 6 october 2021 (exhibit a6), (7) company g payslip in the name of the husband dated 29 june 2021 (exhibit a7), and (8) affidavit of the wife filed 20 august 2019 (exhibit a8),   impairment assessment report dated 5 november 2021 from associate professor mr aj in relation to the husband (exhibit a4), (5) bank ad home loan account statement ending #...00 for the period ending 5 october 2017 (exhibit a5), (6) return to work sa payment advice dated 6 october 2021 (exhibit a6), (7) company g payslip in the name of the husband dated 29 june 2021 (exhibit a7), and (8) affidavit of the wife filed 20 august 2019 (exhibit a8),   bank ad home loan account statement ending #...00 for the period ending 5 october 2017 (exhibit a5), (6) return to work sa payment advice dated 6 october 2021 (exhibit a6), (7) company g payslip in the name of the husband dated 29 june 2021 (exhibit a7), and (8) affidavit of the wife filed 20 august 2019 (exhibit a8),   return to work sa payment advice dated 6 october 2021 (exhibit a6), (7) company g payslip in the name of the husband dated 29 june 2021 (exhibit a7), and (8) affidavit of the wife filed 20 august 2019 (exhibit a8),   company g payslip in the name of the husband dated 29 june 2021 (exhibit a7), and (8) affidavit of the wife filed 20 august 2019 (exhibit a8),   affidavit of the wife filed 20 august 2019 (exhibit a8),
orders sought by the wife  the court allocate as required by section 90xt(4) of the family law act 1975 ("the act") a base amount of one hundred thirty five thousand nine hundred and one dollars ($135,991.00) to the applicant out of the respondent's entitlement in the fund. (b) pursuant to 90xt(l)(a) of the act whenever the fund makes a splittable payment out of the respondent's interest in the fund the trustee shall: pay to the applicant ([ms harcourt]) or to her legal personal representative the entitlement calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 using the base amount specified at paragraph 8(a), and make a corresponding reduction in the entitlement the respondent would have had in the fund but for this order. (c) that paragraphs 2(a) and 2(b) of these orders have effect from the operative time. (d) the operative time for the purposes of order 2(c) of these orders is four (4) business days after the date of service of these orders upon the trustee of the fund. (e) that the trustee of the fund shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary so that, in accordance with the obligations set out under the act and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the trustee can calculate the entitlement of, and make payment to, the applicant in accordance with paragraph 2 of these orders. (f) that the applicant shall do all things necessary including, but not limited to, exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the respondent's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the applicant in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the applicant pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the applicant, each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that, pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the respondent's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the applicant not a splittable payment. that the respondent pay the applicant's costs of this application and incidental thereto. that the real estate properties, being the whole of the land comprised in certificate of title register book volume [...] folio [...] described as [b street, town c] ("the [b street, town c] property") and volume [...] folio [...] being the property at [d street, town e] ("the [d street, town e] property") hereinafter referred to together as "the properties" be sold, and for that purposes the wife is appointed as trustee for the sale of the properties. the husband do transfer and assign to the trustee for the purposes of paragraph 1, the properties and that he forthwith execute a memorandum of transfer to be prepared by the solicitor for the wife of his interests to the trustee within 7 days of a copy of this order and of the transfer of land being served upon him personally and that he forthwith deliver the said transfers duly executed to the solicitors for the wife, [mr ah], johnston withers, 17 sturt street adelaide sa 5000. in the event that the respondent fails to execute the transfer and to deliver them to the said solicitors within 7 days, the registrar is appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act to execute the transfer in the name of the respondent and do whatever acts and things that may be necessary to give validity and operation to the said transfer. that the trustee sell the properties by private treaty or by public auction as she may be advised subject to the following provisions:   pursuant to 90xt(l)(a) of the act whenever the fund makes a splittable payment out of the respondent's interest in the fund the trustee shall: pay to the applicant ([ms harcourt]) or to her legal personal representative the entitlement calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 using the base amount specified at paragraph 8(a), and make a corresponding reduction in the entitlement the respondent would have had in the fund but for this order. (c) that paragraphs 2(a) and 2(b) of these orders have effect from the operative time. (d) the operative time for the purposes of order 2(c) of these orders is four (4) business days after the date of service of these orders upon the trustee of the fund. (e) that the trustee of the fund shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary so that, in accordance with the obligations set out under the act and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the trustee can calculate the entitlement of, and make payment to, the applicant in accordance with paragraph 2 of these orders. (f) that the applicant shall do all things necessary including, but not limited to, exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the respondent's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the applicant in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the applicant pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the applicant, each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that, pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the respondent's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the applicant not a splittable payment. that the respondent pay the applicant's costs of this application and incidental thereto. that the real estate properties, being the whole of the land comprised in certificate of title register book volume [...] folio [...] described as [b street, town c] ("the [b street, town c] property") and volume [...] folio [...] being the property at [d street, town e] ("the [d street, town e] property") hereinafter referred to together as "the properties" be sold, and for that purposes the wife is appointed as trustee for the sale of the properties. the husband do transfer and assign to the trustee for the purposes of paragraph 1, the properties and that he forthwith execute a memorandum of transfer to be prepared by the solicitor for the wife of his interests to the trustee within 7 days of a copy of this order and of the transfer of land being served upon him personally and that he forthwith deliver the said transfers duly executed to the solicitors for the wife, [mr ah], johnston withers, 17 sturt street adelaide sa 5000. in the event that the respondent fails to execute the transfer and to deliver them to the said solicitors within 7 days, the registrar is appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act to execute the transfer in the name of the respondent and do whatever acts and things that may be necessary to give validity and operation to the said transfer. that the trustee sell the properties by private treaty or by public auction as she may be advised subject to the following provisions:   that paragraphs 2(a) and 2(b) of these orders have effect from the operative time. (d) the operative time for the purposes of order 2(c) of these orders is four (4) business days after the date of service of these orders upon the trustee of the fund. (e) that the trustee of the fund shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary so that, in accordance with the obligations set out under the act and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the trustee can calculate the entitlement of, and make payment to, the applicant in accordance with paragraph 2 of these orders. (f) that the applicant shall do all things necessary including, but not limited to, exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the respondent's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the applicant in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the applicant pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the applicant, each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that, pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the respondent's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the applicant not a splittable payment. that the respondent pay the applicant's costs of this application and incidental thereto. that the real estate properties, being the whole of the land comprised in certificate of title register book volume [...] folio [...] described as [b street, town c] ("the [b street, town c] property") and volume [...] folio [...] being the property at [d street, town e] ("the [d street, town e] property") hereinafter referred to together as "the properties" be sold, and for that purposes the wife is appointed as trustee for the sale of the properties. the husband do transfer and assign to the trustee for the purposes of paragraph 1, the properties and that he forthwith execute a memorandum of transfer to be prepared by the solicitor for the wife of his interests to the trustee within 7 days of a copy of this order and of the transfer of land being served upon him personally and that he forthwith deliver the said transfers duly executed to the solicitors for the wife, [mr ah], johnston withers, 17 sturt street adelaide sa 5000. in the event that the respondent fails to execute the transfer and to deliver them to the said solicitors within 7 days, the registrar is appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act to execute the transfer in the name of the respondent and do whatever acts and things that may be necessary to give validity and operation to the said transfer. that the trustee sell the properties by private treaty or by public auction as she may be advised subject to the following provisions:   the operative time for the purposes of order 2(c) of these orders is four (4) business days after the date of service of these orders upon the trustee of the fund. (e) that the trustee of the fund shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary so that, in accordance with the obligations set out under the act and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the trustee can calculate the entitlement of, and make payment to, the applicant in accordance with paragraph 2 of these orders. (f) that the applicant shall do all things necessary including, but not limited to, exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the respondent's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the applicant in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the applicant pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the applicant, each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that, pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the respondent's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the applicant not a splittable payment. that the respondent pay the applicant's costs of this application and incidental thereto. that the real estate properties, being the whole of the land comprised in certificate of title register book volume [...] folio [...] described as [b street, town c] ("the [b street, town c] property") and volume [...] folio [...] being the property at [d street, town e] ("the [d street, town e] property") hereinafter referred to together as "the properties" be sold, and for that purposes the wife is appointed as trustee for the sale of the properties. the husband do transfer and assign to the trustee for the purposes of paragraph 1, the properties and that he forthwith execute a memorandum of transfer to be prepared by the solicitor for the wife of his interests to the trustee within 7 days of a copy of this order and of the transfer of land being served upon him personally and that he forthwith deliver the said transfers duly executed to the solicitors for the wife, [mr ah], johnston withers, 17 sturt street adelaide sa 5000. in the event that the respondent fails to execute the transfer and to deliver them to the said solicitors within 7 days, the registrar is appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act to execute the transfer in the name of the respondent and do whatever acts and things that may be necessary to give validity and operation to the said transfer. that the trustee sell the properties by private treaty or by public auction as she may be advised subject to the following provisions:   that the trustee of the fund shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary so that, in accordance with the obligations set out under the act and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the trustee can calculate the entitlement of, and make payment to, the applicant in accordance with paragraph 2 of these orders. (f) that the applicant shall do all things necessary including, but not limited to, exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the respondent's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the applicant in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the applicant pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the applicant, each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that, pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the respondent's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the applicant not a splittable payment. that the respondent pay the applicant's costs of this application and incidental thereto. that the real estate properties, being the whole of the land comprised in certificate of title register book volume [...] folio [...] described as [b street, town c] ("the [b street, town c] property") and volume [...] folio [...] being the property at [d street, town e] ("the [d street, town e] property") hereinafter referred to together as "the properties" be sold, and for that purposes the wife is appointed as trustee for the sale of the properties. the husband do transfer and assign to the trustee for the purposes of paragraph 1, the properties and that he forthwith execute a memorandum of transfer to be prepared by the solicitor for the wife of his interests to the trustee within 7 days of a copy of this order and of the transfer of land being served upon him personally and that he forthwith deliver the said transfers duly executed to the solicitors for the wife, [mr ah], johnston withers, 17 sturt street adelaide sa 5000. in the event that the respondent fails to execute the transfer and to deliver them to the said solicitors within 7 days, the registrar is appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act to execute the transfer in the name of the respondent and do whatever acts and things that may be necessary to give validity and operation to the said transfer. that the trustee sell the properties by private treaty or by public auction as she may be advised subject to the following provisions:   that the applicant shall do all things necessary including, but not limited to, exercising her request pursuant to regulation 7a.06(1) of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994 for the rollover or transfer of the transferable benefit out of the respondent's interest in the fund to a fund nominated by the applicant in accordance with regulation 7a.12 of the superannuation industry (supervision) regulations 1994. (g) in the event that the superannuation split to the applicant pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the applicant, each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that, pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the respondent's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the applicant not a splittable payment. that the respondent pay the applicant's costs of this application and incidental thereto. that the real estate properties, being the whole of the land comprised in certificate of title register book volume [...] folio [...] described as [b street, town c] ("the [b street, town c] property") and volume [...] folio [...] being the property at [d street, town e] ("the [d street, town e] property") hereinafter referred to together as "the properties" be sold, and for that purposes the wife is appointed as trustee for the sale of the properties. the husband do transfer and assign to the trustee for the purposes of paragraph 1, the properties and that he forthwith execute a memorandum of transfer to be prepared by the solicitor for the wife of his interests to the trustee within 7 days of a copy of this order and of the transfer of land being served upon him personally and that he forthwith deliver the said transfers duly executed to the solicitors for the wife, [mr ah], johnston withers, 17 sturt street adelaide sa 5000. in the event that the respondent fails to execute the transfer and to deliver them to the said solicitors within 7 days, the registrar is appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act to execute the transfer in the name of the respondent and do whatever acts and things that may be necessary to give validity and operation to the said transfer. that the trustee sell the properties by private treaty or by public auction as she may be advised subject to the following provisions:   in the event that the superannuation split to the applicant pursuant to these orders can be rolled over into a separate account to the applicant, each of the parties do all such acts and things and execute all such documents as may be necessary to facilitate and to implement that rollover. (h) that, pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the respondent's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the applicant not a splittable payment. that the respondent pay the applicant's costs of this application and incidental thereto. that the real estate properties, being the whole of the land comprised in certificate of title register book volume [...] folio [...] described as [b street, town c] ("the [b street, town c] property") and volume [...] folio [...] being the property at [d street, town e] ("the [d street, town e] property") hereinafter referred to together as "the properties" be sold, and for that purposes the wife is appointed as trustee for the sale of the properties. the husband do transfer and assign to the trustee for the purposes of paragraph 1, the properties and that he forthwith execute a memorandum of transfer to be prepared by the solicitor for the wife of his interests to the trustee within 7 days of a copy of this order and of the transfer of land being served upon him personally and that he forthwith deliver the said transfers duly executed to the solicitors for the wife, [mr ah], johnston withers, 17 sturt street adelaide sa 5000. in the event that the respondent fails to execute the transfer and to deliver them to the said solicitors within 7 days, the registrar is appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act to execute the transfer in the name of the respondent and do whatever acts and things that may be necessary to give validity and operation to the said transfer. that the trustee sell the properties by private treaty or by public auction as she may be advised subject to the following provisions:   that, pursuant to regulation 14f of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 any payment from the respondent's superannuation interest made after the trustee has rolled over or transferred the transferable benefit to a fund nominated by the applicant not a splittable payment. that the respondent pay the applicant's costs of this application and incidental thereto. that the real estate properties, being the whole of the land comprised in certificate of title register book volume [...] folio [...] described as [b street, town c] ("the [b street, town c] property") and volume [...] folio [...] being the property at [d street, town e] ("the [d street, town e] property") hereinafter referred to together as "the properties" be sold, and for that purposes the wife is appointed as trustee for the sale of the properties. the husband do transfer and assign to the trustee for the purposes of paragraph 1, the properties and that he forthwith execute a memorandum of transfer to be prepared by the solicitor for the wife of his interests to the trustee within 7 days of a copy of this order and of the transfer of land being served upon him personally and that he forthwith deliver the said transfers duly executed to the solicitors for the wife, [mr ah], johnston withers, 17 sturt street adelaide sa 5000. in the event that the respondent fails to execute the transfer and to deliver them to the said solicitors within 7 days, the registrar is appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act to execute the transfer in the name of the respondent and do whatever acts and things that may be necessary to give validity and operation to the said transfer. that the trustee sell the properties by private treaty or by public auction as she may be advised subject to the following provisions:
7.1 the offering price or reserved price in relation to the [d street, town e] property not be less than the sum of $150,000.00, 7.2 the offering price or reserved price in relation to the [b street, town c] property not be less than $300,000.00, 7.3 the trustee may incur advertising expenses in relation to the properties up to the amount of $5,000 with respect to each property, 7.4 the trustee may incur costs for the purposes of redecorating or improvement of the presentation of the properties for the purposes of the sale to such amount as may be advised by the agents acting on the sale but not exceeding the amount of $2.500 for each property, 7.5 the trustee may retain [mr f] of [company g] for the purposes of acting as the agent for the sale of the [d street, town e] property, 7.6 the trustee may retain [ms h] of [j property] for the purposes of acting as the agent on the sale of the [b street, town c] property, 7.7 the trustee may enter into appropriate agency agreement with respect to an agent at an agreed sales commission of 2.7% or less for each of the properties, 7.8 the trustee may retain a solicitor and/or conveyancer of her choice to act for the vendor on the sale, 7.9 the trustee is authorise to enter into a contract for sale on such terms as advised by the solicitors acting upon the sale, 7.10 liberty to apply to the court be reserved to the trustee to apply to the court in respect of the terms and conditions of the sale for further directions in the event that it proves necessary, 7.11 upon completion of the sale of each of the properties the proceeds of sale shall be distributed as follows: 7.11.1 in payment of the agent's commission on sale, 7.11.2 the amount required to discharge any existing mortgage, 7.11.3 the amount required for normal conveyancing adjustments as to municipal and water rates on sale, 7.11.4 the payment of legal costs of acting on the sale, 7.11.5 the remaining balance is to be held on trust in the johnston withers trust account pending further orders of the court. 8. such further or other orders as this honourable court deems fit.
orders sought by the husband  that the former matrimonial home and d street, town e be sold. the husband was opposed to the wife’s order that she have sole control of the sale process, and (2) that there be an order for superannuation splitting in the terms provided in paragraph 2 of the wife’s further amended initiating application such that there be a splitting order in favour of the wife from the husband’s superannuation with n super fund in the sum of $135,991.00, and (3) that the parties do otherwise retain all other assets within their respective possession or control.   that there be an order for superannuation splitting in the terms provided in paragraph 2 of the wife’s further amended initiating application such that there be a splitting order in favour of the wife from the husband’s superannuation with n super fund in the sum of $135,991.00, and (3) that the parties do otherwise retain all other assets within their respective possession or control.   that the parties do otherwise retain all other assets within their respective possession or control.
issues in dispute  whether or not the sum withdrawn by the husband in the sum of $55,000.00 from the parties joint bank ad offset account ending ...40 should be added back into the pool or not, (2) whether or not the wife’s personal loan with bank ad and with a balance of $14,905.00 should be adjusted as a joint liability, (3) whether or not the wife’s bank ad visa with a balance in the sum of $8,500.00 should be added back into the balance sheet, (4) whether or not there was a value attached to the wife’s salon business “company ae”, (5) whether or not the sum of $10,000.00 withdrawn by the wife from the parties joint bank ad account number ...40 prior to separation should be added back into the pool, and (6) whether there should be a 60/40% split in favour of the wife of the non-superannuation assets as sought by the wife, or a 55/45% split of the non-superannuation assets in favour of the wife as sought by the husband.   whether or not the wife’s personal loan with bank ad and with a balance of $14,905.00 should be adjusted as a joint liability, (3) whether or not the wife’s bank ad visa with a balance in the sum of $8,500.00 should be added back into the balance sheet, (4) whether or not there was a value attached to the wife’s salon business “company ae”, (5) whether or not the sum of $10,000.00 withdrawn by the wife from the parties joint bank ad account number ...40 prior to separation should be added back into the pool, and (6) whether there should be a 60/40% split in favour of the wife of the non-superannuation assets as sought by the wife, or a 55/45% split of the non-superannuation assets in favour of the wife as sought by the husband.   whether or not the wife’s bank ad visa with a balance in the sum of $8,500.00 should be added back into the balance sheet, (4) whether or not there was a value attached to the wife’s salon business “company ae”, (5) whether or not the sum of $10,000.00 withdrawn by the wife from the parties joint bank ad account number ...40 prior to separation should be added back into the pool, and (6) whether there should be a 60/40% split in favour of the wife of the non-superannuation assets as sought by the wife, or a 55/45% split of the non-superannuation assets in favour of the wife as sought by the husband.   whether or not there was a value attached to the wife’s salon business “company ae”, (5) whether or not the sum of $10,000.00 withdrawn by the wife from the parties joint bank ad account number ...40 prior to separation should be added back into the pool, and (6) whether there should be a 60/40% split in favour of the wife of the non-superannuation assets as sought by the wife, or a 55/45% split of the non-superannuation assets in favour of the wife as sought by the husband.   whether or not the sum of $10,000.00 withdrawn by the wife from the parties joint bank ad account number ...40 prior to separation should be added back into the pool, and (6) whether there should be a 60/40% split in favour of the wife of the non-superannuation assets as sought by the wife, or a 55/45% split of the non-superannuation assets in favour of the wife as sought by the husband.   whether there should be a 60/40% split in favour of the wife of the non-superannuation assets as sought by the wife, or a 55/45% split of the non-superannuation assets in favour of the wife as sought by the husband.
evidence
the wife
the husband
in my opinion, there is no whole person impairment as a result of the right knee injury that occurred on 8 july 2020.
assets and liabilities
description
ownership
applicant’s value
respondent’s value
assets
former matrimonial home at b street, town c (husband residing)
joint
$ e 300,000.00
350,000.00
property at d street, town e
e 170,000.00
150,000.00
motor vehicle 2
wife
e 3,000.00
5,000.00
furniture
e 1,500.00
agreed
bank ad savings account no ...40 as at 22 april 2022
500.00
motor vehicle 1
husband
e 13,000.00
e 2,000.00
tools
e 1,000.00
company l 2,346 @ $47.44 (as at 4.5.22)
111,294.00
90,297.00
company m shares 2,346 @ $4.65 (as at 4.5.22)
10,908.00
8,750.00
bank account at november 2021
6,000.00
7,175.00
boat (stored at d street, town e)
e 5,000.00
nil
net total of monies withdrawn by husband from bank ad joint offset account at separation
55,000.00
company l share dividends 2017-2019 – total dividends received $12,182.00
12,182.00
business “company ae”
60,000.00
monies withdrawn by wife post separation from bank ad joint offset account
10,000.00
assets subtotal
$ 693,884.00
711,404.00
liabilities
bank ad home loan loan account number ... at 22 april 2022
loan account number ... at 22 april 2022
100,064.00
personal loan at 22 april 2022
14,905.00
nk
visa bank ad at 22 april 2022
8,500.00
liabilities subtotal
$ 123,469.00
superannuation
name of fund
type of interest
member
n super fund – 30.06.21
accumulation
396,811.00
405,000.00
k super fund – 30.06.21
124,830.00
superannuation subtotal
$ 521,641.00
the former matrimonial home at b street, town c and the property at d street, town e
boat
monies withdrawn by husband from joint bank ad offset account
monies withdrawn by the wife from the joint bank ad account
wife’s business “company ae”
wife’s personal loan
bank ad visa liability in the name of the wife
legal fees
revised asset pool
value
1
to be sold
2
3
4,000.00
4
1,500.00
5
bank ad savings account no ... as at 22 april 2022
6
13,000.00
7
2,000.00
8
1,000.00
9
company l shares 2,346 @ $47.44 (as at 4.5.22)
10
company m shares2,346 @ $4.65 (as at 4.5.22)
11
bank account
12
13
14
company l share dividends from 2019-2022
$15,000.00
15
wife’s business
$ 154,229.00
16
bank ad home loan loan account number ... at 1 july 2022
loan account number ... at 1 july 2022
17
$ 114,969.00
18
19
submissions
the wife
applicable legal principles  in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property.[1]   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property.[1]
that the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.[2]   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.[3]   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.[3]   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.[3]   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.[3]   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.[3]   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.[3]   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.[3]   the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:   himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:  ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:   subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under:   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia, and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and   where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and  ) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and   the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and   the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and  a) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viiiab in relation to:   a party to the marriage, or (ii) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.  ) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.  i) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.  ) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.
in many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife. no less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. that is, any express or implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing arrangements of martial property interests were sufficient or appropriate during the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the ending of the marital relationship. and the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4).[6]
contributions
section 79(4)(a) and (b) – financial contributions   the sum of $8,209.00 between the period 6 october 2020 to 5 april 2021, (b) the sum of $6,000.00 between the period 6 april 2021 to 5 october 2021, and (c) the sum of $4,589.95 between the period 6 october 2021 and 5 april 2022.   the sum of $6,000.00 between the period 6 april 2021 to 5 october 2021, and (c) the sum of $4,589.95 between the period 6 october 2021 and 5 april 2022.   the sum of $4,589.95 between the period 6 october 2021 and 5 april 2022.   from the date of separation until 5 april 2019, the sum of $1,744.00 per month, and (b) from 5 april 2019 to april 2022, the sum of $1,572.00 per month.   from 5 april 2019 to april 2022, the sum of $1,572.00 per month.
section 79(4)(c) – contributions to the welfare of the family
section 79(4)(d) – the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage
contribution conclusion
section 75(2) adjustment
the overall effect of the orders
justice and equity
conclusion
associate: dated: 11 august 2022
dated: 11 august 2022
[1] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(1). [2] ibid s 79(2). [3] ibid s 79(4). [4] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108 (per french cj, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[5] ibid [41].[6] ibid [42].