last updated: 29 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mullis & quimby [2022] fedcfamc2f 1046
orders
the court orders that:  within 30 days the wife pay to the husband the sum of $288,608.00. (b) simultaneously with payment by the wife to the husband of the sum referred to in paragraph (a) of this order, the husband sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to transfer to the wife the whole of his right title and interest in the real property at street a1, suburb b in the state of new south wales being the whole of the land in certificate of title folio identifier ... (“the property”) and simultaneously with such payment the wife shall be solely responsible as between the wife and the husband for all outgoings payable in relation to the property and the wife shall indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in relation to all and any such payments, and further simultaneously with such payment the wife shall do all things necessary to discharge the mortgage currently registered over the property by bank j being registered dealing number ...80 (“the mortgage”) so as to release the husband from all and any liability in relation to the mortgage. (c) that in the event that the wife does not pay to the husband the sum referred to in paragraph (a) of this order within 56 days from the date of this order, or does not comply with paragraph (b) of this order, then the wife shall forthwith thereafter and at her sole expense as between herself and the husband engage qualified tradesmen to do all things necessary to rectify the encroachements affecting the boundary between the property and street a2, suburb b in the state of new south wales (“the street a2, suburb b property”) and to disconnect the connection between the septic connections of the property and the street a2, suburb b property and immediately upon completion of that work the husband shall sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list for sale the property at a listing price agreed upon between the parties with a real estate agent agreed upon between them and shall proceed to a sale of the property at a sale price agreed upon between them and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as follows:- (i) in adjustment of rates on settlement, (ii) in payment of agent’s commission (if any) on sale, (iii) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment to the bank j of a sum sufficient to discharge the mortgage, (v) in payment to the husband of the sum of $288,608 together with any interest payable thereon pursuant section 117b of the family law act 1975, (vi) in payment of the balance to the wife. (d) that in the event that paragraph (c) of this order operates and the property does not sell by private sale within five months from the date of this order then the husband shall sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list the property for sale by public auction with an auction agent agreed upon between the parties at a reserve price agreed upon between them and shall proceed to a sale at a sale price agreed upon between them and the wife shall be solely responsible for all costs and expenses of the auction payable prior to the auction sale and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in paragraph (c) of this order. (e) that in the event that paragraph (d) of this order operates and the property does not sell by public auction in accordance with paragraph (d) then the property shall be resubmitted for sale by private treaty in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (c) of this order and the property shall be resubmitted for sale by public auction at six (6) monthly intervals from the last public auction and be resubmitted for sale by private treaty between such auctions, until the property shall be sold and upon such sale either by public auction or private treaty the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in paragraph (c). (f) that in the event that the parties are unable to reach agreement in relation to an auction agent, a real estate agent, a listing price, a reserve price or a sale price whether for a sale by public auction or by private treaty then the parties shall and do hereby appoint the president for the time being of the real estate institute of new south wales or his or her nominee to determine such disputed matter or matters and the parties shall thereafter act in accordance with that determination and the parties shall be equally responsible for the costs and expenses of the president or his or her nominee in making such determination. (g) that the husband is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the wife of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in his power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order. (h) that the wife is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the husband of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in her power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order.   simultaneously with payment by the wife to the husband of the sum referred to in paragraph (a) of this order, the husband sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to transfer to the wife the whole of his right title and interest in the real property at street a1, suburb b in the state of new south wales being the whole of the land in certificate of title folio identifier ... (“the property”) and simultaneously with such payment the wife shall be solely responsible as between the wife and the husband for all outgoings payable in relation to the property and the wife shall indemnify and keep indemnified the husband in relation to all and any such payments, and further simultaneously with such payment the wife shall do all things necessary to discharge the mortgage currently registered over the property by bank j being registered dealing number ...80 (“the mortgage”) so as to release the husband from all and any liability in relation to the mortgage. (c) that in the event that the wife does not pay to the husband the sum referred to in paragraph (a) of this order within 56 days from the date of this order, or does not comply with paragraph (b) of this order, then the wife shall forthwith thereafter and at her sole expense as between herself and the husband engage qualified tradesmen to do all things necessary to rectify the encroachements affecting the boundary between the property and street a2, suburb b in the state of new south wales (“the street a2, suburb b property”) and to disconnect the connection between the septic connections of the property and the street a2, suburb b property and immediately upon completion of that work the husband shall sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list for sale the property at a listing price agreed upon between the parties with a real estate agent agreed upon between them and shall proceed to a sale of the property at a sale price agreed upon between them and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as follows:- (i) in adjustment of rates on settlement, (ii) in payment of agent’s commission (if any) on sale, (iii) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment to the bank j of a sum sufficient to discharge the mortgage, (v) in payment to the husband of the sum of $288,608 together with any interest payable thereon pursuant section 117b of the family law act 1975, (vi) in payment of the balance to the wife. (d) that in the event that paragraph (c) of this order operates and the property does not sell by private sale within five months from the date of this order then the husband shall sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list the property for sale by public auction with an auction agent agreed upon between the parties at a reserve price agreed upon between them and shall proceed to a sale at a sale price agreed upon between them and the wife shall be solely responsible for all costs and expenses of the auction payable prior to the auction sale and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in paragraph (c) of this order. (e) that in the event that paragraph (d) of this order operates and the property does not sell by public auction in accordance with paragraph (d) then the property shall be resubmitted for sale by private treaty in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (c) of this order and the property shall be resubmitted for sale by public auction at six (6) monthly intervals from the last public auction and be resubmitted for sale by private treaty between such auctions, until the property shall be sold and upon such sale either by public auction or private treaty the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in paragraph (c). (f) that in the event that the parties are unable to reach agreement in relation to an auction agent, a real estate agent, a listing price, a reserve price or a sale price whether for a sale by public auction or by private treaty then the parties shall and do hereby appoint the president for the time being of the real estate institute of new south wales or his or her nominee to determine such disputed matter or matters and the parties shall thereafter act in accordance with that determination and the parties shall be equally responsible for the costs and expenses of the president or his or her nominee in making such determination. (g) that the husband is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the wife of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in his power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order. (h) that the wife is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the husband of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in her power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order.   that in the event that the wife does not pay to the husband the sum referred to in paragraph (a) of this order within 56 days from the date of this order, or does not comply with paragraph (b) of this order, then the wife shall forthwith thereafter and at her sole expense as between herself and the husband engage qualified tradesmen to do all things necessary to rectify the encroachements affecting the boundary between the property and street a2, suburb b in the state of new south wales (“the street a2, suburb b property”) and to disconnect the connection between the septic connections of the property and the street a2, suburb b property and immediately upon completion of that work the husband shall sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list for sale the property at a listing price agreed upon between the parties with a real estate agent agreed upon between them and shall proceed to a sale of the property at a sale price agreed upon between them and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as follows:- (i) in adjustment of rates on settlement, (ii) in payment of agent’s commission (if any) on sale, (iii) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment to the bank j of a sum sufficient to discharge the mortgage, (v) in payment to the husband of the sum of $288,608 together with any interest payable thereon pursuant section 117b of the family law act 1975, (vi) in payment of the balance to the wife. (d) that in the event that paragraph (c) of this order operates and the property does not sell by private sale within five months from the date of this order then the husband shall sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list the property for sale by public auction with an auction agent agreed upon between the parties at a reserve price agreed upon between them and shall proceed to a sale at a sale price agreed upon between them and the wife shall be solely responsible for all costs and expenses of the auction payable prior to the auction sale and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in paragraph (c) of this order. (e) that in the event that paragraph (d) of this order operates and the property does not sell by public auction in accordance with paragraph (d) then the property shall be resubmitted for sale by private treaty in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (c) of this order and the property shall be resubmitted for sale by public auction at six (6) monthly intervals from the last public auction and be resubmitted for sale by private treaty between such auctions, until the property shall be sold and upon such sale either by public auction or private treaty the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in paragraph (c). (f) that in the event that the parties are unable to reach agreement in relation to an auction agent, a real estate agent, a listing price, a reserve price or a sale price whether for a sale by public auction or by private treaty then the parties shall and do hereby appoint the president for the time being of the real estate institute of new south wales or his or her nominee to determine such disputed matter or matters and the parties shall thereafter act in accordance with that determination and the parties shall be equally responsible for the costs and expenses of the president or his or her nominee in making such determination. (g) that the husband is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the wife of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in his power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order. (h) that the wife is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the husband of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in her power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order.   in adjustment of rates on settlement, (ii) in payment of agent’s commission (if any) on sale, (iii) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment to the bank j of a sum sufficient to discharge the mortgage, (v) in payment to the husband of the sum of $288,608 together with any interest payable thereon pursuant section 117b of the family law act 1975, (vi) in payment of the balance to the wife.  ) in payment of agent’s commission (if any) on sale, (iii) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment to the bank j of a sum sufficient to discharge the mortgage, (v) in payment to the husband of the sum of $288,608 together with any interest payable thereon pursuant section 117b of the family law act 1975, (vi) in payment of the balance to the wife.  i) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment to the bank j of a sum sufficient to discharge the mortgage, (v) in payment to the husband of the sum of $288,608 together with any interest payable thereon pursuant section 117b of the family law act 1975, (vi) in payment of the balance to the wife.  ) in payment to the bank j of a sum sufficient to discharge the mortgage, (v) in payment to the husband of the sum of $288,608 together with any interest payable thereon pursuant section 117b of the family law act 1975, (vi) in payment of the balance to the wife.   in payment to the husband of the sum of $288,608 together with any interest payable thereon pursuant section 117b of the family law act 1975, (vi) in payment of the balance to the wife.  ) in payment of the balance to the wife.   that in the event that paragraph (c) of this order operates and the property does not sell by private sale within five months from the date of this order then the husband shall sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list the property for sale by public auction with an auction agent agreed upon between the parties at a reserve price agreed upon between them and shall proceed to a sale at a sale price agreed upon between them and the wife shall be solely responsible for all costs and expenses of the auction payable prior to the auction sale and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in paragraph (c) of this order. (e) that in the event that paragraph (d) of this order operates and the property does not sell by public auction in accordance with paragraph (d) then the property shall be resubmitted for sale by private treaty in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (c) of this order and the property shall be resubmitted for sale by public auction at six (6) monthly intervals from the last public auction and be resubmitted for sale by private treaty between such auctions, until the property shall be sold and upon such sale either by public auction or private treaty the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in paragraph (c). (f) that in the event that the parties are unable to reach agreement in relation to an auction agent, a real estate agent, a listing price, a reserve price or a sale price whether for a sale by public auction or by private treaty then the parties shall and do hereby appoint the president for the time being of the real estate institute of new south wales or his or her nominee to determine such disputed matter or matters and the parties shall thereafter act in accordance with that determination and the parties shall be equally responsible for the costs and expenses of the president or his or her nominee in making such determination. (g) that the husband is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the wife of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in his power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order. (h) that the wife is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the husband of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in her power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order.   that in the event that paragraph (d) of this order operates and the property does not sell by public auction in accordance with paragraph (d) then the property shall be resubmitted for sale by private treaty in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (c) of this order and the property shall be resubmitted for sale by public auction at six (6) monthly intervals from the last public auction and be resubmitted for sale by private treaty between such auctions, until the property shall be sold and upon such sale either by public auction or private treaty the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in paragraph (c). (f) that in the event that the parties are unable to reach agreement in relation to an auction agent, a real estate agent, a listing price, a reserve price or a sale price whether for a sale by public auction or by private treaty then the parties shall and do hereby appoint the president for the time being of the real estate institute of new south wales or his or her nominee to determine such disputed matter or matters and the parties shall thereafter act in accordance with that determination and the parties shall be equally responsible for the costs and expenses of the president or his or her nominee in making such determination. (g) that the husband is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the wife of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in his power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order. (h) that the wife is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the husband of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in her power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order.   that in the event that the parties are unable to reach agreement in relation to an auction agent, a real estate agent, a listing price, a reserve price or a sale price whether for a sale by public auction or by private treaty then the parties shall and do hereby appoint the president for the time being of the real estate institute of new south wales or his or her nominee to determine such disputed matter or matters and the parties shall thereafter act in accordance with that determination and the parties shall be equally responsible for the costs and expenses of the president or his or her nominee in making such determination. (g) that the husband is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the wife of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in his power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order. (h) that the wife is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the husband of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in her power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order.   that the husband is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the wife of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in his power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order. (h) that the wife is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the husband of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in her power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order.   that the wife is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the husband of all items of real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources, including superannuation entitlements, currently in her power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order.
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction  the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children x and y, (2) the children live with the wife and spend time with the husband “on a liberal and flexible basis in accordance with their wishes” and have telephone communication with their husband “on a liberal and flexible basis in accordance with their wishes with both parties to facilitate such telephone communication.”   the children live with the wife and spend time with the husband “on a liberal and flexible basis in accordance with their wishes” and have telephone communication with their husband “on a liberal and flexible basis in accordance with their wishes with both parties to facilitate such telephone communication.”
the materials relied upon and final hearing  case summary document prepared by mr jackson, (2) further amended initiating application filed 7 july 2020, (3) affidavit of the husband affirmed 28 august 2020 and filed 1 september 2020, (4) financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 31 august 2020 and filed 1 september 2020, (5) affidavit of mr k, the single expert witness real property valuer, sworn 25 september 2020 and filed 28 september 2020, and (6) the husband’s minute of orders sought on final hearing (exhibit a5).   further amended initiating application filed 7 july 2020, (3) affidavit of the husband affirmed 28 august 2020 and filed 1 september 2020, (4) financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 31 august 2020 and filed 1 september 2020, (5) affidavit of mr k, the single expert witness real property valuer, sworn 25 september 2020 and filed 28 september 2020, and (6) the husband’s minute of orders sought on final hearing (exhibit a5).   affidavit of the husband affirmed 28 august 2020 and filed 1 september 2020, (4) financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 31 august 2020 and filed 1 september 2020, (5) affidavit of mr k, the single expert witness real property valuer, sworn 25 september 2020 and filed 28 september 2020, and (6) the husband’s minute of orders sought on final hearing (exhibit a5).   financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 31 august 2020 and filed 1 september 2020, (5) affidavit of mr k, the single expert witness real property valuer, sworn 25 september 2020 and filed 28 september 2020, and (6) the husband’s minute of orders sought on final hearing (exhibit a5).   affidavit of mr k, the single expert witness real property valuer, sworn 25 september 2020 and filed 28 september 2020, and (6) the husband’s minute of orders sought on final hearing (exhibit a5).   the husband’s minute of orders sought on final hearing (exhibit a5).   exhibit a1 – being the husband’s whole tender bundle containing: (a) bank records for his westpac accounts ending #...03 and #...66, (b) bank records for his bank j accounts ending #...05 and #...06, (c) certain bank j cheque butts, (d) a selection of receipts for materials, tools, and labour costs relating to the construction of the dwelling at street a2, suburb b nsw for over the amount of $900, and (e) an invoice from company h and deposit receipt dated 28 february 2001. (2) exhibit a2 – being a summary pursuant to section 50 of the evidence act 1995 (cth) of transactions marked with highlighter statements for the husband’s bank j account ending ...52 for the period 25 may 2005 to 25 august 2011 the source documents were served in accordance with the requirements of the section), (3) exhibit a3 – being paragraph 52 of the wife’s affidavit sworn 31 october 2013 and filed in the proceedings that day, and (4) exhibit a4 – being a “loan acceptance document” from westpac signed by the wife dated 5 march 2021 and “your loan authority document” from westpac signed by the wife dated 5 march 2021.   bank records for his westpac accounts ending #...03 and #...66, (b) bank records for his bank j accounts ending #...05 and #...06, (c) certain bank j cheque butts, (d) a selection of receipts for materials, tools, and labour costs relating to the construction of the dwelling at street a2, suburb b nsw for over the amount of $900, and (e) an invoice from company h and deposit receipt dated 28 february 2001.   bank records for his bank j accounts ending #...05 and #...06, (c) certain bank j cheque butts, (d) a selection of receipts for materials, tools, and labour costs relating to the construction of the dwelling at street a2, suburb b nsw for over the amount of $900, and (e) an invoice from company h and deposit receipt dated 28 february 2001.   certain bank j cheque butts, (d) a selection of receipts for materials, tools, and labour costs relating to the construction of the dwelling at street a2, suburb b nsw for over the amount of $900, and (e) an invoice from company h and deposit receipt dated 28 february 2001.   a selection of receipts for materials, tools, and labour costs relating to the construction of the dwelling at street a2, suburb b nsw for over the amount of $900, and (e) an invoice from company h and deposit receipt dated 28 february 2001.   an invoice from company h and deposit receipt dated 28 february 2001.   exhibit a2 – being a summary pursuant to section 50 of the evidence act 1995 (cth) of transactions marked with highlighter statements for the husband’s bank j account ending ...52 for the period 25 may 2005 to 25 august 2011 the source documents were served in accordance with the requirements of the section), (3) exhibit a3 – being paragraph 52 of the wife’s affidavit sworn 31 october 2013 and filed in the proceedings that day, and (4) exhibit a4 – being a “loan acceptance document” from westpac signed by the wife dated 5 march 2021 and “your loan authority document” from westpac signed by the wife dated 5 march 2021.   exhibit a3 – being paragraph 52 of the wife’s affidavit sworn 31 october 2013 and filed in the proceedings that day, and (4) exhibit a4 – being a “loan acceptance document” from westpac signed by the wife dated 5 march 2021 and “your loan authority document” from westpac signed by the wife dated 5 march 2021.   exhibit a4 – being a “loan acceptance document” from westpac signed by the wife dated 5 march 2021 and “your loan authority document” from westpac signed by the wife dated 5 march 2021.   case outline document prepared by mr dura and filed 29 september 2020, (2) further amended response to further amended initiating application filed 27 august 2020, (3) affidavit of the wife sworn and filed 10 september 2020, (4) financial statement of the wife sworn or affirmed and filed 10 september 2020, and (5) affidavit of ms l (the wife’s mother) sworn nine september and filed 10 september 2020.   further amended response to further amended initiating application filed 27 august 2020, (3) affidavit of the wife sworn and filed 10 september 2020, (4) financial statement of the wife sworn or affirmed and filed 10 september 2020, and (5) affidavit of ms l (the wife’s mother) sworn nine september and filed 10 september 2020.   affidavit of the wife sworn and filed 10 september 2020, (4) financial statement of the wife sworn or affirmed and filed 10 september 2020, and (5) affidavit of ms l (the wife’s mother) sworn nine september and filed 10 september 2020.   financial statement of the wife sworn or affirmed and filed 10 september 2020, and (5) affidavit of ms l (the wife’s mother) sworn nine september and filed 10 september 2020.   affidavit of ms l (the wife’s mother) sworn nine september and filed 10 september 2020.   exhibit r1 – the whole of the wife’s tender bundle, being: (a) three account payable notices directed to the wife from centrelink dated 11 september 2020, (b) a one page document entitled “higher education loan program (help) 553”, (c) 16 pages of photographs of street a1, suburb b, (d) 10 pages of photographs of street a2, suburb b, (e) building inspection report of m pty ltd dated 9 july 2020 on street a2, suburb b, (f) building inspection report of company n dated 15 july 2020 on 52, (g) individual taxation return of the husband for year ended 30 june 2020, and (h) australian taxation office activity statement of the husband from 4 january 2011 to 7 september 2020, (2) exhibit r2 – being the financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 12 may 2015 and filed in the proceedings 14 may 2015, (3) exhibit r3 – being the financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 12 july and filed 13 july 2018, (4) exhibit r4 – being loan statements for the husband’s loan account ending #...52 dated 14 november 2018 to 1 february 2019, (5) exhibit r5 – being a letter from willis & bowring solicitors to anne day & associates dated 7 august 2020, (6) exhibit r6 – being a letter from anne day & associates to willis & bowring solicitors dated 26 august 2020,   three account payable notices directed to the wife from centrelink dated 11 september 2020, (b) a one page document entitled “higher education loan program (help) 553”, (c) 16 pages of photographs of street a1, suburb b, (d) 10 pages of photographs of street a2, suburb b, (e) building inspection report of m pty ltd dated 9 july 2020 on street a2, suburb b, (f) building inspection report of company n dated 15 july 2020 on 52, (g) individual taxation return of the husband for year ended 30 june 2020, and (h) australian taxation office activity statement of the husband from 4 january 2011 to 7 september 2020,   a one page document entitled “higher education loan program (help) 553”, (c) 16 pages of photographs of street a1, suburb b, (d) 10 pages of photographs of street a2, suburb b, (e) building inspection report of m pty ltd dated 9 july 2020 on street a2, suburb b, (f) building inspection report of company n dated 15 july 2020 on 52, (g) individual taxation return of the husband for year ended 30 june 2020, and (h) australian taxation office activity statement of the husband from 4 january 2011 to 7 september 2020,   16 pages of photographs of street a1, suburb b, (d) 10 pages of photographs of street a2, suburb b, (e) building inspection report of m pty ltd dated 9 july 2020 on street a2, suburb b, (f) building inspection report of company n dated 15 july 2020 on 52, (g) individual taxation return of the husband for year ended 30 june 2020, and (h) australian taxation office activity statement of the husband from 4 january 2011 to 7 september 2020,   10 pages of photographs of street a2, suburb b, (e) building inspection report of m pty ltd dated 9 july 2020 on street a2, suburb b, (f) building inspection report of company n dated 15 july 2020 on 52, (g) individual taxation return of the husband for year ended 30 june 2020, and (h) australian taxation office activity statement of the husband from 4 january 2011 to 7 september 2020,   building inspection report of m pty ltd dated 9 july 2020 on street a2, suburb b, (f) building inspection report of company n dated 15 july 2020 on 52, (g) individual taxation return of the husband for year ended 30 june 2020, and (h) australian taxation office activity statement of the husband from 4 january 2011 to 7 september 2020,   building inspection report of company n dated 15 july 2020 on 52, (g) individual taxation return of the husband for year ended 30 june 2020, and (h) australian taxation office activity statement of the husband from 4 january 2011 to 7 september 2020,   individual taxation return of the husband for year ended 30 june 2020, and (h) australian taxation office activity statement of the husband from 4 january 2011 to 7 september 2020,   australian taxation office activity statement of the husband from 4 january 2011 to 7 september 2020,   exhibit r2 – being the financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 12 may 2015 and filed in the proceedings 14 may 2015, (3) exhibit r3 – being the financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 12 july and filed 13 july 2018, (4) exhibit r4 – being loan statements for the husband’s loan account ending #...52 dated 14 november 2018 to 1 february 2019, (5) exhibit r5 – being a letter from willis & bowring solicitors to anne day & associates dated 7 august 2020, (6) exhibit r6 – being a letter from anne day & associates to willis & bowring solicitors dated 26 august 2020,   exhibit r3 – being the financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 12 july and filed 13 july 2018, (4) exhibit r4 – being loan statements for the husband’s loan account ending #...52 dated 14 november 2018 to 1 february 2019, (5) exhibit r5 – being a letter from willis & bowring solicitors to anne day & associates dated 7 august 2020, (6) exhibit r6 – being a letter from anne day & associates to willis & bowring solicitors dated 26 august 2020,   exhibit r4 – being loan statements for the husband’s loan account ending #...52 dated 14 november 2018 to 1 february 2019, (5) exhibit r5 – being a letter from willis & bowring solicitors to anne day & associates dated 7 august 2020, (6) exhibit r6 – being a letter from anne day & associates to willis & bowring solicitors dated 26 august 2020,   exhibit r5 – being a letter from willis & bowring solicitors to anne day & associates dated 7 august 2020, (6) exhibit r6 – being a letter from anne day & associates to willis & bowring solicitors dated 26 august 2020,   exhibit r6 – being a letter from anne day & associates to willis & bowring solicitors dated 26 august 2020,   exhibit r7 – being statements for a westpac bonus saver account ending #...82 in her sole name dated 27 september to 29 october 2002 and 29 april to 29 may 2003,   exhibit r8 – being a bundle of documents relating to the wife from centrelink, and (9) exhibit r9 –being a bundle of correspondence from centrelink to the wife between 24 january 2005 and 22 april 2006.   exhibit r9 –being a bundle of correspondence from centrelink to the wife between 24 january 2005 and 22 april 2006.
the competing claims of the parties
1. that within seven days of the date of orders the wife vacate the property and premises known as [street a1, suburb b], and thereafter the husband have exclusive occupancy thereof. 2. subject to order 10 the wife pay to the husband the sum of $300,000. 3. in default of the payment referred to in order to the property at [street a2, suburb b] been the land contained in folio identifier ... be sold for the best price reasonably obtainable including but not limited to the following:
a. listing the property with a real estate agent operating in the local area is agreed between the parties and failing agreement by the parties in such real estate agent as nominated by the pres of the real estate institute of new south wales such appointment at the cost of the wife. b. instructing a solicitor or conveyancer to act on the sale and in the presence of agreement a solicitor or conveyancer is appointed by the pres of the law society of new south wales, at the cost of the wife. c. the sale price and listing price be agreed between the parties and failing agreement between the parties, the sale and listing price nominated by the pres at the time being by the new south wales chair of the australian property institute the costs of such appointment to be borne by the wife. d. in the event that the property has not been sold within three months of the date of listing than the sale and listing price be varied as agreed between the parties and failing agreement at a sale price and listing price nominated by the valuer appointed by the new south wales chair of australian property institute.
4. that the parties shall do all acts and things necessary to cooperate with the real estate agent in order to facilitate the sale of the property. 5. that upon the sale of [street a2, suburb b] the sale proceeds be applied in the following manner and priority:
a. in payment of any real estate agents and legal costs of sale, b. any sum owing to westpac banking corporation limited or any mortgagee, c. the sum of $300,000 plus interest owing from the date due for payment until the date of payment to the husband and any remaining balance to the wife.
6. in the event that any party refuses or neglects to sign any document or do anything required pursuant to these orders the registrar of the court be appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 to sign such documents and do such acts on behalf of either party. 7. the husband to do all acts and things necessary including the payment of any necessary money to engage a licensed builder to remove the encroachment of the shed which sits on the rear yard boundary of the properties at [street a1, suburb b] and [street a2, suburb b] including any necessary asbestos removal and the roof of [street a1, suburb b] over the property [street a2, suburb b] . 8. on completion of the work referred to in order 7, the husband will provide the wife with a survey report indicating any encroachment has been removed. 9. the wife to permit access for the work referred to in orders 7 and 8 to be undertaken. 10. the payment in order to is due and payable within 28 days of provision to the wife’s solicitor of a survey report in accordance with order 8.
1. that the further amended application filed 7 july 2020 be dismissed. 2. that the wife be declared pursuant to section 78 of the family law act the sole legal and beneficial owner of the property known as an situate at [street a2, suburb b], subject to all encumbrances and all its furniture and contents. 3. that the wife within 30 days of these orders, pay to the husband a sum to give effect to a division of the net asset pool of the parties as to 70% to the wife and 30% to the husband after taking into account the balance of these orders. 4. simultaneously with the payment referred to in order three, the husband shall sign all documents and do all things necessary to transfer all of his right, title and interest in the property situated and known as [street a1, suburb b] being the whole of the land contained in folio identifier ... to the wife. 5. each party shall be responsible for any debts incurred in their name. 6. that the husband pay the wife’s costs of and incidental to the said application. 7. that each party shall retain to the exclusion of the other all assets currently in their custody, possession or control.
the evidence
the law  the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in property, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, (b) the existing liabilities of the parties, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, and (c) the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 90sf(3) of the act, to which section 90sm(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[9]   the existing liabilities of the parties, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, and (c) the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 90sf(3) of the act, to which section 90sm(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[9]   the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 90sf(3) of the act, to which section 90sm(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[9]
in many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife. no less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. that is, any express or implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing arrangements of marital property interests were sufficient or appropriate during the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the ending of the marital relationship. and the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4).[11]   first, “the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities, and financial resources of the parties at the date of the hearing”,[13] (b) second, “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b), and (c), and determine the contribution-based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”, [14] (c) third, “the court should identify and assess the relevant matters ... (“the other factors”) including...the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant...”,[15] (d) fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[16]   second, “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b), and (c), and determine the contribution-based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”, [14] (c) third, “the court should identify and assess the relevant matters ... (“the other factors”) including...the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant...”,[15] (d) fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[16]   third, “the court should identify and assess the relevant matters ... (“the other factors”) including...the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant...”,[15] (d) fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[16]   fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[16]
... indeed, the authorities are consistent in finding that assessing contributions is not an accounting exercise but a holistic one (brandt & brandt [1997] famca 21, (1997) flc 92-758, norbis & norbis (1986) 161 clr 513).[19]  ] as is plain from earlier decisions of this court, regard must be had to the use made of contributions of various types so as to compare the contributions made by each of the parties during the course of, and over the length of, their relationship (see, for example, in the marriage of pierce (1998) flc 92-844) but that is an entirely different proposition to, as it were, causally linking contributions with their asserted financial “product” or “value”. the former recognises that the nature, form and extent of contributions made by each of the parties might differ, the latter suggests that the absence of a causal link counts as no contribution at all. [15] the search for a causal link might be seen to come instinctively to the necessary inquiry and all the more so when regard is had to s 79(4)(a) which refers to financial contributions made “...directly or indirectly...” “...to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property ...” and goes on to also refer to the financial contribution made “...otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property...” the terms of that sub-paragraph might, naturally enough, be seen to suggest a causal link between those contributions and the “financial product” which those contributions of that type are said to have produced. that same requirement might also be seen to suggest that relevant contributions of that type can be seen to be quantifiable – or, at least, conceptualised – in monetary terms, in contradistinction to contributions made pursuant to s 79(4)(c). [16] while that apparent “causal connection” might be seen in s 79(4)(a) (and (b)), no such connection is apparent from the terms of s 79(4)(c), contributions of that latter type are not linked by the words of the sub-paragraph to the “...acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property...” or, indeed, to “property” at all. this is not a legislative oversight, the 1983 amendments to the act which inserted the current s 79(4)(c) were specifically intended, relevantly, to remove any suggestion that there needed to be a causal link between contributions of that type and any particular asset or property. the explanatory memorandum to the family law act amendment bill 1983 provides, at clause 36, that a specific purpose of the re-casting of s 79(4) was, relevantly, to:
... revise sub-section 79(4) to remove the possibility of an interpretation of the sub-section requiring that there be a nexus between a spouse’s contribution and a specific item of property in section 79 proceedings ...[22]
...the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial, and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by section 79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.[25]
as the chief justice points out, with those principles in mind, the trial judge adopted a broad-brush approach to the parties’ respective expenditure. nowhere error is established by reason alone of that approach, authority eschews “overly pernickety analysis” and section 79 demands neither an audit nor an exercise in accounting. however, when significant sums of money are said by one party or the other to have been “wasted” or to amount to a unilateral “premature distribution of property” and the evidence is suggestive of either or both, an analysis of the relevant sums and their use is needed.[27]
asserted debt
any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account.   as a general practice developed over the years in section 90sm matters, the court ascertains the value of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship by deducting from the value of their assets the value of their total liabilities. in the case of incumbent assets the value is ascertained by deducting the amount of the secured liability from the gross value of the asset. where assets are not encumbered and monies are owed by the parties or one of them to unsecured creditors the court ascertains the value of their property by deducting from the value of their assets the value of their liabilities, including unsecured liabilities. (2) the court may properly determine not to take into account, or to discount the value of, an unsecured liability in certain circumstances. examples are liabilities that are vague or uncertain, unlikely to be enforced or where the liability was unreasonably incurred. (3) the general rule that the court treats liabilities in the way outlined in (1) and (2) is not absolute and is not prescribed by statute and there are a number of well recognised exceptions. there is no requirement that the rights of an unsecured creditor or a claim by a third party must be considered and dealt with prior to the court making orders under section 90sm, nor is there a rule of priority as between a creditor claimant and a spouse. the rights of third-party creditors, however, cannot be ignored, they must be recognised and taken into account and balanced against the rights of the spouse. (4) if in the course of proceeding the rights of a third-party creditor or claimant are likely to be affected, then interests of justice dictate that notice of the proceedings must be given to that creditor or claimant to afford the opportunity to intervene.   the court may properly determine not to take into account, or to discount the value of, an unsecured liability in certain circumstances. examples are liabilities that are vague or uncertain, unlikely to be enforced or where the liability was unreasonably incurred. (3) the general rule that the court treats liabilities in the way outlined in (1) and (2) is not absolute and is not prescribed by statute and there are a number of well recognised exceptions. there is no requirement that the rights of an unsecured creditor or a claim by a third party must be considered and dealt with prior to the court making orders under section 90sm, nor is there a rule of priority as between a creditor claimant and a spouse. the rights of third-party creditors, however, cannot be ignored, they must be recognised and taken into account and balanced against the rights of the spouse. (4) if in the course of proceeding the rights of a third-party creditor or claimant are likely to be affected, then interests of justice dictate that notice of the proceedings must be given to that creditor or claimant to afford the opportunity to intervene.   the general rule that the court treats liabilities in the way outlined in (1) and (2) is not absolute and is not prescribed by statute and there are a number of well recognised exceptions. there is no requirement that the rights of an unsecured creditor or a claim by a third party must be considered and dealt with prior to the court making orders under section 90sm, nor is there a rule of priority as between a creditor claimant and a spouse. the rights of third-party creditors, however, cannot be ignored, they must be recognised and taken into account and balanced against the rights of the spouse. (4) if in the course of proceeding the rights of a third-party creditor or claimant are likely to be affected, then interests of justice dictate that notice of the proceedings must be given to that creditor or claimant to afford the opportunity to intervene.   if in the course of proceeding the rights of a third-party creditor or claimant are likely to be affected, then interests of justice dictate that notice of the proceedings must be given to that creditor or claimant to afford the opportunity to intervene.
kennon claims ] the full court in kennon & kennon [1997] famca 27, (1997) flc 92-757 said the following:
put shortly, our view is that where there is a course of violent conduct by one party towards the other during the marriage which is demonstrated to have had a significant adverse impact upon that party’s contributions to the marriage, or, to put the other way, to have made his or her contributions significantly more arduous than they ought to have been, that is a fact which a trial judge is entitled to take into account in assessing the parties’ respective contributions within s 79.  ] in s & s [2003] famca 905 the full court referred to the above passage in kennon and emphasised the words “which is demonstrated“ saying:
the question is whether a trial judge may infer from the evidence that the result must be that a party’s contributions have been affected.  ] the full court in kennon went on to say that considerations of this nature only apply in a relatively narrow band of cases and that it was not directed at conduct which does not have that effect and, of necessity, it usually did not encompass conduct proximate to the breakdown of the marriage basically because there would be insufficient time for any impact to be relevant to contributions. [71] in s & s, the full court approved a statement by the trial judge, when the trial judge had commented on the difficulty in that case which arose from the wife’s material, because although it gave evidence about specific acts of violence, it did not expressly refer to the impact of the violence on her contributions. the trial judge went on to say: it cannot, however, be the law that the failure to state such matters expressly is necessarily fatal to such evidence, there must be cases where it is obvious or a very likely inference from the facts, that certain kinds of violence must have adversely affected a person’s contributions. [72] the full court in s & s also commented upon the reference to “exceptional cases“ and “the relatively narrow band of cases“. the full court in s & s adopted the trial judge’s comments that: ... the references to “exceptional cases“ and “narrow band of cases“ occurs in the context of the principle of misconduct in general rather than the more narrow formulation about domestic violence. my reading of these passages, therefore, is that it is not necessarily correct that only cases of exceptional violence or a narrow band of domestic violence cases fall within the principles. it seems to me that reading these passages carefully, the key words in a case where there are allegations of domestic violence are “significant adverse impact” and “discernible impact“. that reading of the passage is, i think, given some additional force by the actual decision in the doherty case and the judgments of baker j in both doherty and kennon. [73] the full court in s & s at [47] said:
an insufficiency of evidence in the present case leaves the court with a limited ability to deal with allegations in the context of section 79 proceedings. as kennon has established, it is necessary to provide evidence to establish: the incidence of domestic violence, the effect of domestic violence, and evidence to enable the court to quantify the effect of that violence upon the parties [sic] capacity to “contribute“ as defined by section 79(4).
39. ... we struggle to understand what that “quantification” evidence might be beyond that given by the victim spouse as to the incidence and effect of the violence as identified in [s v s] in the first two dot points at [47]. furthermore, we fail to see how this third step accords with the decision in kennon which the full court in [s v s] said governed the situation. perhaps the use of the word “quantification” is infelicitous and has unintentionally added a gloss to the ratio in kennon, when in truth, the court in [s v s] was merely reinforcing the need for there to be an evidentiary nexus between the conduct complained of and the capacity (or effort expended) to make relevant contributions. and, depending upon the nature of the violence established, in the absence of express evidence about the effect that violence had on the victim spouse’s contributions, how difficult it might be for the court to draw inferences which would establish the evidentiary nexus (see [s v s] at [42])...  ] even though s v s might, in the past, have been interpreted as implying the need for something more, it should now be clear that the required nexus between proven family violence and the significant adverse effect upon the contributions of the victim is capable of being inferred from the lay evidence of the parties (maine v maine [2016] famcafc 270, (2016) 56 fam lr 500, britt v britt [2017] famcafc 27, (2017) 56 fam lr 526, (2017) flc 93-764, [2017] at [74]–[75], keating at [27]–[43], [52]–[67]).
and further at [50] in relation to the nexus being inferred:  ] here, the primary judge found the appellant perpetrated family violence upon the respondent and drew an inference that such violence did have an effect upon the respondent’s contributions, making them “all the more arduous” (at [162]). an inference is an assent to the existence of a fact which is based on the proven existence of some other fact or facts, drawn as part of the fact finding process as an exercise of ordinary powers of deduction and reason in the light of human experience, unaffected by any rule of law (g v h [1994] hca 48, (1994) 181 clr 387 at 390, [1994] hca 48, 124 alr 353 at 355, [1994] hca 48, 18 fam lr 180 at 182). obviously, the strength of the subject inference depends upon the quality of the underlying evidence. it must be reasonable to draw the inference from primary facts. mere conjecture will not suffice (seltsam pty ltd v mcguiness (2000) 49 nswlr 262, [2000] nswca 29 at [80]–[101] per spigelman cj, carr v baker [1936] nswstrp 20, (1936) 36 sr (nsw) 301 at 306–7 per jordan cj). importantly, the evaluation of the evidence from which the subject inference is sought to be drawn should be thorough and balanced. in the context of a kennon argument, any factual controversies over the alleged misconduct of one spouse and its alleged deleterious consequential effects upon the other spouse should be resolved by familiar forensic techniques. disputed but untested allegations, are not facts (keating at [55]–[66]).  ] the central question raised by this appeal is how a judge takes into account the contributions of one party, found to have been made significantly more arduous by the conduct of the other, when assessing contributions under s 79(4)(a)–(c) or s 90sm(4)(a)–(c) of the act. the answer is the primary judge must take a holistic approach. the contributions which have been made significantly more arduous have to be weighed along with all other contributions by each of the parties, whether financial or non-financial, direct or indirect to the acquisition, conservation and improvement of property and in the role of homemaker and parent. all contributions must be weighed collectively and so it is an error to segment or compartmentalise the various contributions and weigh one against the remainder (jabour v jabour (2019) 59 fam lr 475, (2019) flc 93-898, [2019] famcafc 78 at [73]–[87] (jabour), horrigan and horrigan [2020] famcafc 25 at [42]–[48]). [36] that principle has its counterpart in the application of factors prescribed by s 75(2) or s 90sf(3) of the act (in the marriage of j d and s j tomasetti (2000) 26 fam lr 114, (2000) flc 93-023, [2000] famca 314 at [107]–[114]). any adjustment to the parties’ contribution-based entitlements should be determined inclusively after considering all relevant factors, not by aggregating incremental adjustments in respect of each relevant factor. [37] although the use of the short-hand descriptor of a “kennon claim” is not of itself erroneous, it is liable to induce error because the issue is not a stand-alone claim, but is rather integral to the entire process (paysen v laukien (2020) 60 fam lr 464, (2020) flc 93-960, [2020] famcafc 101 at [48]–[50]). nor is it helpful to refer to the issue as a “kennon adjustment” because that epithet invites treatment of the issue as an isolated claim for an additional share of the available property.
the relationship pool
item
ownership
description
wife’s value
husband’s value
assets
1
husband
street a1, suburb b,
$815,000
2
wife
street a2, suburb b
$915,000
3
motor vehicle 1
$1,800
4
tools and equipment
$1,000
5
household contents
nil
6
furniture and contents
7
bank account ending #...21
$117,707
8
bank account
nk
9
boat and trailer
10
motor vehicle 2
$7,500
11
motor vehicle 3
$400
12
motor vehicle 4
13
motor vehicle 5
$11,500
14
motor vehicle 6
$37,480
15
ato credit
$54,600
16
sporting equipment
subtotal
$1,963,987
superannuation
17
super fund ad
$1,323
18
super fund ae
$22
19
super fund af
$8,395
20
super fund ag
$1,278
21
super fund ah
$7,827
$18,845
liabilities
22
westpac mortgage
$220,000
23
bank j mortgage
$358,996
24
bank j visa account
-
$6,048
25
loan from ms l
$109,000
26
westpac credit card (as at 6/04/21)
$7,135
27
hecs debt
$15,411
28
go mastercard
29
centrelink debt
30
dentist debt
$13,000
$723,542
$598,044
owner
value
street a1, suburb b
household contents and furniture
bank account ##?
credit with australian taxation office
westpac bank loan account secured by mortgage on street a2, suburb b
bank j loan accounts secured by mortgage on street a1, suburb b
debt owed to ms l
$82,800
$661,796
section 90sm(3) - is it just and equitable to proceed with a consideration of property settlement orders ?
assessment of the parties contributions – section 90sm(4)(a) to (c)
section 90sm(5)(e) – any adjustment between the parties on consideration of the matters in section 90sf(3)
what orders altering the interests of the parties in the property are just and equitable?
associate: dated: 12 august 2022
dated: 12 august 2022
[1] mullis & quimby [2019] fcca 1516.[2] the husband’s financial statement at item 32; the wife’s trial affidavit at paragraph 68.[3] item 46 of the wife’s financial statement of 10 september 2020.[4] family law act 1975 (cth) s 90sm.[5] family law act 1975 (cth) s 90sm(1)(a).[6] family law act 1975 (cth) s 90sm(1)(d).[7] family law act 1975 (cth) s 90sm(3).[8] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108.[9] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108; see, especially, [37].[10] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108, [37].[11] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108, [42].[12] hickey & hickey & attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (‘hickey’) [2003] famca 395, [39].[13] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[14] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39]. see also family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(4)(a)-(c).[15] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[16] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[17] hickey [2003] famca 395, [47].[18] fontana & fontana [2018] famcafc 63.[19] fontana & fontana [2018] famcafc 63, [27].[20] see, eg, jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78.[21] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154.[22] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, [14]-[16].[23] in the marriage of harris [1991] famca 124; (1991) 104 flr 458, 464.[24] fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57.[25] fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57, [168].[26] grier & malphas [2016] famcafc 84; (2017) 55 fam lr 107.[27] grier & malphas [2016] famcafc 84; (2017) 55 fam lr 107, [129].[28] kennon v kennon [1997] famca 27; (1997) flc 92-757, [84]-[294] (fogarty and lindenmeyer jj).[29] same reference, apparently not reported.