last updated: 15 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rupert & rupert [2022] fedcfamc2f 1077
orders
the court orders that:  the education of the children, both current and future, and (b) the health of the children.   the health of the children.   by judge m neville in proceedings woc229/2020 on 10 july 2020 in the sum of $10,000 (plus interest), payable to the mother within 28 days, and (b) by senior judicial registrar f on 2 may 2022 in the sum of $11,484.50 (plus interest), payable to the mother within 28 days.   by senior judicial registrar f on 2 may 2022 in the sum of $11,484.50 (plus interest), payable to the mother within 28 days.
reasons for judgment
deputy chief judge mcclelland:
introduction
application
evidence
factual background
you are such an ignorant person and think your untouchable and up and beyond the law.. many adjectives words come to mind to describe you.. all i'll say is karma will come to you what goes around comes around. how could a so called mother as you call yourself not give her children the best start in life.. you want them to be like you selfish, lazy and money hungry if you think this is the end think again this is just the beginning.. i have made a formal complaint about you to nsw child protection services and also sort (sic) legal advise to obtain custody of [z].. the agreement can be overturned. (as per the original)
i am going to get the consent order overturned i going to take half the money and take [the child] off you i'm working in [city d] now which means i can get consent order over turned because my circumstances have changed that’s how i can do it ask your solicitor. i can’t wait to divorce you and then i am going to marry [ms e] then she will be [the child] mum i also want you to change your name back to your maiden name.. you don't have the privilege anymore to carry my last name. (as per the original)
adjective words come to mind to describe you.. but in essence you are not worth the air you breath you're a waste of space on this earth.. by the way i know exactly where you live the number and name of the street your (sic) paying rent between 450 and 500 dollars a week... you think you can hide but you can’t.. wait til the court date. (as per the original)
there is a problem [the child] lives with you.. so why don't you give [the child] to me and you have the two older ones.. that's fair.. so he can have a decent education and life instead of that home school crap.. or do you want him to become like you sit around and collect welfare payments.. let me guess you wont give up your meal ticket because you mite (sic) have to work. (as per the original)
you should be ashamed of yourself not letting me have my son because it affects your benefits. yes [the mother] that's why your saying no because it mite affect benefits your choosing money over your son happiness. you don't send enough warm clothes for him, so we will be buying him clothes leaving them here for him to wear and i will be having it deducted from the child support this also includes the fees i have paid for his sports which he loves. (as per the original)
the child’s circumstances
home schooling
the mother is currently unemployed, however when she did work, was able to work casually in order to continue her primary care of the children. it is anticipated that this will continue. this will also allow the children to continue to be home schooled by the applicant, as has been the case throughout the relationship.
father’s unilateral therapy treatment for the child
as [the child] is the subject of a court order providing for equal shared parental responsibility and [the father] objects to [the child] being registered for home schooling, nesa is commencing a process to cancel [the child’s] home schooling registration. this letter provides formal notice that nesa recommends that [the child’s] current home schooling registration be cancelled.
i want [the child] to go to school at [suburb m] next year as we are moving out there. and yes [the mother] [the child] is going to school next year as your licence is cancelled and you will not be able to get it back. (as per the original)
... you are not permitted to teach [the child] anymore, what part of that don’t you understand. your licence has been cancelled. you will also have to put my name on [the child’s] enrolment to school
as of 6 november [the child] is required to attend school. the education department has informed me that when your licnence is due for renewal, if i don't agree to it your licence application will be refused as they will take my claim into conisderation . just to remind you again the licence expires on 5 november. (as per the original)
i am willing to participate in a mediation session with [the mother] to discuss [the child’s] schooling etc, however please be aware that my stance to home schooling will not change as i believe [the child] is way behind in school and should attend mainstream school.
commencing the week of the 8th november [the child] must attend mainstream school, i will be having [the child] on the weekend of the 5th november and i must have schooling essentials and name of school for me to be able to take him to school on monday the 8th november.
make sure you send [the child’s] school uniform on friday, as i will drop [the child] off at school on the monday morning. you have util [sic] friday next week to arrange this.
this is the last opportunity that i will be giving you, i am not mucking around with you, you need to take this seriously. what school is [the child] attending on monday?? as i will be taking him there. make sure he has all his school essentials and school clothes. in relation to his other clothes, if i am required to buy them, that's not a problem but i will be letting child support know and sending them the receipts and having the amount deducted which i can do because i have spoken to them, this is due to you calling them to find out my current address.
that pending further order, [the child] born [in] 2012 be enrolled and registered with the new south wales education standards authority (nesa) for home schooling for the period 6 november 2021 until 5 november 2022.
relevant legal principles
presumption of equal shared parental responsibility  when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. ... (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in:   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence.   when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   in considering which order to make, the court must, to the extent that it is possible to do so with the child’s best interests being the paramount consideration, ensure that the order:
...   does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence.
the child’s best interests
primary considerations
meaningful relationship
risk
additional considerations
views expressed by the child
significant relationships
decision-making, spending time and communicating with the child
responsibilities to maintain the child
practical difficulty
parenting capacity
the child’s youth and other characteristics  report from ms o speech pathology dated 31 march 2021. (b) report from the p physio dated march 2021 (c) report from r clinic dated march 2021. (d) report from s equine services dated 26 april 2021.   report from the p physio dated march 2021 (c) report from r clinic dated march 2021. (d) report from s equine services dated 26 april 2021.   report from r clinic dated march 2021. (d) report from s equine services dated 26 april 2021.   report from s equine services dated 26 april 2021.
a) [the child] is chronically affected in his ability to function in all of his activities of daily living which requires increased support and surveillance by [the mother]. b) [the child] is only able to maintain a corrected seated posture momentarily before he is seen to "hang on his joints" in all postures, including slumping into posterior pelvic tilt (sitting on his tail bone) due to reduced muscular endurance and core stability. c) it is paramount that [the child] receives one on one and close supervision for both his self care and activities of daily living and for social/emotional and recreational activities to enable safe participation in the community. d) it is painful and difficult for [the child] to remain seated at the table and can only assume a seated positon for 6 to 10 minutes. e) if something unexpected occurs or if [the child] is exposed to an environment that is very noisy, [the child] can shut down and disengage. f) [the child] can become easily “overwhelmed”, fidgets and withdraws regularly. these are ways in which [the child] copes with the sensory environment he finds himself in.
b) [the child] is only able to maintain a corrected seated posture momentarily before he is seen to "hang on his joints" in all postures, including slumping into posterior pelvic tilt (sitting on his tail bone) due to reduced muscular endurance and core stability. c) it is paramount that [the child] receives one on one and close supervision for both his self care and activities of daily living and for social/emotional and recreational activities to enable safe participation in the community. d) it is painful and difficult for [the child] to remain seated at the table and can only assume a seated positon for 6 to 10 minutes. e) if something unexpected occurs or if [the child] is exposed to an environment that is very noisy, [the child] can shut down and disengage. f) [the child] can become easily “overwhelmed”, fidgets and withdraws regularly. these are ways in which [the child] copes with the sensory environment he finds himself in.
c) it is paramount that [the child] receives one on one and close supervision for both his self care and activities of daily living and for social/emotional and recreational activities to enable safe participation in the community. d) it is painful and difficult for [the child] to remain seated at the table and can only assume a seated positon for 6 to 10 minutes. e) if something unexpected occurs or if [the child] is exposed to an environment that is very noisy, [the child] can shut down and disengage. f) [the child] can become easily “overwhelmed”, fidgets and withdraws regularly. these are ways in which [the child] copes with the sensory environment he finds himself in.
d) it is painful and difficult for [the child] to remain seated at the table and can only assume a seated positon for 6 to 10 minutes. e) if something unexpected occurs or if [the child] is exposed to an environment that is very noisy, [the child] can shut down and disengage. f) [the child] can become easily “overwhelmed”, fidgets and withdraws regularly. these are ways in which [the child] copes with the sensory environment he finds himself in.
e) if something unexpected occurs or if [the child] is exposed to an environment that is very noisy, [the child] can shut down and disengage. f) [the child] can become easily “overwhelmed”, fidgets and withdraws regularly. these are ways in which [the child] copes with the sensory environment he finds himself in.
f) [the child] can become easily “overwhelmed”, fidgets and withdraws regularly. these are ways in which [the child] copes with the sensory environment he finds himself in.
attitude to the child and parental responsibilities
minimising the prospect of future litigation
outstanding legal costs
disposition
costs of these proceedings  subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.   if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.  ) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to: (a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings,   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   such other matters as the court considers relevant. ...
a number of factors are then listed in the subparagraphs. the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings is the first mentioned factor. nowhere in subs (2a) or elsewhere in s 117, is there any prescription that more than one factor must be present before an order for costs is made nor of comparative weight of the factors set out in subs (2a). as a consequence, there is nothing to prevent any factor being the sole foundation for an order for costs.
orders
associate: dated: 16 august 2022
dated: 16 august 2022