last updated: 29 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
wyard & wyard [2022] fedcfamc2f 1157
orders
the court orders that:
the court further orders that:
reasons for judgment(delivered orally, revised from transcript)
judge obradovic:
the law
the act supports the generally regarded view in the australian community that children should be entitled to have a relationship with their grandparents, provided it is in the child’s best interests. however, any determination of the best interests of a child or children should be informed by the family dynamics between the children’s parent/s and grandparent/s. in that regard, the views of the parents are significant but not necessarily determinative
his honour went on to say that:
the law is that parents are entitled to parent children. if there is an assertion that parenting duties ought to be usurped it is for the person asserting that fact to establish that parents are not carrying out those duties in the best interests of the child.  ] in that case, benjamin j was faced with an argument by the applicant grandfather that a grandparent has a “special position” under the legislation which entitles him or her to spend time and communicate with grandchildren. that is clearly not correct, but it seems that in dispelling that notion his honour went too far the other way and in effect accepted the submission of the parents that it was their role to determine with whom their children should have a relationship, and that should shape whatever order is made. his honour’s comments that tend to suggest that the commencement of the decision-making process is a presumption that a parent knows best, and the onus is on a non-parent to persuade the court that the role of the parent should be usurped and their views disregarded, are not supported by authority, and indeed depart from full court authority. [43]... there are no presumptions or preferential positions that apply as between parent and non-parent, and an application for a parenting order by a non-parent is to be determined in the same way as an application by a parent, namely, according to its own facts and having regard to the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration (s 60ca of the act). that is not altered by the parent having sole parental responsibility.
determination  wyard] and i are not confident that the applicant will look after our children and respect our decisions as parents. the applicant has questioned our parenting decisions in the past and we do not consider she will follow them. we do not feel our children are safe with the applicant on her property. based on the applicant’s past behaviours towards [mr wyard], particularly when she is intoxicated or angry, [mr wyard] and i do not want to risk our children being exposed to the same abuse and violence.
...the vinegar of litigation can only sour further the intractably bitter dispute between the adults. it will be impossible to quarantine the children from such festering and caustic resentment and animosity. unsurprisingly, such a view has been long-held. for example, in mazur, after noting that the only disruptive aspect of the child’s life in that matter was “the anxiety of these proceedings and what has led up to them”, woods j (in the marriage of mazur [1977] vicrp 37, (1976) 2 famlr 11, 311) went on to say: “the disadvantages of a coercive situation would totally outweigh the prospect of any advantage such contact may offer.”
associate:
dated: 7 september 2022