last updated: 18 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mcgowan & brennan [2022] fedcfamc2f 1082
cranston & persson (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 187
orders
the court orders that:
vaccination against covid-19
costs
next court date
reasons for judgment
judge eldershaw:
introduction   there is no dispute that covid-19 is a real disease and present within the population, (b) there is no suggestion that the covid-19 pandemic has been anything other than a major health crisis, and (c) there is no so-called “anti-vax” sentiment – x has been vaccinated against the usual childhood illnesses.   there is no suggestion that the covid-19 pandemic has been anything other than a major health crisis, and (c) there is no so-called “anti-vax” sentiment – x has been vaccinated against the usual childhood illnesses.   there is no so-called “anti-vax” sentiment – x has been vaccinated against the usual childhood illnesses.
documents   her case outline filed 9 august 2022, (b) initiating application filed 21 april 2022, (c) affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 21 april 2022, (d) affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 13 may 2022, (e) affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 25 july 2022, (f) affidavit of dr b filed 25 july 2022, and (g) specific issues report of ms c dated 5 august 2022.   initiating application filed 21 april 2022, (c) affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 21 april 2022, (d) affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 13 may 2022, (e) affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 25 july 2022, (f) affidavit of dr b filed 25 july 2022, and (g) specific issues report of ms c dated 5 august 2022.   affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 21 april 2022, (d) affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 13 may 2022, (e) affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 25 july 2022, (f) affidavit of dr b filed 25 july 2022, and (g) specific issues report of ms c dated 5 august 2022.   affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 13 may 2022, (e) affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 25 july 2022, (f) affidavit of dr b filed 25 july 2022, and (g) specific issues report of ms c dated 5 august 2022.   affidavit of ms mcgowan filed 25 july 2022, (f) affidavit of dr b filed 25 july 2022, and (g) specific issues report of ms c dated 5 august 2022.   affidavit of dr b filed 25 july 2022, and (g) specific issues report of ms c dated 5 august 2022.   specific issues report of ms c dated 5 august 2022.   his case outline filed 5 august 2022, (b) response to initiating application filed 9 may 2022, (c) affidavit of mr brennan filed 21 april 2022, (d) affidavit of mr brennan filed 25 july 2022, (e) parenting questionnaire filed 5 may 2022, (f) notice of risk filed 5 may 2022, (g) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 1), (h) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 2) (with final sentence added), and (i) health care complaints commission investigation report and covering letter addressed to mr e (the complainant) dated 7 july 2010.   response to initiating application filed 9 may 2022, (c) affidavit of mr brennan filed 21 april 2022, (d) affidavit of mr brennan filed 25 july 2022, (e) parenting questionnaire filed 5 may 2022, (f) notice of risk filed 5 may 2022, (g) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 1), (h) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 2) (with final sentence added), and (i) health care complaints commission investigation report and covering letter addressed to mr e (the complainant) dated 7 july 2010.   affidavit of mr brennan filed 21 april 2022, (d) affidavit of mr brennan filed 25 july 2022, (e) parenting questionnaire filed 5 may 2022, (f) notice of risk filed 5 may 2022, (g) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 1), (h) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 2) (with final sentence added), and (i) health care complaints commission investigation report and covering letter addressed to mr e (the complainant) dated 7 july 2010.   affidavit of mr brennan filed 25 july 2022, (e) parenting questionnaire filed 5 may 2022, (f) notice of risk filed 5 may 2022, (g) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 1), (h) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 2) (with final sentence added), and (i) health care complaints commission investigation report and covering letter addressed to mr e (the complainant) dated 7 july 2010.   parenting questionnaire filed 5 may 2022, (f) notice of risk filed 5 may 2022, (g) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 1), (h) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 2) (with final sentence added), and (i) health care complaints commission investigation report and covering letter addressed to mr e (the complainant) dated 7 july 2010.   notice of risk filed 5 may 2022, (g) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 1), (h) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 2) (with final sentence added), and (i) health care complaints commission investigation report and covering letter addressed to mr e (the complainant) dated 7 july 2010.   medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 1), (h) medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 2) (with final sentence added), and (i) health care complaints commission investigation report and covering letter addressed to mr e (the complainant) dated 7 july 2010.   medical certificate completed 5 may 2022 from dr d (no 2) (with final sentence added), and (i) health care complaints commission investigation report and covering letter addressed to mr e (the complainant) dated 7 july 2010.   health care complaints commission investigation report and covering letter addressed to mr e (the complainant) dated 7 july 2010.   atagi’s recommendations for the use of the paediatric pfizer covid-19 vaccine in children aged five to 11 years in australia dated 21 february 2022, (b) “pfizer covid-19 vaccine for children aged five to 11: information for parents and guardians” published by the commonwealth department of health and aged care, and (c) “let’s do this”: covid-19 vaccination for children (five to 11 years) published by nsw ministry of health, december 2021.   “pfizer covid-19 vaccine for children aged five to 11: information for parents and guardians” published by the commonwealth department of health and aged care, and (c) “let’s do this”: covid-19 vaccination for children (five to 11 years) published by nsw ministry of health, december 2021.   “let’s do this”: covid-19 vaccination for children (five to 11 years) published by nsw ministry of health, december 2021.
proposals  pursuant to s 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth), the father shall not cause or allow x to receive the covid-19 vaccine without prior written consent of the mother, (b) upon x attaining the age of 14 years, that the parents shall facilitate x to receive the covid-19 vaccine if that accords with x’s view, and if there is any doubt as to x’s view, the parties will do all acts and things to attend a child inclusive family dispute resolution process to obtain his views, and (c) the father pays to the mother the sum of $525 on account of half of the fee of dr b attending court on 10 august 2022.   upon x attaining the age of 14 years, that the parents shall facilitate x to receive the covid-19 vaccine if that accords with x’s view, and if there is any doubt as to x’s view, the parties will do all acts and things to attend a child inclusive family dispute resolution process to obtain his views, and (c) the father pays to the mother the sum of $525 on account of half of the fee of dr b attending court on 10 august 2022.   the father pays to the mother the sum of $525 on account of half of the fee of dr b attending court on 10 august 2022.   the father have sole parental responsibility for all decisions relating to the covid-19 vaccine for x. (b) in the alternative, that x receive the covid-19 vaccine upon attaining the age of 12 years of age.   in the alternative, that x receive the covid-19 vaccine upon attaining the age of 12 years of age.
issues for determination
the law  in addition to the jurisdiction that a court has under this part in relation to children, the court also has jurisdiction to make orders relating to the welfare of children.
note: division 4 of part xiiiaa (international protection of children) may affect the jurisdiction of a court to make an order relating to the welfare of a child.   in deciding whether to make an order under subsection (1) in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
evidence
at this stage, from the information that is available, i am not comfortable consenting to [x] receiving the covid-19 mrna vaccination.
evidence of the court child expert  mcgowan] considers that [x] cannot be himself when he is with his father and that he tends to say and do things to please his father, but then reveals how he really feels when he returns to her care.   brennan] considers that [x] has always tried to appease both parents, telling each of them different things. ... [x] was well aware that [ms mcgowan] did not want [x] to be vaccinated, but that he spoke to [x] about people having a choice and that members of the [brennan] household were choosing to be vaccinated for themselves, the community and the vulnerable. he denied coercing [x] in any way. he said that [x] indicated he wanted to get vaccinated. [mr brennan] said that [x] was concerned that [ms mcgowan] would be angry with him ([x]) but that he told [x] she would be angry with him ([mr brennan]), and not with [x]. [mr brennan] acknowledged that the way [ms mcgowan] found out that [x] had been vaccinated was “horrible” and could have been avoided if he had spoken to her about it the next morning.
he seems to perceive that his father wanted him to have [the vaccine] because they were about to travel overseas to see family, some of whom were elderly, and him ([x]) having the vaccine could help to protect those members. [x] seemed to perceive that his mother did not want him to have the vaccine, but does not know why this is the case. [x] said that, at the time, he did not know whether he should or should not have the vaccine. he said he told his father he wanted to have it, so his father took him to get it. however, he indicated that he did not know if he wanted it or not, even though he told his father he wanted it. [x] said that, at that time, he was worried that, if he said he did not want it, his father may have gotten angry with him, and, if he said he did want it, his mother may have gotten angry with him. ...when he was advised that his father thinks it would be best for him if he had another dose and that his mother thinks it would be best for him if he does not have another dose, [x] spontaneously stated “i don’t care if i don’t or do.” this was explored further with [x], but he maintained a position of not expressing any view on the issue of whether he should or should not, or wants or does not want, any further doses.   [x] has a meaningful, loving and close relationship with each of his parents,   if [x] is exposed to or drawn into, the conflict between his parents, it will have a detrimental effect on him and his relationships, (c) while the parents appear to have protected [x] from exposure of their conflict about further covid-19 vaccinations (noting there was a restraint to this effect), they will need to continue to be mindful of their conflict and disputes and ensure that they make every effort to resolve those disputes prior to discussing the issues with [x] and certainly prior to taking any action that would place [x] in any kind of situation of needing to lie to a parent or inform a parent of something significant, (d) there are no developmental or psychological characteristics of [x] that are relevant to the issue of whether he receives the vaccine, and (e) [x] did not indicate a particular view about being vaccinated. he is likely to be looking for instruction and reassurance from his parents about whether or not he should receive the vaccination.   while the parents appear to have protected [x] from exposure of their conflict about further covid-19 vaccinations (noting there was a restraint to this effect), they will need to continue to be mindful of their conflict and disputes and ensure that they make every effort to resolve those disputes prior to discussing the issues with [x] and certainly prior to taking any action that would place [x] in any kind of situation of needing to lie to a parent or inform a parent of something significant, (d) there are no developmental or psychological characteristics of [x] that are relevant to the issue of whether he receives the vaccine, and (e) [x] did not indicate a particular view about being vaccinated. he is likely to be looking for instruction and reassurance from his parents about whether or not he should receive the vaccination.   there are no developmental or psychological characteristics of [x] that are relevant to the issue of whether he receives the vaccine, and (e) [x] did not indicate a particular view about being vaccinated. he is likely to be looking for instruction and reassurance from his parents about whether or not he should receive the vaccination.   [x] did not indicate a particular view about being vaccinated. he is likely to be looking for instruction and reassurance from his parents about whether or not he should receive the vaccination.
adversarial expert evidence and government health advice
evidentiary matters
admissibility of dr b’s report
judicial notice, admissibility and inferences regarding government health advice
pursuant to section 144 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), at the hearing, the court may take judicial notice of published advice issued by public health authorities, including:   the document “atagi recommendations on the use of covid-19 vaccinations in all young adolescents in australia, dated 27 august 2021 available at ...,. (2) “atagi recommendations on the pfizer covid-19 vaccine use in children aged 5 to 11 years’ dated 10 december 2021 available at ...
that proof is not required about knowledge that is not reasonably open to question and is either: (a) common knowledge in the locality in which the proceeding is being held or generally, or (b) capable of verification by reference to a document the authority of which cannot reasonably be questioned.   common knowledge in the locality in which the proceeding is being held or generally, or (b) capable of verification by reference to a document the authority of which cannot reasonably be questioned.   capable of verification by reference to a document the authority of which cannot reasonably be questioned.
... so generally known that every ordinary person may be reasonably presumed to be aware of it.
... every ordinary person may be reasonably presumed to be aware of it, the court “notices” it, either simpliciter if it is at once satisfied of the fact without more, or after such information or investigation as it considers reliable and necessary. [...] judges are not free to apply their own views and to make their own inquiries of social ethics, psychology, politics and history without requiring evidence or other proof. [...] two reasons why this is so are immediately apparent. the first is that parties must be given an opportunity to deal with all matters which the court regards as material. and the second is that rarely is there any universal acceptance of what is true history, politics or social ethics. anyone with any knowledge of these will be aware that there is a huge, indeed probably immeasurable, range of differences as to what they legitimately are, and the ways in which they are to be identified, understood and applied. [...] that is why judges prefer to and generally are required to act on evidence actually adduced and are conservative about taking judicial notice of matters of supposed notoriety.
the conflict of expert opinion evidence in relation to the benefits and risks of immunisation preclude any prospect of the court taking judicial notice under section 144 of the evidence act. if an issue in proceedings is controversial, it is almost inevitable that there will be differing credible expert opinions in relation to it and demonstrably, it would not fall within the operation of section 144.
whilst it is not always possible, it is preferable for the court to have credible expert evidence about the disease, the vaccine and the child or children in question and that the court should not rely on information provided by peak scientific organisations unless that information is properly before the court, for example, through an expert witness.   there is no dispute that the advice of atagi and government health advisors is admissible in the proceedings, (b) pursuant to s 183 of the evidence act, i can infer that the documents that have been prepared by, and set out the advice from, atagi and the government health advisors, are persons who are appropriately qualified to provide that advice to the government, and through government, to the people of australia: cranston & persson (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 187 at [34]- [40], (c) while it is preferable, it is not necessarily essential, that the information from atagi be before the court through an expert witness, and (d) this matter concerns an evaluation of risk to a child, for which as much information as possible would assist me in making a decision. i also note that in child-related proceedings, the rules of evidence do not apply by reason of division 12a of part vii of the act.   pursuant to s 183 of the evidence act, i can infer that the documents that have been prepared by, and set out the advice from, atagi and the government health advisors, are persons who are appropriately qualified to provide that advice to the government, and through government, to the people of australia: cranston & persson (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 187 at [34]- [40], (c) while it is preferable, it is not necessarily essential, that the information from atagi be before the court through an expert witness, and (d) this matter concerns an evaluation of risk to a child, for which as much information as possible would assist me in making a decision. i also note that in child-related proceedings, the rules of evidence do not apply by reason of division 12a of part vii of the act.   while it is preferable, it is not necessarily essential, that the information from atagi be before the court through an expert witness, and (d) this matter concerns an evaluation of risk to a child, for which as much information as possible would assist me in making a decision. i also note that in child-related proceedings, the rules of evidence do not apply by reason of division 12a of part vii of the act.   this matter concerns an evaluation of risk to a child, for which as much information as possible would assist me in making a decision. i also note that in child-related proceedings, the rules of evidence do not apply by reason of division 12a of part vii of the act.
consideration
what are the risks to x in being, or not being, vaccinated against covid-19 while a member of the cohort of children aged five to 11 years?
there is a statistically or virtually nil risk of serious covid-19 in general affecting children aged 5 to 11 years – there seems to be little benefit to be gained by vaccinating these children. but there is a clear and significant risk of serious adverse effects including myocarditis, pericarditis and death in this age group following gene-based covid-19 vaccination as well as other serious adverse effects. in addition, based on recent laboratory research, there is the potential for serious long-term adverse effects including lifelong and inherited genetic effects which cannot be predicted at the present time. in my opinion and based on the published science, there is no compelling benefit case for the administration of gene-based covid-19 “vaccines” [...] to any child aged 5 – 11 years of age...”
covid-19 vaccines carry with them a risk of harm to the recipient. however, the information provided by these reputable australian organisations indicates that, as a general proposition, the risks are significantly outweighed by the benefits. [...] atagi believes that the benefits of vaccination warrant a recommendation for vaccination in this age group. unvaccinated children will remain at greater risk of adverse outcomes related to the covid-19 pandemic.   adequacy of vaccine evaluation in terms of patient safety, efficacy and effectiveness, (b) relationship between the vaccine and adverse events, and (c) disease severity and transmissibility in children aged five to 11 years.   relationship between the vaccine and adverse events, and (c) disease severity and transmissibility in children aged five to 11 years.   disease severity and transmissibility in children aged five to 11 years.
adequacy of vaccine evaluation in terms of patient safety, efficacy and effectiveness for 5 to 11 year olds  vaccines that are released on the basis of provisional approval cannot be considered fully evaluated and are experimental, (b) the “provisional approval” pathway involves an expedited review system enabling therapeutic products, including vaccines, to be made available for use when there is a perceived urgent need, even though the amount of safety and efficacy data normally required for approval is not available. the manufacturer is required to submit further data over a defined period to address outstanding safety and efficacy issues, and (c) the covid-19 mrna vaccine is “unprecedented” in that it is directed towards a disease that has never before been successfully treated. such vaccines are expected to take more than 12 years to develop due to the technical difficulties and they are expected to have a very low chance (about 5 percent) of proving safety and efficacy in even early phase ii clinical trials involving small numbers of individuals and a very much lower chance (about 2 percent) of moving to larger phase iii clinical trials and demonstrating safety and efficacy before being considered for marketing.   the “provisional approval” pathway involves an expedited review system enabling therapeutic products, including vaccines, to be made available for use when there is a perceived urgent need, even though the amount of safety and efficacy data normally required for approval is not available. the manufacturer is required to submit further data over a defined period to address outstanding safety and efficacy issues, and (c) the covid-19 mrna vaccine is “unprecedented” in that it is directed towards a disease that has never before been successfully treated. such vaccines are expected to take more than 12 years to develop due to the technical difficulties and they are expected to have a very low chance (about 5 percent) of proving safety and efficacy in even early phase ii clinical trials involving small numbers of individuals and a very much lower chance (about 2 percent) of moving to larger phase iii clinical trials and demonstrating safety and efficacy before being considered for marketing.   the covid-19 mrna vaccine is “unprecedented” in that it is directed towards a disease that has never before been successfully treated. such vaccines are expected to take more than 12 years to develop due to the technical difficulties and they are expected to have a very low chance (about 5 percent) of proving safety and efficacy in even early phase ii clinical trials involving small numbers of individuals and a very much lower chance (about 2 percent) of moving to larger phase iii clinical trials and demonstrating safety and efficacy before being considered for marketing.   clinical trials were conducted prior to the omicron variant and the results reflect vaccine efficacy against older strains of the virus. vaccine efficacy or effectiveness against the omicron strain in children aged five to 11 years is not yet known, (b) the paediatric pfizer vaccine has been demonstrated to reduce covid-19 in children five to 11 years of age. among 2,186 trial participants aged five to 11 years without evidence of prior covid infection, two doses of 10 micrograms of the pfizer vaccine were 90.7 percent effective at preventing laboratory confirmed covid-19 from day seven after the second dose, (c) approval of the vaccine is based on results of a clinical trial demonstrating that the vaccine is highly effective and that most side effects are mild and transient, and (d) vaccine effectiveness data from real world experience is not yet available for children aged five to 11 years but are expected in coming months.   the paediatric pfizer vaccine has been demonstrated to reduce covid-19 in children five to 11 years of age. among 2,186 trial participants aged five to 11 years without evidence of prior covid infection, two doses of 10 micrograms of the pfizer vaccine were 90.7 percent effective at preventing laboratory confirmed covid-19 from day seven after the second dose, (c) approval of the vaccine is based on results of a clinical trial demonstrating that the vaccine is highly effective and that most side effects are mild and transient, and (d) vaccine effectiveness data from real world experience is not yet available for children aged five to 11 years but are expected in coming months.   approval of the vaccine is based on results of a clinical trial demonstrating that the vaccine is highly effective and that most side effects are mild and transient, and (d) vaccine effectiveness data from real world experience is not yet available for children aged five to 11 years but are expected in coming months.   vaccine effectiveness data from real world experience is not yet available for children aged five to 11 years but are expected in coming months.   the vaccine for which x is eligible has received provisional approval by the therapeutic goods administration, (b) the amount of safety and efficacy data usually required prior to a drug being released to the market has not been obtained for the vaccine, on account of urgency, (c) the vaccine has not been fully evaluated although data continues to be gathered, (d) to the extent the drug was evaluated in clinical trials prior to the omicron variant, such evaluation indicated efficacy, however efficacy against the omicron variant is not yet known, and (e) real world or actual vaccine effectiveness is not yet known.   the amount of safety and efficacy data usually required prior to a drug being released to the market has not been obtained for the vaccine, on account of urgency, (c) the vaccine has not been fully evaluated although data continues to be gathered, (d) to the extent the drug was evaluated in clinical trials prior to the omicron variant, such evaluation indicated efficacy, however efficacy against the omicron variant is not yet known, and (e) real world or actual vaccine effectiveness is not yet known.   the vaccine has not been fully evaluated although data continues to be gathered, (d) to the extent the drug was evaluated in clinical trials prior to the omicron variant, such evaluation indicated efficacy, however efficacy against the omicron variant is not yet known, and (e) real world or actual vaccine effectiveness is not yet known.   to the extent the drug was evaluated in clinical trials prior to the omicron variant, such evaluation indicated efficacy, however efficacy against the omicron variant is not yet known, and (e) real world or actual vaccine effectiveness is not yet known.   real world or actual vaccine effectiveness is not yet known.
relationship between the vaccine and adverse events for five to 11 year olds  the covid-19 vaccines deliver genetic material in a vector to produce a spike protein similar to that found on the surface of the coronavirus. it is also the spike protein produced by the vaccine which is understood to cause the unprecedented number of serious adverse events and death, (b) as at 23 july 2022, five children in the five to 11-year age group have died according to the drug adverse reporting notifications system used in australia. two of these five children are described by dr b as an “adverse event following immunisation”. the other three were respectively “cardiac arrest, generalised tonic-clonic seizure”, “cardiac arrest” and “abdominal pain, cardiac arrest”, (c) at the time of dr b’s report: (i) there were 213 cases of chest pain which were said by him to be indicative of myocarditis and pericarditis, and which have been reported in the daen website for children aged 5 to 11 years, and (ii) the tga has received 1,500 reports of adverse drug reactions to the covid-19 vaccine for children aged five to 11 years including 35 cases of suspected myocarditis, (d) there is a connection to the rates of myocarditis per million doses by age cohort following the second dose of the pfizer and moderna vaccines in australia – these being the vaccines administered to children, (e) there is a clear and significant risk of serious adverse effects including myocarditis, pericarditis and death in the five to 11-year-old age group following the gene-based covid vaccine and other serious side effects, and (f) there is the potential for serious long term adverse side effects which cannot be predicted at present.   as at 23 july 2022, five children in the five to 11-year age group have died according to the drug adverse reporting notifications system used in australia. two of these five children are described by dr b as an “adverse event following immunisation”. the other three were respectively “cardiac arrest, generalised tonic-clonic seizure”, “cardiac arrest” and “abdominal pain, cardiac arrest”, (c) at the time of dr b’s report: (i) there were 213 cases of chest pain which were said by him to be indicative of myocarditis and pericarditis, and which have been reported in the daen website for children aged 5 to 11 years, and (ii) the tga has received 1,500 reports of adverse drug reactions to the covid-19 vaccine for children aged five to 11 years including 35 cases of suspected myocarditis, (d) there is a connection to the rates of myocarditis per million doses by age cohort following the second dose of the pfizer and moderna vaccines in australia – these being the vaccines administered to children, (e) there is a clear and significant risk of serious adverse effects including myocarditis, pericarditis and death in the five to 11-year-old age group following the gene-based covid vaccine and other serious side effects, and (f) there is the potential for serious long term adverse side effects which cannot be predicted at present.   at the time of dr b’s report: (i) there were 213 cases of chest pain which were said by him to be indicative of myocarditis and pericarditis, and which have been reported in the daen website for children aged 5 to 11 years, and (ii) the tga has received 1,500 reports of adverse drug reactions to the covid-19 vaccine for children aged five to 11 years including 35 cases of suspected myocarditis, (d) there is a connection to the rates of myocarditis per million doses by age cohort following the second dose of the pfizer and moderna vaccines in australia – these being the vaccines administered to children, (e) there is a clear and significant risk of serious adverse effects including myocarditis, pericarditis and death in the five to 11-year-old age group following the gene-based covid vaccine and other serious side effects, and (f) there is the potential for serious long term adverse side effects which cannot be predicted at present.   there were 213 cases of chest pain which were said by him to be indicative of myocarditis and pericarditis, and which have been reported in the daen website for children aged 5 to 11 years, and (ii) the tga has received 1,500 reports of adverse drug reactions to the covid-19 vaccine for children aged five to 11 years including 35 cases of suspected myocarditis,  ) the tga has received 1,500 reports of adverse drug reactions to the covid-19 vaccine for children aged five to 11 years including 35 cases of suspected myocarditis,   there is a connection to the rates of myocarditis per million doses by age cohort following the second dose of the pfizer and moderna vaccines in australia – these being the vaccines administered to children, (e) there is a clear and significant risk of serious adverse effects including myocarditis, pericarditis and death in the five to 11-year-old age group following the gene-based covid vaccine and other serious side effects, and (f) there is the potential for serious long term adverse side effects which cannot be predicted at present.   there is a clear and significant risk of serious adverse effects including myocarditis, pericarditis and death in the five to 11-year-old age group following the gene-based covid vaccine and other serious side effects, and (f) there is the potential for serious long term adverse side effects which cannot be predicted at present.   there is the potential for serious long term adverse side effects which cannot be predicted at present.   as at february 2021, over 8.9 million children aged five to 11 years have received at least one dose of the paediatric pfizer dose in the united states and 6.6 million have received a second dose. data on the safety of the vaccine is available for this large real-world population, which is already greater in number than the total population of children aged five to 11 in australia, being 2.3 million. the risk of myocarditis after the second dose of the pfizer vaccine in children aged five to 11 years is estimated to be 2 per million doses in females and 4.3 per million in males. this is several fold lower than the reporting rates in adolescents and young adults, and (b) the paediatric pfizer vaccine was demonstrated to be well tolerated in children aged five to 11 years with most adverse events being mild and transient. the systemic adverse reactions most frequently reported were fatigue, headache, muscle pain, chills and fever with the latter occurring in 6.5 percent of children after the second dose. there were no serious adverse events reported in the trial that were considered to be related to the vaccination. local and systemic adverse events in the five to 11 age group were milder than in the 16 to 25-year age group.   the paediatric pfizer vaccine was demonstrated to be well tolerated in children aged five to 11 years with most adverse events being mild and transient. the systemic adverse reactions most frequently reported were fatigue, headache, muscle pain, chills and fever with the latter occurring in 6.5 percent of children after the second dose. there were no serious adverse events reported in the trial that were considered to be related to the vaccination. local and systemic adverse events in the five to 11 age group were milder than in the 16 to 25-year age group.   the most common side effects include a sore arm, headaches and fatigue. these usually go away on their own or are treated with over-the-counter medication like paracetamol or ibuprofen, (b) there is a risk to x of experiencing an adverse event after being vaccinated against covid-19, (c) such risk includes myocarditis, pericarditis or death, (d) myocarditis and pericarditis are serious adverse events, (e) death is a catastrophic adverse event, (f) 6.6 million children aged children to 11 years in the united states have received a second dose, of which 4.3 male children per million developed myocarditis, (g) two, and possibly up to five, children in the age cohort in australia have died in circumstances which may be related, whether causally or correlatively, to receiving the vaccine, (h) the incidence of x experiencing a common side effect is high but the severity of that risk is likely to be acceptable, and (i) the incidence of x experiencing a serious adverse event is low however the severity of that risk, if experienced, may be serious or catastrophic, i.e. unacceptable.   there is a risk to x of experiencing an adverse event after being vaccinated against covid-19, (c) such risk includes myocarditis, pericarditis or death, (d) myocarditis and pericarditis are serious adverse events, (e) death is a catastrophic adverse event, (f) 6.6 million children aged children to 11 years in the united states have received a second dose, of which 4.3 male children per million developed myocarditis, (g) two, and possibly up to five, children in the age cohort in australia have died in circumstances which may be related, whether causally or correlatively, to receiving the vaccine, (h) the incidence of x experiencing a common side effect is high but the severity of that risk is likely to be acceptable, and (i) the incidence of x experiencing a serious adverse event is low however the severity of that risk, if experienced, may be serious or catastrophic, i.e. unacceptable.   such risk includes myocarditis, pericarditis or death, (d) myocarditis and pericarditis are serious adverse events, (e) death is a catastrophic adverse event, (f) 6.6 million children aged children to 11 years in the united states have received a second dose, of which 4.3 male children per million developed myocarditis, (g) two, and possibly up to five, children in the age cohort in australia have died in circumstances which may be related, whether causally or correlatively, to receiving the vaccine, (h) the incidence of x experiencing a common side effect is high but the severity of that risk is likely to be acceptable, and (i) the incidence of x experiencing a serious adverse event is low however the severity of that risk, if experienced, may be serious or catastrophic, i.e. unacceptable.   myocarditis and pericarditis are serious adverse events, (e) death is a catastrophic adverse event, (f) 6.6 million children aged children to 11 years in the united states have received a second dose, of which 4.3 male children per million developed myocarditis, (g) two, and possibly up to five, children in the age cohort in australia have died in circumstances which may be related, whether causally or correlatively, to receiving the vaccine, (h) the incidence of x experiencing a common side effect is high but the severity of that risk is likely to be acceptable, and (i) the incidence of x experiencing a serious adverse event is low however the severity of that risk, if experienced, may be serious or catastrophic, i.e. unacceptable.   death is a catastrophic adverse event, (f) 6.6 million children aged children to 11 years in the united states have received a second dose, of which 4.3 male children per million developed myocarditis, (g) two, and possibly up to five, children in the age cohort in australia have died in circumstances which may be related, whether causally or correlatively, to receiving the vaccine, (h) the incidence of x experiencing a common side effect is high but the severity of that risk is likely to be acceptable, and (i) the incidence of x experiencing a serious adverse event is low however the severity of that risk, if experienced, may be serious or catastrophic, i.e. unacceptable.   6.6 million children aged children to 11 years in the united states have received a second dose, of which 4.3 male children per million developed myocarditis, (g) two, and possibly up to five, children in the age cohort in australia have died in circumstances which may be related, whether causally or correlatively, to receiving the vaccine, (h) the incidence of x experiencing a common side effect is high but the severity of that risk is likely to be acceptable, and (i) the incidence of x experiencing a serious adverse event is low however the severity of that risk, if experienced, may be serious or catastrophic, i.e. unacceptable.   two, and possibly up to five, children in the age cohort in australia have died in circumstances which may be related, whether causally or correlatively, to receiving the vaccine, (h) the incidence of x experiencing a common side effect is high but the severity of that risk is likely to be acceptable, and (i) the incidence of x experiencing a serious adverse event is low however the severity of that risk, if experienced, may be serious or catastrophic, i.e. unacceptable.   the incidence of x experiencing a common side effect is high but the severity of that risk is likely to be acceptable, and (i) the incidence of x experiencing a serious adverse event is low however the severity of that risk, if experienced, may be serious or catastrophic, i.e. unacceptable.   the incidence of x experiencing a serious adverse event is low however the severity of that risk, if experienced, may be serious or catastrophic, i.e. unacceptable.
disease severity and transmissibility in children aged 5 to 11 years.  there is no compelling case for administering the gene based vaccine to children aged five to 11 years, (b) the risk of death due to covid-19 may range from exceedingly rare to virtually or statistically nil, and (c) there is a lack of information about this age group which renders tenuous the assessment of risk of death in children due to covid-19.   the risk of death due to covid-19 may range from exceedingly rare to virtually or statistically nil, and (c) there is a lack of information about this age group which renders tenuous the assessment of risk of death in children due to covid-19.   there is a lack of information about this age group which renders tenuous the assessment of risk of death in children due to covid-19.   transmissibility of infection in younger children is lower than in older age groups, (b) children aged five to 11 years (8.9 percent of the population) were the least likely of all age groups to require hospitalisation or icu admission for covid-19, (c) children aged five to 11 years accounted for 0.7 percent of covid-19 related hospitalisations in australia, and for 0.04 percent of covid-19 related icu admissions over the period 6 june 2021 to 7 october 2021 (during the delta outbreak), (d) the reported proportion of hospitalised cases is likely to be an over-estimate of severe disease since children are often hospitalised for social indications (e.g. if their carer is hospitalised for covid-19), (e) deaths in children due to covid-19 are rare. data from the united kingdom suggests that two per every one million children infected with the virus died of covid-19, (f) there are a number of risk factors for severe illness for children aged five to 11 years arising from stated risk factors such as obesity, chronic pulmonary disease, congenital heart disease and neurological disease, (g) multisystem inflammatory syndrome is temporally associated with covid-19 infection (“mis-c”). this is a rare condition with an estimated incidence of one in 2,469 cases and typically occurs two to six weeks post infection in children with a median age of nine years. the severity ranges from mild to life threatening and can include severe heart disease, (h) children aged five to 11 years may experience “long covid”, being a broad array of symptoms for over three months post-infection. long covid appears to be less severe in children than in adults, and (i) the vaccine has been recommended for children, with the recommended dosage being two injections containing 10 micrograms each, is given approximately eight weeks apart. this is a smaller dose than for adolescents and adults.   children aged five to 11 years (8.9 percent of the population) were the least likely of all age groups to require hospitalisation or icu admission for covid-19, (c) children aged five to 11 years accounted for 0.7 percent of covid-19 related hospitalisations in australia, and for 0.04 percent of covid-19 related icu admissions over the period 6 june 2021 to 7 october 2021 (during the delta outbreak), (d) the reported proportion of hospitalised cases is likely to be an over-estimate of severe disease since children are often hospitalised for social indications (e.g. if their carer is hospitalised for covid-19), (e) deaths in children due to covid-19 are rare. data from the united kingdom suggests that two per every one million children infected with the virus died of covid-19, (f) there are a number of risk factors for severe illness for children aged five to 11 years arising from stated risk factors such as obesity, chronic pulmonary disease, congenital heart disease and neurological disease, (g) multisystem inflammatory syndrome is temporally associated with covid-19 infection (“mis-c”). this is a rare condition with an estimated incidence of one in 2,469 cases and typically occurs two to six weeks post infection in children with a median age of nine years. the severity ranges from mild to life threatening and can include severe heart disease, (h) children aged five to 11 years may experience “long covid”, being a broad array of symptoms for over three months post-infection. long covid appears to be less severe in children than in adults, and (i) the vaccine has been recommended for children, with the recommended dosage being two injections containing 10 micrograms each, is given approximately eight weeks apart. this is a smaller dose than for adolescents and adults.   children aged five to 11 years accounted for 0.7 percent of covid-19 related hospitalisations in australia, and for 0.04 percent of covid-19 related icu admissions over the period 6 june 2021 to 7 october 2021 (during the delta outbreak), (d) the reported proportion of hospitalised cases is likely to be an over-estimate of severe disease since children are often hospitalised for social indications (e.g. if their carer is hospitalised for covid-19), (e) deaths in children due to covid-19 are rare. data from the united kingdom suggests that two per every one million children infected with the virus died of covid-19, (f) there are a number of risk factors for severe illness for children aged five to 11 years arising from stated risk factors such as obesity, chronic pulmonary disease, congenital heart disease and neurological disease, (g) multisystem inflammatory syndrome is temporally associated with covid-19 infection (“mis-c”). this is a rare condition with an estimated incidence of one in 2,469 cases and typically occurs two to six weeks post infection in children with a median age of nine years. the severity ranges from mild to life threatening and can include severe heart disease, (h) children aged five to 11 years may experience “long covid”, being a broad array of symptoms for over three months post-infection. long covid appears to be less severe in children than in adults, and (i) the vaccine has been recommended for children, with the recommended dosage being two injections containing 10 micrograms each, is given approximately eight weeks apart. this is a smaller dose than for adolescents and adults.   the reported proportion of hospitalised cases is likely to be an over-estimate of severe disease since children are often hospitalised for social indications (e.g. if their carer is hospitalised for covid-19), (e) deaths in children due to covid-19 are rare. data from the united kingdom suggests that two per every one million children infected with the virus died of covid-19, (f) there are a number of risk factors for severe illness for children aged five to 11 years arising from stated risk factors such as obesity, chronic pulmonary disease, congenital heart disease and neurological disease, (g) multisystem inflammatory syndrome is temporally associated with covid-19 infection (“mis-c”). this is a rare condition with an estimated incidence of one in 2,469 cases and typically occurs two to six weeks post infection in children with a median age of nine years. the severity ranges from mild to life threatening and can include severe heart disease, (h) children aged five to 11 years may experience “long covid”, being a broad array of symptoms for over three months post-infection. long covid appears to be less severe in children than in adults, and (i) the vaccine has been recommended for children, with the recommended dosage being two injections containing 10 micrograms each, is given approximately eight weeks apart. this is a smaller dose than for adolescents and adults.   deaths in children due to covid-19 are rare. data from the united kingdom suggests that two per every one million children infected with the virus died of covid-19, (f) there are a number of risk factors for severe illness for children aged five to 11 years arising from stated risk factors such as obesity, chronic pulmonary disease, congenital heart disease and neurological disease, (g) multisystem inflammatory syndrome is temporally associated with covid-19 infection (“mis-c”). this is a rare condition with an estimated incidence of one in 2,469 cases and typically occurs two to six weeks post infection in children with a median age of nine years. the severity ranges from mild to life threatening and can include severe heart disease, (h) children aged five to 11 years may experience “long covid”, being a broad array of symptoms for over three months post-infection. long covid appears to be less severe in children than in adults, and (i) the vaccine has been recommended for children, with the recommended dosage being two injections containing 10 micrograms each, is given approximately eight weeks apart. this is a smaller dose than for adolescents and adults.   there are a number of risk factors for severe illness for children aged five to 11 years arising from stated risk factors such as obesity, chronic pulmonary disease, congenital heart disease and neurological disease, (g) multisystem inflammatory syndrome is temporally associated with covid-19 infection (“mis-c”). this is a rare condition with an estimated incidence of one in 2,469 cases and typically occurs two to six weeks post infection in children with a median age of nine years. the severity ranges from mild to life threatening and can include severe heart disease, (h) children aged five to 11 years may experience “long covid”, being a broad array of symptoms for over three months post-infection. long covid appears to be less severe in children than in adults, and (i) the vaccine has been recommended for children, with the recommended dosage being two injections containing 10 micrograms each, is given approximately eight weeks apart. this is a smaller dose than for adolescents and adults.   multisystem inflammatory syndrome is temporally associated with covid-19 infection (“mis-c”). this is a rare condition with an estimated incidence of one in 2,469 cases and typically occurs two to six weeks post infection in children with a median age of nine years. the severity ranges from mild to life threatening and can include severe heart disease, (h) children aged five to 11 years may experience “long covid”, being a broad array of symptoms for over three months post-infection. long covid appears to be less severe in children than in adults, and (i) the vaccine has been recommended for children, with the recommended dosage being two injections containing 10 micrograms each, is given approximately eight weeks apart. this is a smaller dose than for adolescents and adults.   children aged five to 11 years may experience “long covid”, being a broad array of symptoms for over three months post-infection. long covid appears to be less severe in children than in adults, and (i) the vaccine has been recommended for children, with the recommended dosage being two injections containing 10 micrograms each, is given approximately eight weeks apart. this is a smaller dose than for adolescents and adults.   the vaccine has been recommended for children, with the recommended dosage being two injections containing 10 micrograms each, is given approximately eight weeks apart. this is a smaller dose than for adolescents and adults.   children aged five to 11 years are less likely to experience severe disease from covid‑19, other than those with certain medical conditions, (b) the risk of death in children aged five to 11 years from covid-19 is uncertain, however, the available data suggests that the risk of death in children aged five to 11 years from covid-19 is rare or minimal, (c) between june and october 2021, during the outbreak of the delta strain, children accounted for 0.4 percent of covid-related hospital admissions however this is likely to over-estimate severe disease in that population, and (d) transmissibility of infection in children aged five to 11 years is lower compared to older age groups.   the risk of death in children aged five to 11 years from covid-19 is uncertain, however, the available data suggests that the risk of death in children aged five to 11 years from covid-19 is rare or minimal, (c) between june and october 2021, during the outbreak of the delta strain, children accounted for 0.4 percent of covid-related hospital admissions however this is likely to over-estimate severe disease in that population, and (d) transmissibility of infection in children aged five to 11 years is lower compared to older age groups.   between june and october 2021, during the outbreak of the delta strain, children accounted for 0.4 percent of covid-related hospital admissions however this is likely to over-estimate severe disease in that population, and (d) transmissibility of infection in children aged five to 11 years is lower compared to older age groups.   transmissibility of infection in children aged five to 11 years is lower compared to older age groups.   the risk to x from receiving the vaccine is uncertain. the available data, which pre-dates the omicron variant, suggests a reduction of covid-19 within the age cohort, (b) the risk of x experiencing a common side effect is high but the severity of such side effects is acceptable, (c) the risk of x experiencing a severe adverse event from the vaccine is low but the severity of such reaction may be unacceptable, (d) if x contracts covid-19, he is less likely to experience severe disease, less likely to be hospitalised, and less likely to transmit the disease as compared to individuals in other age cohorts, (e) if x contracts covid-19, he is at risk of developing multisystem inflammatory syndrome, which may include severe cardiac disease, and/or ‘long covid’, (f) the risk of death to x from covid-19 is uncertain, however, the available data suggests that the risk is rare or minimal, and (g) both the vaccine and the disease present the risk of death or severe heart disease. in both scenarios, the incidence of risk is low but the severity may be unacceptable.   the risk of x experiencing a common side effect is high but the severity of such side effects is acceptable, (c) the risk of x experiencing a severe adverse event from the vaccine is low but the severity of such reaction may be unacceptable, (d) if x contracts covid-19, he is less likely to experience severe disease, less likely to be hospitalised, and less likely to transmit the disease as compared to individuals in other age cohorts, (e) if x contracts covid-19, he is at risk of developing multisystem inflammatory syndrome, which may include severe cardiac disease, and/or ‘long covid’, (f) the risk of death to x from covid-19 is uncertain, however, the available data suggests that the risk is rare or minimal, and (g) both the vaccine and the disease present the risk of death or severe heart disease. in both scenarios, the incidence of risk is low but the severity may be unacceptable.   the risk of x experiencing a severe adverse event from the vaccine is low but the severity of such reaction may be unacceptable, (d) if x contracts covid-19, he is less likely to experience severe disease, less likely to be hospitalised, and less likely to transmit the disease as compared to individuals in other age cohorts, (e) if x contracts covid-19, he is at risk of developing multisystem inflammatory syndrome, which may include severe cardiac disease, and/or ‘long covid’, (f) the risk of death to x from covid-19 is uncertain, however, the available data suggests that the risk is rare or minimal, and (g) both the vaccine and the disease present the risk of death or severe heart disease. in both scenarios, the incidence of risk is low but the severity may be unacceptable.   if x contracts covid-19, he is less likely to experience severe disease, less likely to be hospitalised, and less likely to transmit the disease as compared to individuals in other age cohorts, (e) if x contracts covid-19, he is at risk of developing multisystem inflammatory syndrome, which may include severe cardiac disease, and/or ‘long covid’, (f) the risk of death to x from covid-19 is uncertain, however, the available data suggests that the risk is rare or minimal, and (g) both the vaccine and the disease present the risk of death or severe heart disease. in both scenarios, the incidence of risk is low but the severity may be unacceptable.   if x contracts covid-19, he is at risk of developing multisystem inflammatory syndrome, which may include severe cardiac disease, and/or ‘long covid’, (f) the risk of death to x from covid-19 is uncertain, however, the available data suggests that the risk is rare or minimal, and (g) both the vaccine and the disease present the risk of death or severe heart disease. in both scenarios, the incidence of risk is low but the severity may be unacceptable.   the risk of death to x from covid-19 is uncertain, however, the available data suggests that the risk is rare or minimal, and (g) both the vaccine and the disease present the risk of death or severe heart disease. in both scenarios, the incidence of risk is low but the severity may be unacceptable.   both the vaccine and the disease present the risk of death or severe heart disease. in both scenarios, the incidence of risk is low but the severity may be unacceptable.
what are the risks to x in being vaccinated against covid-19 at age 14?
what is the risks to x in being vaccinated, or not being vaccinated, against covid-19 at age 12?
conventional vaccines usually take about 7 years to develop and test. in a 2018 publication sponsored by the bill and melinda gates foundation, vaccines were divided into three categories: simple, complex and unprecedented. the unprecedented category represents those vaccines directed towards a disease that has never before been successfully treated and include vaccines against hiv and malaria. according to authors seneff and nigh, unprecedented vaccines are expected to take more than 12 years to develop due to the technical difficulties and they are expected to have a very low chance (about 5%) of proving safety and efficacy in even early phase ii clinical trials involving small numbers of individuals and a very much lower chance (about 2%) of moving to larger phase iii clinical trials and demonstrating safety and efficacy before being considered for marketing. the gene-based covid-19 “vaccines” were developed in less than a year and are supported by abbreviated safety and efficacy clinical data. these gene-based “vaccines” are in the “unprecedented” category. (emphasis added)   all parties agree that x can be vaccinated by, if not before the age of 14 thus, there is no issue of risk to x in being vaccinated at this age, (a) children aged 14 years are in the cohort of adolescents which spans from 12 to 16 years, and (a) the mother’s rationale for five more years to pass for the vaccine to be evaluated does not accord with her own expert’s evidence on this issue.   children aged 14 years are in the cohort of adolescents which spans from 12 to 16 years, and (a) the mother’s rationale for five more years to pass for the vaccine to be evaluated does not accord with her own expert’s evidence on this issue.   the mother’s rationale for five more years to pass for the vaccine to be evaluated does not accord with her own expert’s evidence on this issue.
what are the benefits to x in being vaccinated against covid-19?  has the anticipated benefit of reducing the likelihood of school closures, and disruptions to extra-curricular activities and social activities, (b) is anticipated to reduce parental absenteeism and isolation of children and their families, (c) may reduce disruption to usual activities which may have positive impacts on the mental health and wellbeing of children and their families in allowing them to resume and maintain normal activities that contribute to their educational, physical, psychological and social development, and (d) may reduce transmission of disease through children which may lead to lower disease incidence in the general population and household contacts.   is anticipated to reduce parental absenteeism and isolation of children and their families, (c) may reduce disruption to usual activities which may have positive impacts on the mental health and wellbeing of children and their families in allowing them to resume and maintain normal activities that contribute to their educational, physical, psychological and social development, and (d) may reduce transmission of disease through children which may lead to lower disease incidence in the general population and household contacts.   may reduce disruption to usual activities which may have positive impacts on the mental health and wellbeing of children and their families in allowing them to resume and maintain normal activities that contribute to their educational, physical, psychological and social development, and (d) may reduce transmission of disease through children which may lead to lower disease incidence in the general population and household contacts.   may reduce transmission of disease through children which may lead to lower disease incidence in the general population and household contacts.   directly benefit from less disruption to his normal activities and education, and thus maintain better mental health as a consequence, and (b) indirectly benefit from a reduced risk of one or more his parents, step parents or other household members becoming ill with the associated demands on the household as a consequence, including financial pressures from parental absenteeism from work. he may also indirectly benefit from members of his local community being able to engage in normal activities.   indirectly benefit from a reduced risk of one or more his parents, step parents or other household members becoming ill with the associated demands on the household as a consequence, including financial pressures from parental absenteeism from work. he may also indirectly benefit from members of his local community being able to engage in normal activities.
conclusion as to risk vs benefit of the vaccine
should any decision to vaccinate x be made subject to his views?  x can maintain privacy over his health records. the mother adopted the rationale of the independent children’s lawyer in this regard, namely that x will be able to consent to simple treatments in accordance with his own views, without his parents being able to access his health records as to avoid the effects of their disagreement and conflict, and (b) x will have gained a level of maturity that will equip him to make a decision for himself.   x will have gained a level of maturity that will equip him to make a decision for himself.   may be futile given the purpose of the specific issues report was to ascertain his views in an expert setting but no view was forthcoming, and (b) may be detrimental to x if it renews parental dispute on the issue.   may be detrimental to x if it renews parental dispute on the issue.
additional considerations
conclusion
costs
legal framework   subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.   if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.  ) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to: (a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   such other matters as the court considers relevant.   to avoid doubt, in proceedings in which an independent children's lawyer for a child has been appointed, the court may make an order under subsection (2) as to costs or security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, to the effect that each party to the proceedings bears, in such proportion as the court considers just, the costs of the independent children's lawyer in respect of the proceedings.   all relevant matters in s 117(2a) of the act “must all be taken into account and all balanced in order to determine whether the overall circumstances justify the making of an order for costs”: i & i (no. 2) (1995) flc 92–625 at 82,277, (b) no one factor under s 117(2a) of the act prevails over any other factor. rather, it is a matter of weight that is accorded to each of the relevant factors in the trial judge’s discretion: medlon & medlon (no. 6) (indemnity costs) (2015) flc 93–664 at [24]. (c) there is nothing to prevent any factor in s 117(2a) being the sole foundation for an order for costs: pbf as child representative for af (legal aid commission of tasmania) & trf & lkl [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 at [41], and (d) neither special circumstances nor an exceptional case is required before an order for costs can be made: penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311.   no one factor under s 117(2a) of the act prevails over any other factor. rather, it is a matter of weight that is accorded to each of the relevant factors in the trial judge’s discretion: medlon & medlon (no. 6) (indemnity costs) (2015) flc 93–664 at [24]. (c) there is nothing to prevent any factor in s 117(2a) being the sole foundation for an order for costs: pbf as child representative for af (legal aid commission of tasmania) & trf & lkl [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 at [41], and (d) neither special circumstances nor an exceptional case is required before an order for costs can be made: penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311.   there is nothing to prevent any factor in s 117(2a) being the sole foundation for an order for costs: pbf as child representative for af (legal aid commission of tasmania) & trf & lkl [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 at [41], and (d) neither special circumstances nor an exceptional case is required before an order for costs can be made: penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311.   neither special circumstances nor an exceptional case is required before an order for costs can be made: penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311.
mother’s cost application   pursuant to div 7.1.3 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) (the rules), each party has leave to adduce evidence from one expert other than a single expert with respect to the issue of the vaccination of [x] born [...] 2012 (“adversarial expert”) and no later than 4:00pm aedt on 29 april 2022, applicant and respondent file and serve on the other an affidavit annexing or detailing evidence from one adversarial expert upon whom they intend to rely at the hearing. (3) leave is granted to each party to cross-examine the other party’s adversarial expert at the hearing for a maximum period of one (1) hour. (4) if either party elects to take up the opportunity to cross-examine the other party’s adversarial expert at the hearing, then they must: (a) provide both the other party and the other party’s adversarial expert with written notice of their intention to do so at least 14 days prior to the hearing, and (b) pay any costs associated with the adversarial expert’s attendance at court (in person or electronically) for the purposes of cross-examination.   leave is granted to each party to cross-examine the other party’s adversarial expert at the hearing for a maximum period of one (1) hour. (4) if either party elects to take up the opportunity to cross-examine the other party’s adversarial expert at the hearing, then they must: (a) provide both the other party and the other party’s adversarial expert with written notice of their intention to do so at least 14 days prior to the hearing, and (b) pay any costs associated with the adversarial expert’s attendance at court (in person or electronically) for the purposes of cross-examination.   if either party elects to take up the opportunity to cross-examine the other party’s adversarial expert at the hearing, then they must: (a) provide both the other party and the other party’s adversarial expert with written notice of their intention to do so at least 14 days prior to the hearing, and (b) pay any costs associated with the adversarial expert’s attendance at court (in person or electronically) for the purposes of cross-examination.   provide both the other party and the other party’s adversarial expert with written notice of their intention to do so at least 14 days prior to the hearing, and (b) pay any costs associated with the adversarial expert’s attendance at court (in person or electronically) for the purposes of cross-examination.   pay any costs associated with the adversarial expert’s attendance at court (in person or electronically) for the purposes of cross-examination.
independent children’s lawyer’s costs application
associate: dated: 17 august 2022
dated: 17 august 2022