last updated: 31 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gengxin & zedong [2022] fedcfamc2f 1083
orders
the court declares by consent that:
the court further orders that:
by consent:
by order of the court:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
deputy chief judge mercuri:
introduction  the applicant mother is a country b citizen and the respondent father is an australian citizen, (b) the parties have one child, x born in 2018, who was born in the united states of america, and (c) the respondent does and has acknowledged that he is the biological father of the child and that he was an australian citizen at the time of the child’s birth.   the parties have one child, x born in 2018, who was born in the united states of america, and (c) the respondent does and has acknowledged that he is the biological father of the child and that he was an australian citizen at the time of the child’s birth.   the respondent does and has acknowledged that he is the biological father of the child and that he was an australian citizen at the time of the child’s birth.   that the declaration under section 69va of the act not only state that the father is the child’s biological father, but also that he was an australian citizen at the time of the child’s birth, (b) that the mother have liberty to apply for an australian passport for the child, and (c) that the father sign all necessary documents required to facilitate the child’s application for an australian passport.   that the mother have liberty to apply for an australian passport for the child, and (c) that the father sign all necessary documents required to facilitate the child’s application for an australian passport.   that the father sign all necessary documents required to facilitate the child’s application for an australian passport.
evidence  her amended application filed on 14 july 2022, and (b) her affidavits filed on 13 may 2019 and 22 march 2022.   her affidavits filed on 13 may 2019 and 22 march 2022.
issues for consideration  the nature of the declaration that the court should make under section 69va, and (b) whether it is in the child’s best interests to make orders permitting the mother to seek australian citizenship for the child and requiring the father to take all necessary steps to facilitate that application.   whether it is in the child’s best interests to make orders permitting the mother to seek australian citizenship for the child and requiring the father to take all necessary steps to facilitate that application.
consideration
section 69va declaration
pursuant to section 69va of the act, the court declares that the respondent father, [mr zedong], born [in] 1958, being an australian citizen at all relevant time and is the biological father of the child, [x], born [in] 2018.
69a what this division does this division deals with: (a) the institution of proceedings and procedure (subdivision b), and (b) jurisdiction of courts (subdivision c), and (c) presumption of parentage, (subdivision d) and (d) parentage evidence (subdivision e), and (e) the places and people to which this part extends and applies (subdivision f).   the places and people to which this part extends and applies (subdivision f).
69va declarations of parentage as well as deciding, after receiving evidence, the issue of the parentage of a child for the purposes of proceedings, the court may also issue a declaration of parentage that is conclusive evidence of parentage for the purposes of all laws of the commonwealth.
application for australian citizenship for the child  she be at liberty to apply for australian citizenship for the child, and (b) the father be required to do all things and sign all documents necessary to assist with that application.   the father be required to do all things and sign all documents necessary to assist with that application.
in this part, parental responsibility in relation to a child, means all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which by law, parents have in relation to children.
conclusion
deputy associate: dated: 18 august 2022
dated: 18 august 2022
[1] joint statement of agreed facts and facts in dispute filed on 26 july 2022.[2] joint summary of final orders by consent and orders not consented to filed on 26 july 2022.[3] applicant’s outline of case filed on 25 july 2022.[4] respondent’s outline of case filed on 26 july 2022.[5] mother’s affidavit affirmed and filed on 22 march 2022 at paragraphs [5] and [6]. [6] mother’s affidavit affirmed and filed on 22 march 2022 at paragraph [7].