last updated: 20 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
colbert & colbert [2022] fedcfamc2f 1090
orders
the court orders:  for the benefit of the applicant husband, via his solicitors' trust account, the sum of $1,498,085.81, free of any and all claims of the wife, and (b) for the benefit of the second respondent, the sum of $800,000.   for the benefit of the second respondent, the sum of $800,000.   her interest in any company or as a beneficiary in any trust, (b) the contents of her bank accounts, (c) the personal property and household contents in her possession as at the date on which these orders are made including any motor vessel she has acquired, (d) any motor vessel in her possession, and (e) any superannuation or employment entitlements in her name.   the contents of her bank accounts, (c) the personal property and household contents in her possession as at the date on which these orders are made including any motor vessel she has acquired, (d) any motor vessel in her possession, and (e) any superannuation or employment entitlements in her name.   the personal property and household contents in her possession as at the date on which these orders are made including any motor vessel she has acquired, (d) any motor vessel in her possession, and (e) any superannuation or employment entitlements in her name.   any motor vessel in her possession, and (e) any superannuation or employment entitlements in her name.   any superannuation or employment entitlements in her name.   the contents of his bank accounts, (b) the following chattels in his possession:- (i) motor vehicle 1, (ii) the trailer, (iii) motor vehicle 2, (c) any vehicle in his possession subject to any encumbrance thereon, (d) all other personal property and household contents in his possession as at the date, (e) his employment entitlements, and (f) his super fund 1 entitlements.   the following chattels in his possession:- (i) motor vehicle 1, (ii) the trailer, (iii) motor vehicle 2, (c) any vehicle in his possession subject to any encumbrance thereon, (d) all other personal property and household contents in his possession as at the date, (e) his employment entitlements, and (f) his super fund 1 entitlements.   motor vehicle 1, (ii) the trailer, (iii) motor vehicle 2,  ) the trailer, (iii) motor vehicle 2,  i) motor vehicle 2,   any vehicle in his possession subject to any encumbrance thereon, (d) all other personal property and household contents in his possession as at the date, (e) his employment entitlements, and (f) his super fund 1 entitlements.   all other personal property and household contents in his possession as at the date, (e) his employment entitlements, and (f) his super fund 1 entitlements.   his employment entitlements, and (f) his super fund 1 entitlements.   his super fund 1 entitlements.   any and all taxation debts in her name or in the name of any entity associated with her, howsoever and whenever arising, (b) any claims by any liquidator of any company associated with her, including colbert pty ltd, (c) all credit card, store or other card liabilities held in her name, and (d) all other liabilities incurred by her or in her name, howsoever arising.   any claims by any liquidator of any company associated with her, including colbert pty ltd, (c) all credit card, store or other card liabilities held in her name, and (d) all other liabilities incurred by her or in her name, howsoever arising.   all credit card, store or other card liabilities held in her name, and (d) all other liabilities incurred by her or in her name, howsoever arising.   all other liabilities incurred by her or in her name, howsoever arising.   all credit card, store or other card liabilities held in his name, and (b) all other liabilities incurred by him or in his name, excepting the claim by the liquidator of the company colbert pty ltd which shall be a liability of the wife.   all other liabilities incurred by him or in his name, excepting the claim by the liquidator of the company colbert pty ltd which shall be a liability of the wife.   the second respondent is entitled to $800,000.00 from the proceeds of sale from the properties located at e street, d town in the state of queensland and f street, g town in the state of new south wales and which are held in evans brandon family lawyers' trust account (proceeds of sale), and (b) the respondent wife has no equitable interest in the proceeds of sale as against the second respondent.   the respondent wife has no equitable interest in the proceeds of sale as against the second respondent.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge middleton:
background  should the matter proceed by way of undefended hearing, and if so (b) whether the orders sought by consent by the applicant and second respondent are just and equitable.   whether the orders sought by consent by the applicant and second respondent are just and equitable.
material
the law
determination  give an address for service before the time for the respondent to give an address has expired, or (b) file a response before the time for the respondent to file a response has expired, or (c) comply with an order of the court in the proceeding, or (d) file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or (g) defend the proceeding with due diligence, or (h) prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   file a response before the time for the respondent to file a response has expired, or (c) comply with an order of the court in the proceeding, or (d) file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or (g) defend the proceeding with due diligence, or (h) prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   comply with an order of the court in the proceeding, or (d) file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or (g) defend the proceeding with due diligence, or (h) prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or (g) defend the proceeding with due diligence, or (h) prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or (g) defend the proceeding with due diligence, or (h) prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   do any act required to be done by these rules, or (g) defend the proceeding with due diligence, or (h) prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   defend the proceeding with due diligence, or (h) prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or (b) give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court proceeding in the time limited in the order.   give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court proceeding in the time limited in the order.   make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court proceeding in the time limited in the order.
....in consequence of the settled practice which exists, the court ought not usually make an order for the payment of costs on some basis other than the party and party basis. the circumstances of the case must be such as to warrant the court in departing from the usual course. that has been the view of all judges dealing with applications for payment of costs on the indemnity or some other basis whether here or in england. the tests have been variously put. the court of appeal in andrews v. barnes (39 ch d at 141) said the court had a general and discretionary power to award costs as between solicitor and client "as and when the justice of the case might so require." woodward j in fountain selected meats appears to have adopted what was said by brandon lj (as he was) in preston v. preston ((1982) 1 all er at 58) namely, there should be some special or unusual feature in the case to justify the court in departing from the ordinary practice. most judges dealing with the problem have resolved the particular case before them by dealing with the circumstances of that case and finding in it the presence or absence of factors which would be capable, if they existed, of warranting a departure from the usual rule.
dated: 18 august 2022