last updated: 23 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
lowden & lowden [2022] fedcfamc2f 1138
orders
the court orders that:  that the mother: (i) notify the father of any proposed decision relating to the long term care and welfare of the child and the reasons for the proposal, such notification to be given in writing at least six weeks prior to a final decision being made, and (ii) take into consideration any views expressed by the father about the proposed decision, (b) that the father is permitted to contact the child’s school and authorise a nominee to collect the child from school (in accordance with order 4 below) for the purposes of the child spending time with the father as provided for by order 2, (c) that, unless the mother and the father otherwise agree in writing, the mother is restrained from: (i) changing the child’s name, (ii) relocating the child’s residence or school enrolment to any area more than 150 km driving distance from city b nsw, (iii) taking the child for counselling or allowing the child to attend with the mother for counselling relating to: the child’s relationship with the father, the mother’s relationship with the father, or alleged abuse by the father towards the child or the mother, and (iv) enrolling the child in any extra-curricular activities that will require the child to miss out on spending time with the father as provided for in these orders.   notify the father of any proposed decision relating to the long term care and welfare of the child and the reasons for the proposal, such notification to be given in writing at least six weeks prior to a final decision being made, and (ii) take into consideration any views expressed by the father about the proposed decision,  ) take into consideration any views expressed by the father about the proposed decision,   that the father is permitted to contact the child’s school and authorise a nominee to collect the child from school (in accordance with order 4 below) for the purposes of the child spending time with the father as provided for by order 2, (c) that, unless the mother and the father otherwise agree in writing, the mother is restrained from: (i) changing the child’s name, (ii) relocating the child’s residence or school enrolment to any area more than 150 km driving distance from city b nsw, (iii) taking the child for counselling or allowing the child to attend with the mother for counselling relating to: the child’s relationship with the father, the mother’s relationship with the father, or alleged abuse by the father towards the child or the mother, and (iv) enrolling the child in any extra-curricular activities that will require the child to miss out on spending time with the father as provided for in these orders.   that, unless the mother and the father otherwise agree in writing, the mother is restrained from: (i) changing the child’s name, (ii) relocating the child’s residence or school enrolment to any area more than 150 km driving distance from city b nsw, (iii) taking the child for counselling or allowing the child to attend with the mother for counselling relating to: the child’s relationship with the father, the mother’s relationship with the father, or alleged abuse by the father towards the child or the mother, and (iv) enrolling the child in any extra-curricular activities that will require the child to miss out on spending time with the father as provided for in these orders.   changing the child’s name, (ii) relocating the child’s residence or school enrolment to any area more than 150 km driving distance from city b nsw, (iii) taking the child for counselling or allowing the child to attend with the mother for counselling relating to: the child’s relationship with the father, the mother’s relationship with the father, or alleged abuse by the father towards the child or the mother, and (iv) enrolling the child in any extra-curricular activities that will require the child to miss out on spending time with the father as provided for in these orders.  ) relocating the child’s residence or school enrolment to any area more than 150 km driving distance from city b nsw, (iii) taking the child for counselling or allowing the child to attend with the mother for counselling relating to: the child’s relationship with the father, the mother’s relationship with the father, or alleged abuse by the father towards the child or the mother, and (iv) enrolling the child in any extra-curricular activities that will require the child to miss out on spending time with the father as provided for in these orders.  i) taking the child for counselling or allowing the child to attend with the mother for counselling relating to: the child’s relationship with the father, the mother’s relationship with the father, or alleged abuse by the father towards the child or the mother, and (iv) enrolling the child in any extra-curricular activities that will require the child to miss out on spending time with the father as provided for in these orders.  ) enrolling the child in any extra-curricular activities that will require the child to miss out on spending time with the father as provided for in these orders.   during school term, for two weekends out of every four, with such weekends to align with the father’s weekends off work, as per his work roster, as follows: (i) on one weekend, from 5:30 pm on friday until 5:30 pm on sunday, and (ii) on one weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday. (b) in even years, from the conclusion of school on friday until midday on the second saturday in the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, (c) in odd years, from midday on the second saturday of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays until midday on the last saturday of the relevant school holiday period, (d) for the christmas school holidays at the end of term 4: (i) for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2022, on a week about basis, the mother having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2022, (ii) for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2023, on a week about basis, with the father having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2023, (iii) for the christmas school holidays thereafter, on an equal basis with changeover taking place in the middle of the school holidays: in even years, the father having the first half of the school holidays, in odd years, the mother having the first half of the school holidays, (e) at other times as agreed between the parties.   on one weekend, from 5:30 pm on friday until 5:30 pm on sunday, and (ii) on one weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday.  ) on one weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday.   in even years, from the conclusion of school on friday until midday on the second saturday in the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, (c) in odd years, from midday on the second saturday of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays until midday on the last saturday of the relevant school holiday period, (d) for the christmas school holidays at the end of term 4: (i) for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2022, on a week about basis, the mother having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2022, (ii) for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2023, on a week about basis, with the father having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2023, (iii) for the christmas school holidays thereafter, on an equal basis with changeover taking place in the middle of the school holidays: in even years, the father having the first half of the school holidays, in odd years, the mother having the first half of the school holidays, (e) at other times as agreed between the parties.   in odd years, from midday on the second saturday of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays until midday on the last saturday of the relevant school holiday period, (d) for the christmas school holidays at the end of term 4: (i) for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2022, on a week about basis, the mother having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2022, (ii) for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2023, on a week about basis, with the father having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2023, (iii) for the christmas school holidays thereafter, on an equal basis with changeover taking place in the middle of the school holidays: in even years, the father having the first half of the school holidays, in odd years, the mother having the first half of the school holidays, (e) at other times as agreed between the parties.   for the christmas school holidays at the end of term 4: (i) for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2022, on a week about basis, the mother having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2022, (ii) for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2023, on a week about basis, with the father having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2023, (iii) for the christmas school holidays thereafter, on an equal basis with changeover taking place in the middle of the school holidays: in even years, the father having the first half of the school holidays, in odd years, the mother having the first half of the school holidays, (e) at other times as agreed between the parties.   for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2022, on a week about basis, the mother having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2022, (ii) for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2023, on a week about basis, with the father having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2023, (iii) for the christmas school holidays thereafter, on an equal basis with changeover taking place in the middle of the school holidays: in even years, the father having the first half of the school holidays, in odd years, the mother having the first half of the school holidays,  ) for the christmas school holidays commencing in 2023, on a week about basis, with the father having the first week of the christmas school holiday period in 2023, (iii) for the christmas school holidays thereafter, on an equal basis with changeover taking place in the middle of the school holidays: in even years, the father having the first half of the school holidays, in odd years, the mother having the first half of the school holidays,  i) for the christmas school holidays thereafter, on an equal basis with changeover taking place in the middle of the school holidays: in even years, the father having the first half of the school holidays, in odd years, the mother having the first half of the school holidays,   at other times as agreed between the parties.   discussing these proceedings with or in the presence or hearing of the child, or showing any court document relating to these proceedings to, the child, (b) making critical or derogatory comments about the other parent or members of the other parent’s family or any member of the other parent’s household in the presence or within hearing of the child and will do all things reasonably necessary to immediately remove the child from the presence of anyone else who does so, (c) communicating with one another in a derogatory or belittling manner, (d) questioning the child in relation to his time with either parent, (e) consuming alcohol whilst caring for the child or within 12 hours of the child coming into their care.   making critical or derogatory comments about the other parent or members of the other parent’s family or any member of the other parent’s household in the presence or within hearing of the child and will do all things reasonably necessary to immediately remove the child from the presence of anyone else who does so, (c) communicating with one another in a derogatory or belittling manner, (d) questioning the child in relation to his time with either parent, (e) consuming alcohol whilst caring for the child or within 12 hours of the child coming into their care.   communicating with one another in a derogatory or belittling manner, (d) questioning the child in relation to his time with either parent, (e) consuming alcohol whilst caring for the child or within 12 hours of the child coming into their care.   questioning the child in relation to his time with either parent, (e) consuming alcohol whilst caring for the child or within 12 hours of the child coming into their care.   consuming alcohol whilst caring for the child or within 12 hours of the child coming into their care.   an accurate itinerary to include a copy of the parent’s and child’s return airlines tickets, (b) the departure date from australia and return date to australia: (c) each country the parent and child will be travelling to: (d) the date on which the parent and child will arrive and depart from each country other than australia, and (e) a telephone number and address at which the parent and the child can be contacted at each destination while overseas.   the departure date from australia and return date to australia: (c) each country the parent and child will be travelling to: (d) the date on which the parent and child will arrive and depart from each country other than australia, and (e) a telephone number and address at which the parent and the child can be contacted at each destination while overseas.   each country the parent and child will be travelling to: (d) the date on which the parent and child will arrive and depart from each country other than australia, and (e) a telephone number and address at which the parent and the child can be contacted at each destination while overseas.   the date on which the parent and child will arrive and depart from each country other than australia, and (e) a telephone number and address at which the parent and the child can be contacted at each destination while overseas.   a telephone number and address at which the parent and the child can be contacted at each destination while overseas.   advise the other parent of same in writing (by text message or email), (b) do all things, sign all documents and give all consents and authorities necessary to enable each parent to attend such appointment or a subsequent separate appointment and to ensure that each parent is fully appraised regarding the child’s health, treatment and prognosis and anything required of them as a parent with respect to same.   do all things, sign all documents and give all consents and authorities necessary to enable each parent to attend such appointment or a subsequent separate appointment and to ensure that each parent is fully appraised regarding the child’s health, treatment and prognosis and anything required of them as a parent with respect to same.
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction
the materials relied upon at final hearing  further amended initiating application filed on 15 november 2019, (2) notice of risk filed 6 april 2018, (3) affidavit of the mother sworn and filed 15 september 2020, and (4) a case outline prepared by ms druitt, filed 16 september 2019.   notice of risk filed 6 april 2018, (3) affidavit of the mother sworn and filed 15 september 2020, and (4) a case outline prepared by ms druitt, filed 16 september 2019.   affidavit of the mother sworn and filed 15 september 2020, and (4) a case outline prepared by ms druitt, filed 16 september 2019.   a case outline prepared by ms druitt, filed 16 september 2019.   exhibit a1 –a ‘notice of decision’ from the commissioner of victim’s rights regarding the approval of support for the mother dated 14 march 2019, (2) exhibit a2 –document from ‘victims services’ entitled ‘recognition payment for ms lowden’ dated 21 may 2020, (3) exhibit a3 – 20 pages of screenshot messages from facebook messenger from the father to the mother, (4) exhibit a4 – a document entitled ‘treatment report’ dated 17 september 2020 by ms d, clinical psychologist on behalf of the child, (5) exhibit a5 – a document entitled ‘treatment report’ dated 17 september 2020 by ms d, clinical psychologist, on behalf of the mother, (6) exhibit a6 – a 2 page letter dated 15 september 2020 entitled “request for progress report’ from mdv lawyers (for the mother) to ms d, (7) exhibit a7 – 25 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the child, (8) exhibit a8 – 22 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the mother, (9) exhibit a9 – the applicant mother’s final minute of order, (10) exhibit a10 – the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 20 november 2018, (11) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.   exhibit a2 –document from ‘victims services’ entitled ‘recognition payment for ms lowden’ dated 21 may 2020, (3) exhibit a3 – 20 pages of screenshot messages from facebook messenger from the father to the mother, (4) exhibit a4 – a document entitled ‘treatment report’ dated 17 september 2020 by ms d, clinical psychologist on behalf of the child, (5) exhibit a5 – a document entitled ‘treatment report’ dated 17 september 2020 by ms d, clinical psychologist, on behalf of the mother, (6) exhibit a6 – a 2 page letter dated 15 september 2020 entitled “request for progress report’ from mdv lawyers (for the mother) to ms d, (7) exhibit a7 – 25 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the child, (8) exhibit a8 – 22 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the mother, (9) exhibit a9 – the applicant mother’s final minute of order, (10) exhibit a10 – the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 20 november 2018, (11) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.   exhibit a3 – 20 pages of screenshot messages from facebook messenger from the father to the mother, (4) exhibit a4 – a document entitled ‘treatment report’ dated 17 september 2020 by ms d, clinical psychologist on behalf of the child, (5) exhibit a5 – a document entitled ‘treatment report’ dated 17 september 2020 by ms d, clinical psychologist, on behalf of the mother, (6) exhibit a6 – a 2 page letter dated 15 september 2020 entitled “request for progress report’ from mdv lawyers (for the mother) to ms d, (7) exhibit a7 – 25 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the child, (8) exhibit a8 – 22 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the mother, (9) exhibit a9 – the applicant mother’s final minute of order, (10) exhibit a10 – the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 20 november 2018, (11) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.   exhibit a4 – a document entitled ‘treatment report’ dated 17 september 2020 by ms d, clinical psychologist on behalf of the child, (5) exhibit a5 – a document entitled ‘treatment report’ dated 17 september 2020 by ms d, clinical psychologist, on behalf of the mother, (6) exhibit a6 – a 2 page letter dated 15 september 2020 entitled “request for progress report’ from mdv lawyers (for the mother) to ms d, (7) exhibit a7 – 25 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the child, (8) exhibit a8 – 22 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the mother, (9) exhibit a9 – the applicant mother’s final minute of order, (10) exhibit a10 – the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 20 november 2018, (11) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.   exhibit a5 – a document entitled ‘treatment report’ dated 17 september 2020 by ms d, clinical psychologist, on behalf of the mother, (6) exhibit a6 – a 2 page letter dated 15 september 2020 entitled “request for progress report’ from mdv lawyers (for the mother) to ms d, (7) exhibit a7 – 25 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the child, (8) exhibit a8 – 22 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the mother, (9) exhibit a9 – the applicant mother’s final minute of order, (10) exhibit a10 – the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 20 november 2018, (11) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.   exhibit a6 – a 2 page letter dated 15 september 2020 entitled “request for progress report’ from mdv lawyers (for the mother) to ms d, (7) exhibit a7 – 25 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the child, (8) exhibit a8 – 22 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the mother, (9) exhibit a9 – the applicant mother’s final minute of order, (10) exhibit a10 – the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 20 november 2018, (11) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.   exhibit a7 – 25 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the child, (8) exhibit a8 – 22 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the mother, (9) exhibit a9 – the applicant mother’s final minute of order, (10) exhibit a10 – the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 20 november 2018, (11) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.   exhibit a8 – 22 pages of ms d’s clinical psychology notes relating to the mother, (9) exhibit a9 – the applicant mother’s final minute of order, (10) exhibit a10 – the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 20 november 2018, (11) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.   exhibit a9 – the applicant mother’s final minute of order, (10) exhibit a10 – the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 20 november 2018, (11) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.  ) exhibit a10 – the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 20 november 2018, (11) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.  ) exhibit a11 – document entitled ‘orders 23 september 2020’ being an example of the father’s 2021 work roster (12) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.  ) exhibit a12 – a google maps map of city e to town f, and (13) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.  ) exhibit a13 – a google maps map of city e to suburb v.   further amended response filed 14 september 2019, (2) notice of risk filed 14 september 2020, (3) affidavit of the father sworn and filed 15 september 2020, and (4) affidavit of his partner, ms g, sworn and filed 14 september 2020, (5) affidavit of the paternal grandmother, ms h, (6) affidavit of his former wife, ms j, sworn and filed 14 september 2020, and (7) a case outline prepared by his solicitor and filed 18 september 2020.   notice of risk filed 14 september 2020, (3) affidavit of the father sworn and filed 15 september 2020, and (4) affidavit of his partner, ms g, sworn and filed 14 september 2020, (5) affidavit of the paternal grandmother, ms h, (6) affidavit of his former wife, ms j, sworn and filed 14 september 2020, and (7) a case outline prepared by his solicitor and filed 18 september 2020.   affidavit of the father sworn and filed 15 september 2020, and (4) affidavit of his partner, ms g, sworn and filed 14 september 2020, (5) affidavit of the paternal grandmother, ms h, (6) affidavit of his former wife, ms j, sworn and filed 14 september 2020, and (7) a case outline prepared by his solicitor and filed 18 september 2020.   affidavit of his partner, ms g, sworn and filed 14 september 2020, (5) affidavit of the paternal grandmother, ms h, (6) affidavit of his former wife, ms j, sworn and filed 14 september 2020, and (7) a case outline prepared by his solicitor and filed 18 september 2020.   affidavit of the paternal grandmother, ms h, (6) affidavit of his former wife, ms j, sworn and filed 14 september 2020, and (7) a case outline prepared by his solicitor and filed 18 september 2020.   affidavit of his former wife, ms j, sworn and filed 14 september 2020, and (7) a case outline prepared by his solicitor and filed 18 september 2020.   a case outline prepared by his solicitor and filed 18 september 2020.
the competing proposals of the parties  that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child, [x] born [in] 2014. [2] that the child live with the mother. [3] that the child spend time with the father, subject to the fathers work commitments, as follows:   on the first saturday every month from 10.00am until 4.00pm, [b] on one sunday closest to the child’s birthday from 10.00am until 4.00pm, [c] during christmas 2021 from 2.00pm christmas eve until 10.00am boxing day and each alternate year thereafter, [d] on the weekend of father’s day from 5:00 pm on the saturday before until 5:00pm on that day. [e] if mother’s day falls on a weekend when the child is not already spending time with the mother, then the mother will spend time with the child from 5:00pm on the saturday before the day until 5:00 pm on that day.   that the fathers time spent with the child pursuant to order 3 shall be arranged to work around the rotating work roster of the father noting that he is a shift worker and so as to facilitate same the father must provide the mother with a copy of his work roster no later than 48 hours following receipt of same by text message. [5] that all changeovers take place at the [location c, city b] with the father to collect the child from the mother at the commencement of his time and the mother to collect the child from the father at the conclusion of his time. [6] each parent shall forthwith and contemporaneously with the event, advise the other of any medical emergency or significant illness experienced by the child, including sufficient information, consents and authorities to enable each party to speak with any treating doctor to obtain information regarding the child’s health and prognosis and treatment. [7] each parent shall forthwith upon being advised of any specialist medical appointment for the child:   advise the other parent of same in writing (by text message). [b] do all things, sign all documents and give all consent and authorities necessary to enable each parent to attend such appointment or a subsequent separate appointment and to ensure that each parent is fully appraised regarding the child’s health, treatment and prognosis and anything required of them as a parent with respect to same.   that both parents shall be restrained by injunction from:   discussing these proceedings, with or in the presence or hearing of the child, or showing any court documentation to, the child. [b] making critical or derogatory comments about the other parent or members of their family in the presence or within hearing of the child and will do all things reasonably necessary to immediately remove the child from the presence of anyone else who does so. [c] communicating with one another in a derogatory or belittling manner. [d] questioning the child in relation to his time with either parent. [e] consuming alcohol whilst caring for the child or within 12 hours of the child coming into their care.   these orders serve as authority for the father to receive copies of all school reports and application for school photographs from the children’s school, together with any other information that the parent would normally receive and any other information the father any request regarding the child’s progress at school. [10] that the parties keep each other informed of their contact telephone number and advise of any change within 24 hours. [11] that each party do all things and sign all documents to ensure the child has a valid australian passport and in the event that the father fails to do so that mother shall be permitted to apply in the absence of obtaining the father’s consent by virtue of this order. [12] that upon the child turning the age of six (6) years, the parents shall do all acts and things and sing all documents necessary to obtain a passport for the child within three (3) months of either party notifying the other in writing of their intention to travel overseas with the child. [13] the parents shall renew and/or replace the child’s passport no later than six (6) months prior to the expiration of the passport pending the child attaining the age of eighteen (18) years. [14] unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing, the parents shall cause the child’s passport to be provided to the mother for safe keeping with the father to be provided by the mother with a photocopy of the child’s passport and any renewals within seven (7) days of issue. [15] the parents shall equally bear the costs of each passport application or renewal for the child. [16] the parents shall use their best endeavours to ensure that any overseas travel for the child coincides with nsw school holiday periods. [17] the parent proposing to take the child overseas shall provide the other parent as much notification as possible for his or her intention to take the child overseas and in any event shall provide not less than sixty (60) days’ notice of such intention. [18] the parent proposing to take the child overseas shall provide the other parent with the following information in writing as soon as possible and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the proposed departure date: -   an accurate itinerary to include a copy of the parent’s and child’s return airlines tickets, [b] the departure date from australia and return date to australia, [c] each country the parent and child will be travelling to, [d] the date on which the parent and child will arrive and depart from each country other than australia, and [e] a telephone number and address at which the parent and the child can b contacted at each destination while overseas  ] each parent shall be hereby restrained from taking or keeping the child overseas outside of the dates specified in the written itinerary provided to the other parent unless this is agreed to in writing by the other parent. [20] on the occasions that the father proposes to take the child out of australia, the mother shall release the child’s passport to the father no less than thirty (30) days in advance of the overseas travel for the purpose of such travel. [21] upon the child returning to australia, the father shall return the passport to the mother at the very next changeover of the child. [22] if a parent travels overseas with the child during a period that coincides with a period of time the other parent is to spend with the child in accordance with these orders, the other parent shall be offered time with the child equal to the time missed by the parent with such time to take place within twelve (12) weeks of the child returning to australia.
parenting [1] that the parents shall each have equal shared parental responsibility for [x] (born [in] 2014) ("the child"). [2] that the child live with the mother. [3] that the child spend time with the father as follows,  1] during the school term, in a four consecutive week rotation, with weeks one and two to align with the father’s weeks off work as per his work roster as follows,
[3.1.1]week one: from 5:30pm friday until 5:30pm sunday, [3.1.2] week two: from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday, [3.1.3] week three: no time with the father, [3.1.4] week four: no time with the father, and 2] in even years,
[3.2.1] from the conclusion of school friday until midday on the second saturday term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, [3.2.2] from the conclusion of school on the last school day of term four until midday on the fourth [3.2.3] saturday of the christmas school holiday period: and 3] in odd years,
[3.3.1] from midday on the second saturday of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays until midday on the last saturday of the relevant school holiday period, [3.3.2] from midday on the fourth saturday of the christmas school holiday period until midday on the last saturday of the relevant period, and 4] at times as agreed between the parties.   the respondent father’s time:-  1] at order 3.1 shall be suspended during the operation of orders 3.2 and 3.3: and [4.2] upon the commencement of school terms 1, 2, 3 and 4, week one in order 3.1.1 shall recommence on the first weekend that the respondent father has of pursuant to his work roster.   that for the purpose of facilitating changeover, the parties (or their nominee known to the child) shall meet at the [location c, city b], unless times with the father are expressed at the ‘commencement’ or at the ‘conclusion’ of school, and if it is a school day in which changeover is to occur at the child’s school. [6] that the parties will use their reasonable endeavours to be cordial and respectful to each other at changeovers. [7] each parent shall forthwith, and contemporaneous with the event, advise the other of any medical emergency or significant illness experienced by the child, including sufficient information, consents and authorities to enable each party to speak with any treating doctor, to obtain information regarding the child’s health, prognosis and treatment, and to visit the child if hospitalised. [8] that this order serve as authority for the father to receive copies of all school reports and applications for school photographs from the child’s school together with any other information parents would normally receive and any other information he requests regarding the child’s progress at school. [9] each parent shall forthwith upon being advised of any specialist medical appointment for the child:   advise the other parent of same in writing (by text message or email), [b] do all things, sign all documents and give all consents and authorities necessary to enable each parent to attend such appointment or a subsequent separate appointment and to ensure that each parent is fully appraised regarding the child’s health, treatment and prognosis and anything required of them as a parent with respect to same.  ] if the child is enrolled in an out of school activities, either party must inform the other party in writing of such activity and scheduled times that the child is to attend. that each party be entitled to attend all events involving the child including but not limited to:  .1] sporting functions or lessons, [10.2] extra-curricular activities that allow for parental attendance or participation, [10.3] school functions and events that allow for parental attendance or participation,
[10.3.1] and the parent who has the child in their care of the day of such activity will be responsible for the day to day care of the child at such event including the child’s transportation to and from the event unless otherwise agreed on between the parties. ] that both parties be restrained by injunction from: -  .1] consuming alcohol to excess in the presence of the child or for 12 hours before and during any period of spending time with the child. [11.2] questioning the child in relation to his time with either parent [11.3] speaking about the other parent in a derogatory way or from allowing the child to remain in the vicinity of any other person who speaks about the other parent in a derogatory manner.  ] that the parties keep each other informed of their contact and residential address details. [13] that for the purpose of facilitating communication between the parents, each parent shall communicate regarding the child via www.mymob.com or such other application or website as the parties agree in writing ("the website"), except in the case of emergency. [14] to facilitate the preceding order, within 7 days of the making of these orders, each parent will establish a parent account on the website and shall do all things necessary, to enrol in the program for one year subscription by completing the online signup process and shall thereafter, conduct all parental communication using the website’s features save for communication which must be acted upon in less than 24 hours. [15] the parties shall use calendar, info bank and expense features ("other features") and shall use the messaging feature only when the information cannot be conveyed in the other features. [16] the parties shall not communicate by telephone or text message except regarding matters of an emergency nature regarding the child that must be acted upon in less than 24 hours, and in the case of such emergency, the parties shall record the subject and content of the communication by a journal entry in the calendar feature of the programme. [17] that, unless otherwise agreed in writing, or further order of this court, each parent will renew and keep current their subscription to the program during the child’s minority. passport [18] that upon the child turning the age of six (6) years, the parents shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to obtain a passport for the child within three (3) months of either party notifying the other in writing of their intention to travel overseas with the child. [19] the parents shall renew and/or replace the child’s passport no later than six (6) months prior to the expiration of the passport pending the child attaining the age of eighteen (18) years. [20] unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing, the parents shall cause the child’s passport to be provided to the applicant father for safe keeping with the respondent mother to be provided by the applicant father with a photocopy of the child’s passport and any renewals within seven (7) days of issue. [21] the parents shall equally bear the costs of each passport application or renewal for the child. [22] the parents shall use their best endeavours to ensure that any overseas travel for the child coincides with nsw school holiday periods. [23] the parent proposing to take the child overseas shall provide the other parent as much notification as possible of his or her intention to take the child overseas and in any event shall provide not less than sixty (60) days’ notice of such intention. [24] the parent proposing to take the child overseas shall provide the other parent with the following information in writing as soon as possible and not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the proposed departure date:-  .1] an accurate itinerary to include a copy of the parent’s and child’s return airlines tickets, [24.2] the departure date from australia and return date to australia: [24.3] each country the parent and child will be travelling to: [24.4] the date on which the parent and child will arrive and depart from each country other than australia, and [25.4] a telephone number and address at which the parent and the child can be contacted at each destination while overseas.  ] each parent shall be hereby restrained from taking or keeping the child overseas outside of the dates specified in the written itinerary provided to the other parent unless this is agreed to in writing by the other parent. [26] on the occasions that the respondent mother proposes to take the child out of australia, the applicant father shall release the child’s passport to the respondent mother no less than fourteen (14) days in advance of the overseas travel for the purpose of such travel. [27] upon the child returning to australia, the respondent mother shall return the passport to the applicant father at the very next changeover of the child. [28 if a parent travels overseas with the child during period that coincides with a period of time the other parent is to spend with the child in accordance with these orders, the other parent shall be offered time with the child equal to the time missed by the parent with such time to take place within twelve (12) weeks of the child returning to australia.
subject to the proposed amendments and comments set out below, the icl supports the making of orders as sought by the respondent father in his further amended response filed on 14 september 2020. parental responsibility the icl seeks the following order in relation to parental responsibility, in substitution for order 1 as sought by the father:   that, subject to subparagraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) below, the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child [x] born [in] 2014 (“the child”).
[a] that the mother:
[i] notify the father of any proposed decision relating to the long term care and welfare of the child and the reasons for the proposal, such notification to be given in writing at least six weeks prior to a final decision being made, and [ii] take into consideration any views expressed by the father about the proposed decision,
[b] that the father is permitted to contact the child’s school and authorise a nominee to collect the child from school (in accordance with order 5 below) for the purposes of the child spending time with the father as provided for by order 3, [c] that, unless the mother and the father otherwise agree in writing, the mother is restrained from:
[i] changing the child’s name, [ii] relocating the child’s residence to any area more than 150 km driving distance from [city b] nsw, [iii] taking the child for counselling or allowing the child to attend with the mother for counselling relating to: [a] the child’s relationship with the father, [b] the mother’s relationship with the father, or [c] alleged abuse by the father towards the child or the mother, and [iv] enrolling the child in any extra-curricular activities that will require the child to miss out on spending time with the father as provided for in these orders.
spend time the icl seeks the following order in relation to spending time, in substitution for order 3.1 as sought by the father:  1] during school term, for two weekends out of every four, with such weekends to align with the father’s weekends off work, as per his work roster, as follows:
[a] on one weekend, from 5:30 pm on friday until 5:30 pm on sunday, and [b] on one weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday until the commencement of school on monday.
the icl seeks the following order in relation to the child’s spending time with the father, in addition to the orders sought by the father:  .] that the father forward a copy of his work roster to the mother at least 28 days before the commencement of any changes to the four week cycle referred to in order 3.1 above.
passport each party seeks an order that they hold the child’s passport. the icl does not have a view about this issue and considers that are arguments to support both side’s proposals.[1]   that, subject to subparagraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) below, the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child [x] born [in] 2014 (“the child”). ... [c] that, unless the mother and the father otherwise agree in writing, the mother is restrained from: ... [ii] relocating the child’s residence or school enrolment to any area more than 150 km driving distance from [city b] nsw”.
is going to be living primarily with his mother, it makes more sense that she be the one that [has] greater responsibility.[2]   the amount of time that the child should spend with his father, (2) which parent should retain possession of the child’s australian passport and at what age should an australian passport be obtained for the child.   which parent should retain possession of the child’s australian passport and at what age should an australian passport be obtained for the child.
the evidence
it’s regular. it’s a tuesday night from 7 o’clock at night till 10 o’clock at night. so 40 three hours a month on a tuesday night.[6]
in addition to the compulsory call out on a weekend and a week in training per year.
whilst [x] was a baby, i observed [the mother] to be an attentive, loving and caring mother to [x].   lowden], i packed your car now fuck off! you are incapable of caring for [x]. i am selling the house & will contact your divorce lawyer with details.
dear [ms lowden], i am officially informing you that we are now separated as man and wife and i will be filing for a divorce in [city ab] local court by august 2018. the grounds for divorce will be irreconcilable differences. until such times we will remain separated. if you have any questions i can recommend independent legal advice. yours sincerely [mr lowden] 20 november 2017.
from about october 2017, [ms lowden] and i talked about “separating”. it was not until [ms lowden] left our home with [x] on 16 february 2018 that i consider we had separated on a final basis.”
dear [ms lowden], it is recommended that you change your surname back to your maiden name as soon as possible as my above intent is to divorce you. it is an inexpensive way of gaining dignity for us both. kind regards [mr lowden] 04 feb 2018
and
to [mr lowden], formally i have taken u of my call register. if it’s an emergency simply notify me through facebook [mr lowden] 04 feb 2018.
drinking at least 1 bottle [of] wine every day since we met.
during my marriage to [mr lowden], i observed [mr lowden] drank a lot of red wine. [mr lowden] drank after his shift or of an evening, although never before work.
undertook a home detox program which took approximately five days.
i have not consumed a drop of alcohol since
i have not observed [mr lowden] to have a sip of alcohol for approximately three years.
since mid-2017, i have never witnessed [mr lowden] consuming any alcohol.
by the end of 2015, my daughters simply did not come to visit with me at the [city ab] home. instead, i would visit them at my parents’ home when [ms lowden] was not around or at [ms j]’s home. from around 2016 and until separation, i took [x] to visit with his sisters at my parents’ home at least once per week without [ms lowden] present.
about two years after [ms lowden] and [mr lowden] purchased the [city ab] property, [ms p] told me that “[ms lowden] won’t let us there anymore.” from that day onwards, the children never stayed at the property at [city ab].
was not allowed to have chinese food in the little unit. [mr lowden] used to flush my chinese food into the toilet while i was at work. i came back from work and could not find it. i asked him where my food was and he said: it was disgusting and i flush them to the toilet.
mr ladopoulos: she said that she wasn’t allowed – well, presumably that you didn’t allow her to eat [chinese] food and you used to flush the [chinese] food into the toilet, is that true? father: on – on – yes, i got to explain it, but, yes, that is true. ladmr opoulos: okay. well, what’s the explanation? father: the explanation was we were living in a unit and she cooked a hot pot and it was – and it was like an orange soup, and it was left there at room temperature on the stove for – for an awful amount of time. and – and she was having it before breakfast that she was having it – sorry, she was having it for breakfast and then going to work. and on one occasion she had it and – and she vomited in the toilet, you know, so it was all – it had been sitting there for days and it had like an oil, sort of, growing on top of it, you know. and after about four days, i – i did flush it down the toilet. yes. and i, you know, i think we went out for tea that night and – i – i – it is true, but the – there was a reason for it, i was just worried about her health more than anything. mr ladopoulos: well, did you tell her she wasn’t allowed to have chinese food? father: no, no, not at all. no. i love chinese. i was always having – no.   lowden] then left me a love letter which only confused me more.  9] on 15 february 2018 after work i went back home and it was chinese new year eve. [x] was very unsettled i took [x] to [store ac], [city ab] and bought him a truck to give [mr lowden] a break. we went back after 1 hour or so. i asked [mr lowden] what he wants for dinner and he said he did not want anything. i made a video call to my parents in china. [x] and i were talking to them while [mr lowden] was sitting on the red lounge in the lounge room. [mr lowden] walked off to the kitchen by himself while my parents were looking for him to talk. [130] later that night [x] was crying to sleep with me but [mr lowden] still insisted that [x] should sleep by himself while [mr lowden] was sleeping on the mattress in [x’s] bedroom. i helped [mr lowden] to calm [x] down while [mr lowden] kept sighing. i was very much scared and then told him that it would be easier to let [x] sleep with me in the night so everybody could have a good sleep. i took [x] with me and did not sleep that night. the next day [mr lowden] was going to night shift. he said he had to go earlier to get his pink slip. i prepared him lunch which i did most days but he did not take either his lunch in the fridge or his fresh clothes i set out for him, which he normally always does. [131] i waited until after [mr lowden] left for work and i decided i was going to leave this day. [132] i left with [x] and some clothes packed for both of us. [x] and i went to a local refuge.
on 16 february and 2018 i fled the former family home with [x] to stay at a local refuge.   lowden] had previously threatened to take [x] from me if i ever left him.
this scared me greatly.
mr lawrence: he has not made any threats to your personal safety, has he? mother: until now, no. mr lawrence: what you mean quote until now? mother: what i mean is from separation until now, he hasn’t.  7] a few days after she returned from spending four weeks in china, she asked me “sit down with me in the kitchen”. [ms lowden] then said to me “our marriage has problems. but my boyfriend in china and i have decided that we won’t get together because we don’t want to break our families up. he had a wife and child to”. i was shocked and saddened by this admission. [108] after this conversation, [ms lowden] and i then took [x] to preschool together and then [ms lowden] drove me to the train station that afternoon and i went to work. [109] while i was at work, i started to think about what [ms lowden’s] admission to me meant. i became angry because i loved her but realised that she had been having an affair. i admit that i was very wound up and i sent her a text message that evening which i wish i had not sent. it would have been hurtful to [mr lowden]. i swore at her. it was out of character. [110] the following day, i regretted sending the text message.   on 5 february 2018 and 11:56 pm – “i’m coming after little china boy. after i fuck you off. he’s next!”, (2) immediately after – “you pair of fucking shit cu**ts disgust me”, (3) at 6:23 am on an unspecified date, but on the whole of the relevant evidence i find to be 6 february 2018 – “i still can’t believe the fucking stress you and little china boy put me and x through. you pair of fucking retarded cu**ts are going to pay!”   immediately after – “you pair of fucking shit cu**ts disgust me”, (3) at 6:23 am on an unspecified date, but on the whole of the relevant evidence i find to be 6 february 2018 – “i still can’t believe the fucking stress you and little china boy put me and x through. you pair of fucking retarded cu**ts are going to pay!”   at 6:23 am on an unspecified date, but on the whole of the relevant evidence i find to be 6 february 2018 – “i still can’t believe the fucking stress you and little china boy put me and x through. you pair of fucking retarded cu**ts are going to pay!”
mr lawrence: you say a paragraph 319 that you would like your address to remain private. mother: yes mr lawrence: why would you not feel safe if [mr lowden] knows where you and [x] are living? mother: this is my life experience. i don’t know what he’s going to do about it. because, i would feel not safe. mr lawrence: what has he done that makes you feel unsafe about him knowing where [x] and you are living? mother: the thing is, one month before the separation or before i moved out when we slept in the different bedrooms, he would actually – in the middle of the night, he would come into my bedroom and then stood in front of the bed, and i got so scared. i even didn’t know how or when he entered into the room. mr lawrence: do you say that he is going to do that again? mother: i don’t know. i don’t know what he is going to do. that’s why i’m scared. mr lawrence: well, i put to you that there is no reason for you to think that he would do that. mother: i disagree. you were not him, so you wouldn’t know. i am not him, so i wouldn’t know. mr lawrence: there is no reason why you would not feel safe if [mr lowden] knew where you and [x] were living. mother: so you are saying that if he knows where we live, it’s okay and i would feel safe, is that correct? mr lawrence: yes. mother: i disagree. mr lawrence: you said a few moments ago that one of the reasons you don’t feel safe is because [mr lowden] was tracking your phone. mother: yes. and that’s one of the major reasons after our separation. mr lawrence: so that’s one of the reasons you would not feel safe [mr lowden] knowing your address. and the other reason you don’t feel safe if [mr lowden] knows your address is that he came into your room – your bedroom in december 2017 while you were sleeping or trying to sleep. mother: another reason is the sms that [mr lowden] sent me. he was trying to threaten me in the sms.
lawrence: [ms lowden], you said that you had received some sms messages, or a message, from [mr lowden], which caused you some fear or concern. mother: correct. lawrence: was it one sms or several? mother: it was over a period of time with ms – sms and – plus the facebook messenger. lawrence: are these the messages that you refer to in your affidavit? mother: yes. i think i mentioned it. lawrence: you said that a major concern was [mr lowden] tracking your phone. mother: no. tracking my phone is just one – was one-way. lawrence: so it was one of the major reasons you don’t want him knowing where you live? mother: the main reason i don’t want him to know where i live is the fear for my personal safety. lawrence: why are you concerned for your personal safety? mother: because, over a long period of time, he has been sending me messages to threaten me. lawrence: and those messages are in your affidavit? mother: yes.[7]
ms druitt: but it is the case, isn’t it, that you’re the only one who has threatened to kill [the mother]? father: i don’t – i said some terrible things, yes. ms druitt: no, no. can i suggest, you can’t be mealy-mouthed about this, if you’re going to show any regret. you actually threatened to kill her, didn’t you? father: i would have to look at the documents again, but i don’t think so. [the father read the relevant messages through over the lunch break and cross examination resumed after the lunch break] ms druitt: [ms lowden], did you get to read the smses that are in the mother’s tender bundle 2 at page 17? father: yes, ma’am, i did. ms druitt: right. now, when we look at those text messages on page 17, it is reasonable to interpret them as threats to kill the mother and her boyfriend, aren’t they? father: i apologise. that wasn’t my intention. i know there – there – they’re shocking, but that wasn’t my intention. i apologise. his honour: no. well, that’s not an answer to the question. that’s sort of going round the back of the question. father: yes, apologies, your honour. it – it could be misconstrued, yes, that is correct.[8]
i am aware that [ms lowden] alleges that i threatened to kill her. i would never kill or harm [ms lowden] and i have never said any such thing nor have i ever threaten to harm you in any way
druitt: because you go on to say i would never kill or harm her, but you’ve told her you’re going to kill her in writing? father: when i wrote it, i didn’t mean i was going to kill her. it was just... druitt: right. just a slip of the finger, was it? father: no, no. it wasn’t – it was – i know it’s abusive and shocking, but my intention wasn’t to go around, you know, killing. it was just – i don’t know what my intention was, to be honest.[9]
but, of course, you’re the person who has threatened death, yes?
to which the father replied:
yes, that’s correct.
mr ladopoulos: ... did i understand correctly in saying that one of the reasons you say you are concerned – you are fearful of [ms lowden] – is because after you first left him with [x] he tracked you down. is at one of the reasons you say you are fearful of him? mother: yes. mr ladopoulos: and, again, if i understood correctly, another reason you said you are fearful [ms lowden] is because of threats he made to you, is that correct? mother: yes. mr ladopoulos: and you say that the threats he made to you were via sms messages, is that correct? mother: yes. sms and facebook messenger. mr ladopoulos: all right. you have, through your lawyers, put into evidence before his honour a number of documents. you’re aware of that? mother: yes. mr ladopoulos: and included in those documents are a series of sms text messages that you received from [ms lowden], is that right? mother: yes. mr ladopoulos: and have you seen the series of messages that have been put into evidence before his honour, [ms lowden]? have you seen that document? mother: yes. yes, i provided those evidences.
mr ladopoulos: now, it would be correct to say, [ms lowden], you made sure that all the important messages were included in that document, is that right? mother: filing these documents and stacking them together is part of the jobs for my solicitors, and i provided all i could. mr ladopoulos: all right. let me ask you the question in a different way. you made sure that you gave to your solicitors all the messages that you got from [ms lowden] that contained threats, didn’t you. mother: yes. mr ladopoulos: one of the messages – or one of the threats that i think you referred to earlier was – i think if you go to page 16 of those documents – sorry, page 17. have you got page 17, [ms lowden]? mother: yes.
mr ladopoulos: all right. well, what i want to suggest you, [ms lowden], is that after the message on 5 february, the one that says:
i’m coming after little china boy. after i fuck you off, he’s next
and the one on the same day there:
you pair of fucken shit c**ts disgust me
and the one down – i’m still looking at page 17:
i still can’t believe the fucken stress you and little china boy put me and [x] through. you pair of fucken retarded c**ts are going to pay
right? what i’m suggesting to you is that all of the messages after that that you’ve included in your evidence, there are no threats in any of those messages. what you say about that? mother: yes, because i tell him in – through the messages, saying i need time to calm down. mr ladopoulos: well, i’m not sure that that answers my question, [ms lowden]. i will ask it again. what i’m suggesting to you is that all of the messages received after the messages on page 17 don’t have any threats, you agree with that? mother: there were no – through the facebook messenger, no. mr ladopoulos: i don’t follow, [ms lowden]. i’m going to have one more try. the messages on pages 18 through to page – the last one is on page 29 – there are no threats, you agree with that? mother: yes. from the message received from facebook messenger, yes, but then there is still other sms. mr ladopoulos: well, are these messages on pages 10 through to page 29, are they facebook messages or sms messages? mother: facebook messages. mr ladopoulos: well, you haven’t given his honour any evidence of your sms messages, have you? mother: i did provide all the messages since 2018. mr ladopoulos: all right. the message on page 17, the messages on page 17 that have the threats, they happened on 5 february and on the tuesday just after 5 february you told his honour, is that right? mother: yes. even before that. mr ladopoulos: and it’s the case, isn’t it, that just before 5 february [ms lowden] believe that you had been having an affair with somebody in china, is that right? mother: no. i didn’t have an affair. i didn’t have a boyfriend. i didn’t know where he got this from it. mr ladopoulos: well, i’m not asking you whether you had an affair or had a boyfriend, [ms lowden]. i am asking you: it’s the case, isn’t it, that [ms lowden], he thought you had an affair. that’s right, isn’t it? mother: yes. that’s what he thought. mr ladopoulos: and he thought that just before 5 february, didn’t he. mother: no. he had these kinds of thoughts for a very long time. even if i go to the hairdresser he thinks i have a boyfriend. his honour: that’s not what you were asked. you are being asked about ms lowden believing you had had an affair when you were in china, which occurred in early january 2018. mother: yes. mr ladopoulos: and the messages that are there just before page 17, they’re talking about him accusing you of having an affair, aren’t they? mother: yes. mr ladopoulos: have you ever considered that maybe [ms lowden], when he made the threats that are there in those messages on page 17, made them at a time that he was angry because he believed you had been having an affair? mother: but then being angry is not a reason to threaten someone. mr ladopoulos: and have you ever thought that maybe in the heat of his anger he made those threats, but after he calmed down he didn’t make any further threats? is that a possibility? mother: no. no. he has been like this for a long time, so there is no such possibility.[10]
mr ladopoulos: you see, i’m going to suggest you that in the messages from page 18 up to page 29, [ms lowden] not only doesn’t make any threats, but he informs you that he would like for you to get back together. he informs you that he would like for you to get back together. informs you that he is prepared to pay for the car so you can have a car. he tells you at one point he had looked at some old photographs and how pretty you had looked. he has been quite nice to you in all those messages, i would suggest. what you say about that? mother: first of all, i left the home at – on 16 february, and regarding buying the car, he actually took out the mortgage and then pay off the car loan, and also he took off all our pictures hanging on the wall. his honour: that’s not an answer to the question. in the messages on pages 18 to 29 there are no threats. [ms lowden] tells you that he wants to get back together with you, that is prepared to pay for a car, that he has looked at old photos and tells you how pretty you looked. he is being nice to you, isn’t he? mother: from what we can see from the messages, yes.
he has never been physically violent to you at all?
with which the mother agreed.
while you’re thinking, can i just make a comment about peri-separation stress? in other words, per-traumatic stress. in the heat of separation, people are not at their best. when we are highly stressed, the blood isn’t going to our frontal lobes. that’s part of the adaptive stress response, the blood – we cease the – the blood supply goes to our long muscles so we can fight, flight, or freeze and we shut down non-essential things like sleep, food, dreaming, digestion, et cetera and the blood is taken away from the frontal lobe, the centre of higher reasoning because in an emergency you have to act on habitual programs. you can’t start holding a committee meeting in your brain. so that is – when people are very, very stressed at the time of separation, they often do things which are emotionally driven, not rational and which – because the part of the brain that says, “hey, stop and think about this, don’t” – you know, think before you act, is turned off. so in that context, if people utter threats like “i’ll kill you, you bloody – blah blah blah”, it’s unfortunate, unwise and, if they don’t act on it, maybe atypical. however, what we are looking for, really, is not one-off events in periods of high stress but established patterns of behaviour including behaviour which is – which is cold, calculating, remorseless and self-seeking over a long period. so if you’re saying to me am i terribly worried about that threat, if that threat wasn’t actioned and it was uttered in the context of anger about discovering infidelity or fear of loss of the relationship or whatever, i’m not too exercised about that as a predictor of future violence.
the mother alleges that, in 2010, the father threatened to kill her, telling her that he would then hand himself into the police. she alleges that he commented that he should have cut the brake linings on the car of his ex-wife (with whom he has two daughters).   lowden] reported that [ms lowden] “threatened to kill his ex-wife ([ms j])”.   lowden] would not allow it.
without providing evidence in proper form to ground that assertion.
we were in financial difficulty by that time for we only had [mr lowden’s] one wage.
..all my money went to groceries and all the bills ... [mr lowden] did not give me any financial support by that time. [mr lowden] did pay the mortgage.  s] christening happened [in] 2015. [mr lowden] and i did not have any money but roughly $200 left in his account ...
i did not have enough money to buy the flight ticket. i asked [mr lowden] to help and transferred money from his defence force bank.
... unreasonably denying [the mother] the financial autonomy that she would otherwise have had[12]
nor:
... unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of [the mother] or her child, at a time when [the mother] is entirely or predominantly dependent on [the father] for financial support[13]
preventing [the mother] from making or keeping connections with her family, friends or culture[14]
and certainly not:
... unlawfully depriving [the mother or any or any member of the mother’s family] of his or her liberty.[15]
... waited until after [mr lowden] left for work and i decided i was going to leave this day. i left with [x] and some clothes pack for both of us. [x] and i went to a local refuge.
... for a short while before being granted temporary housing in [city e]. no one knew where i had moved except my solicitor and the refuge.
has left and she has [x] with her. she said she wants some time away.
as she always managed our phone accounts.   from 10 am until 4 pm every fourth saturday from july to october plus the fathers day sunday, (2) on the middle weekend between those saturdays, from 10 am on saturday until 4 pm on sunday, and (3) changeovers taking place “between the parents only” at city b police station.   on the middle weekend between those saturdays, from 10 am on saturday until 4 pm on sunday, and (3) changeovers taking place “between the parents only” at city b police station.   changeovers taking place “between the parents only” at city b police station.   restraining the parents from making comments derogatory of each other in the child’s presence or hearing, (2) communicating with each other in a derogatory or belittling manner (3) from consuming alcohol while caring for the child or within 12 hours of the child coming into their care, (4) for each parent to keep the other parent informed of any medical matters affecting the child and of their contact telephone number, (5) without admissions, that the father must supervise the child at all times with the child is in his care, and (6) that both parties ensure the child is supervised by an adult at all times the child is in their care.   communicating with each other in a derogatory or belittling manner (3) from consuming alcohol while caring for the child or within 12 hours of the child coming into their care, (4) for each parent to keep the other parent informed of any medical matters affecting the child and of their contact telephone number, (5) without admissions, that the father must supervise the child at all times with the child is in his care, and (6) that both parties ensure the child is supervised by an adult at all times the child is in their care.   from consuming alcohol while caring for the child or within 12 hours of the child coming into their care, (4) for each parent to keep the other parent informed of any medical matters affecting the child and of their contact telephone number, (5) without admissions, that the father must supervise the child at all times with the child is in his care, and (6) that both parties ensure the child is supervised by an adult at all times the child is in their care.   for each parent to keep the other parent informed of any medical matters affecting the child and of their contact telephone number, (5) without admissions, that the father must supervise the child at all times with the child is in his care, and (6) that both parties ensure the child is supervised by an adult at all times the child is in their care.   without admissions, that the father must supervise the child at all times with the child is in his care, and (6) that both parties ensure the child is supervised by an adult at all times the child is in their care.   that both parties ensure the child is supervised by an adult at all times the child is in their care.   on a wednesday 10 am overnight until 4 pm thursday commencing wednesday, 20 march 2019, (2) on a weekend from 5:30 pm friday until 5:30 pm sunday commencing friday, 5 april 2019. (3) that the father’s wednesday overnight time shall occur every 10 days following a weekend visit during his rostered days off and the father’s weekend time shall occur every 17 days following a wednesday visit during his rostered weekend off. (4) four block periods of time to work around the father’s rostered days off as follows: (a) from 10 am thursday 2 may to 4 pm sunday, 5 may 2019 (3 nights), (b) in july 2019, september 2019, november 2019 and january 2024 for a four night period with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice. (5) following the child commencing kindergarten the child’s overnight time with the father on wednesdays shall cease. (6) from 2020 the child shall spend a period of 6 nights and 7 days with the father during the term 1, 2 and 3 short school term holidays with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice. (7) over the christmas period, the child shall spend time with the father from 5:30 pm christmas eve, 24 december 2019 until 10 am boxing day, 26 december 2019.   on a weekend from 5:30 pm friday until 5:30 pm sunday commencing friday, 5 april 2019. (3) that the father’s wednesday overnight time shall occur every 10 days following a weekend visit during his rostered days off and the father’s weekend time shall occur every 17 days following a wednesday visit during his rostered weekend off. (4) four block periods of time to work around the father’s rostered days off as follows: (a) from 10 am thursday 2 may to 4 pm sunday, 5 may 2019 (3 nights), (b) in july 2019, september 2019, november 2019 and january 2024 for a four night period with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice. (5) following the child commencing kindergarten the child’s overnight time with the father on wednesdays shall cease. (6) from 2020 the child shall spend a period of 6 nights and 7 days with the father during the term 1, 2 and 3 short school term holidays with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice. (7) over the christmas period, the child shall spend time with the father from 5:30 pm christmas eve, 24 december 2019 until 10 am boxing day, 26 december 2019.   that the father’s wednesday overnight time shall occur every 10 days following a weekend visit during his rostered days off and the father’s weekend time shall occur every 17 days following a wednesday visit during his rostered weekend off. (4) four block periods of time to work around the father’s rostered days off as follows: (a) from 10 am thursday 2 may to 4 pm sunday, 5 may 2019 (3 nights), (b) in july 2019, september 2019, november 2019 and january 2024 for a four night period with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice. (5) following the child commencing kindergarten the child’s overnight time with the father on wednesdays shall cease. (6) from 2020 the child shall spend a period of 6 nights and 7 days with the father during the term 1, 2 and 3 short school term holidays with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice. (7) over the christmas period, the child shall spend time with the father from 5:30 pm christmas eve, 24 december 2019 until 10 am boxing day, 26 december 2019.   four block periods of time to work around the father’s rostered days off as follows: (a) from 10 am thursday 2 may to 4 pm sunday, 5 may 2019 (3 nights), (b) in july 2019, september 2019, november 2019 and january 2024 for a four night period with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice. (5) following the child commencing kindergarten the child’s overnight time with the father on wednesdays shall cease. (6) from 2020 the child shall spend a period of 6 nights and 7 days with the father during the term 1, 2 and 3 short school term holidays with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice. (7) over the christmas period, the child shall spend time with the father from 5:30 pm christmas eve, 24 december 2019 until 10 am boxing day, 26 december 2019.   from 10 am thursday 2 may to 4 pm sunday, 5 may 2019 (3 nights), (b) in july 2019, september 2019, november 2019 and january 2024 for a four night period with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice.   in july 2019, september 2019, november 2019 and january 2024 for a four night period with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice.   following the child commencing kindergarten the child’s overnight time with the father on wednesdays shall cease. (6) from 2020 the child shall spend a period of 6 nights and 7 days with the father during the term 1, 2 and 3 short school term holidays with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice. (7) over the christmas period, the child shall spend time with the father from 5:30 pm christmas eve, 24 december 2019 until 10 am boxing day, 26 december 2019.   from 2020 the child shall spend a period of 6 nights and 7 days with the father during the term 1, 2 and 3 short school term holidays with the father to provide the mother with at least 28 days notice. (7) over the christmas period, the child shall spend time with the father from 5:30 pm christmas eve, 24 december 2019 until 10 am boxing day, 26 december 2019.   over the christmas period, the child shall spend time with the father from 5:30 pm christmas eve, 24 december 2019 until 10 am boxing day, 26 december 2019.   the father to ensure the mother is kept informed of his roster and that he provide her with a copy of his roster each month, (2) the child to spend time with the mother from 5:30 pm christmas eve, 24 december 2020 until 10 am boxing day, 26 december 2020, (3) changeovers to take place at the location c, city b with the father to collect the child from the mother at the start of his time and the mother to collect the child from the father at the end of his time, (4) the father to telephone the mother’s mobile phone to speak with the child each sunday when the father is not otherwise spending time with child at 6 pm, (5) the mother to telephone the child on the father’s mobile phone on occasions when the child was spending time with the father for a period of three nights or more, and the mother to telephone the father’s mobile at an agreed date and time and failing agreement at 6 pm on the night of the midpoint of the child stay, (6) each parent to speak to the child by telephone on the child’s birthday and the parent’s birthday at 6 pm if the child is with the other parent, (7) the parents to communicate through the “our family wizard” website at the father’s expense, to be reimbursed on final property settlement, (8) each parent to keep the other informed of all medical matters affecting the child, (9) the father within seven days to make contact with ms d, clinical psychologist, to discuss the child’s treatment, (10) repeating the injunctive orders affecting each of the parents from the orders of 18 june and 4 october 2018, (11) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.   the child to spend time with the mother from 5:30 pm christmas eve, 24 december 2020 until 10 am boxing day, 26 december 2020, (3) changeovers to take place at the location c, city b with the father to collect the child from the mother at the start of his time and the mother to collect the child from the father at the end of his time, (4) the father to telephone the mother’s mobile phone to speak with the child each sunday when the father is not otherwise spending time with child at 6 pm, (5) the mother to telephone the child on the father’s mobile phone on occasions when the child was spending time with the father for a period of three nights or more, and the mother to telephone the father’s mobile at an agreed date and time and failing agreement at 6 pm on the night of the midpoint of the child stay, (6) each parent to speak to the child by telephone on the child’s birthday and the parent’s birthday at 6 pm if the child is with the other parent, (7) the parents to communicate through the “our family wizard” website at the father’s expense, to be reimbursed on final property settlement, (8) each parent to keep the other informed of all medical matters affecting the child, (9) the father within seven days to make contact with ms d, clinical psychologist, to discuss the child’s treatment, (10) repeating the injunctive orders affecting each of the parents from the orders of 18 june and 4 october 2018, (11) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.   changeovers to take place at the location c, city b with the father to collect the child from the mother at the start of his time and the mother to collect the child from the father at the end of his time, (4) the father to telephone the mother’s mobile phone to speak with the child each sunday when the father is not otherwise spending time with child at 6 pm, (5) the mother to telephone the child on the father’s mobile phone on occasions when the child was spending time with the father for a period of three nights or more, and the mother to telephone the father’s mobile at an agreed date and time and failing agreement at 6 pm on the night of the midpoint of the child stay, (6) each parent to speak to the child by telephone on the child’s birthday and the parent’s birthday at 6 pm if the child is with the other parent, (7) the parents to communicate through the “our family wizard” website at the father’s expense, to be reimbursed on final property settlement, (8) each parent to keep the other informed of all medical matters affecting the child, (9) the father within seven days to make contact with ms d, clinical psychologist, to discuss the child’s treatment, (10) repeating the injunctive orders affecting each of the parents from the orders of 18 june and 4 october 2018, (11) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.   the father to telephone the mother’s mobile phone to speak with the child each sunday when the father is not otherwise spending time with child at 6 pm, (5) the mother to telephone the child on the father’s mobile phone on occasions when the child was spending time with the father for a period of three nights or more, and the mother to telephone the father’s mobile at an agreed date and time and failing agreement at 6 pm on the night of the midpoint of the child stay, (6) each parent to speak to the child by telephone on the child’s birthday and the parent’s birthday at 6 pm if the child is with the other parent, (7) the parents to communicate through the “our family wizard” website at the father’s expense, to be reimbursed on final property settlement, (8) each parent to keep the other informed of all medical matters affecting the child, (9) the father within seven days to make contact with ms d, clinical psychologist, to discuss the child’s treatment, (10) repeating the injunctive orders affecting each of the parents from the orders of 18 june and 4 october 2018, (11) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.   the mother to telephone the child on the father’s mobile phone on occasions when the child was spending time with the father for a period of three nights or more, and the mother to telephone the father’s mobile at an agreed date and time and failing agreement at 6 pm on the night of the midpoint of the child stay, (6) each parent to speak to the child by telephone on the child’s birthday and the parent’s birthday at 6 pm if the child is with the other parent, (7) the parents to communicate through the “our family wizard” website at the father’s expense, to be reimbursed on final property settlement, (8) each parent to keep the other informed of all medical matters affecting the child, (9) the father within seven days to make contact with ms d, clinical psychologist, to discuss the child’s treatment, (10) repeating the injunctive orders affecting each of the parents from the orders of 18 june and 4 october 2018, (11) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.   each parent to speak to the child by telephone on the child’s birthday and the parent’s birthday at 6 pm if the child is with the other parent, (7) the parents to communicate through the “our family wizard” website at the father’s expense, to be reimbursed on final property settlement, (8) each parent to keep the other informed of all medical matters affecting the child, (9) the father within seven days to make contact with ms d, clinical psychologist, to discuss the child’s treatment, (10) repeating the injunctive orders affecting each of the parents from the orders of 18 june and 4 october 2018, (11) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.   the parents to communicate through the “our family wizard” website at the father’s expense, to be reimbursed on final property settlement, (8) each parent to keep the other informed of all medical matters affecting the child, (9) the father within seven days to make contact with ms d, clinical psychologist, to discuss the child’s treatment, (10) repeating the injunctive orders affecting each of the parents from the orders of 18 june and 4 october 2018, (11) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.   each parent to keep the other informed of all medical matters affecting the child, (9) the father within seven days to make contact with ms d, clinical psychologist, to discuss the child’s treatment, (10) repeating the injunctive orders affecting each of the parents from the orders of 18 june and 4 october 2018, (11) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.   the father within seven days to make contact with ms d, clinical psychologist, to discuss the child’s treatment, (10) repeating the injunctive orders affecting each of the parents from the orders of 18 june and 4 october 2018, (11) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.  ) repeating the injunctive orders affecting each of the parents from the orders of 18 june and 4 october 2018, (11) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.  ) restraining the mother from moving the child’s residence outside of city e or the australian capital territory, (12) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.  ) that both parents ensure the child supervised by an adult at all times he is in their respective care, and (13) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.  ) for the mother to complete the parenting course entitled post separation cooperative parenting.   was not coping with the overnight time and i believe [x] continues to struggle with the overnight time
the mother nevertheless consented to a continuation of the father’s overnight time with x in the consent orders of 4 october 2018.
in october 2018 i agreed for [mr lowden] to continue to spend time with [x] provided his time worked around [mr lowden’s] work commitments as i wanted [mr lowden] and [x] to spend quality time together.
her presenting issues of “depression”
and had attended her first appointment on 28 august 2018. details from ms d’s clinical notes and a treatment report for each of the mother and the child will be reviewed shortly in these reasons.   af] reported that, when [x] returns from spending time with his father, his behaviour is difficult. she reported that [x] is angry, and physically violent, and that he wets the bed, and is often constipated (not his usual behaviour).   has not demonstrated any form of aggressive behaviour during session, and presents as happy, and seemingly content. [x] does not present as impulsive, or overly active. his concentration, and memory appear to be appropriate for a child of his chronological age.
about the length of the phone conversations that [x] has with [ms lowden]. she stated that, on father’s day, and another time, the phone call can last for 45 minutes. she reported that, during the phone call, [x] will speak with [ms lowden], the paternal grandmother, and [ms lowden’s] ex-wife. she reported that [x] is encouraged to play “paper, scissors, rock” over the phone with [ms lowden], and company.   lowden] reported a history of family violence during the relationship, including intimidation and threats to kill her, manipulation, controlling behaviour, and financial abuse, perpetrated by [ms lowden].
according to [ms lowden], on 31/03/18, a “private detective came to [location ad] ([city e], nsw), and took [x]” from her ([ms lowden]), at changeover. the paternal grandparents were involved in the incident.
whereas all of the evidence on hearing indicates that the participants in the events of 31 march 2018 when the paternal grandparents remove the child from the mother by a trick did not include a private detective, nor was the occasion “a changeover”.   lowden] remains very anxious about the well-being of [x], especially when spending time with [ms lowden]. she retains an underlying fear that [x] will be taken from her, or mistreated, or that his care needs will be neglected, by the father ([ms lowden]) or his family.   lowden] [also referred to as “the applicant”] states that on 5 february, 2018 she was the victim of an act of violence that occurred in [city ab], new south wales, and as a direct result of that act, she suffered harm.   lowden] was the victim of domestic violence committed by an alleged offender. the violence occurred on five february, 2018 at [city ab], in new south wales
and that the mother
suffered psychological injuries as a result.
indicates that [ms lowden] was a victim of ongoing domestic violence during the course of her relationship with the offender and not the one incident that is referenced on the application form. [ms lowden] has disclosed that this violence includes controlling behaviour, verbal abuse, threats of being killed and financial abuse.   lowden] was a victim of repeated violence from the offender during the course of their relationship.
was a victim of violence on an ongoing basis during the course of her relationship with the offender. this violence included daily verbal abuse, threats of harm, threats to end [ms lowden’s] life and other forms of violence and intimidation.
i would be more than happy to pick up or drop off [x] to and from [ms lowden] when [mr lowden] could not do so.
when [x] is ready to freely express himself and also when he is able to make telephone calls or contact the mum, i think that’s a better position for [x] ... when [x] is able to handle all different situations and when he comes home he has a different reaction, i think then that’s the time when [x] is ready.[16]
mr lawrence: if [x] was spending time on his father’s farm with his father and his grandparents and his two sisters, would that be beneficial to [x]? mother: so, it depends on what [x] is doing there and what – what he is being experiencing. mr lawrence: well, what if he was just spending the weekend there? mother: so, if [x] goes there for the weekend and he spends the whole day watching tv. mr lawrence: is that what you think he does when he spends time with his father, madam? mother: i don’t know. i’m just giving an example, because the question that you put is very vague.[17]
inferring that she did not know what the child did while spending time with the father.
mr lawrence: so, it’s the quality of time, not the amount of time that you’re concerned about, is that correct? mother: correct. mr lawrence: what is it about the quality of time that [x] currently spends with his dad that you are concerned... mother: there’s no quality. mr lawrence: you don’t think there is any quality in the time that [x] spends with his father currently, is that what you’re saying? mother: this is not what i think, it’s actually the fact. mr lawrence: well, what makes it the fact? mother: ... as soon as [x] returns, [x] get sick and has a stomach ache ...... have fever, constipation and then some – once [x] returns from the father’s place, [x’s] behaviour becomes attacking .... it actually takes a lot of time and effort from myself and [x] to come [x] down. mr lawrence: madam, you’re not answering my question, i’m sorry. my question is about the quality of time that [x] is spending with his father. i am not asking you about what happens with [x] after he comes back to your care. you say that the time that [x] spends with his father at the moment is of no quality at all? yes or no? mother: yes.
and shortly thereafter:
mr lawrence: do you say, then, that [x] is receiving some benefit from spending time with his father? mother: yes. mr lawrence: what benefit? mother: at least – so through the grow up process of [x], he has his father be there guiding him. mr lawrence: is that all? mother: up until now, yes. mr lawrence: guiding him in relation to what? mother: father and the son. mr lawrence: and you think that’s important for [x]? mother: yes, it’s important for everyone. ... mr lawrence: your proposal would reduce [x’s] time with his father from what you just described on a normal month from friday through to sunday to one saturday a month from 10 am until 4 pm. that’s correct, isn’t it? mother: yes. mr lawrence: will [x] get less benefit from that time than he gets from the time that he spends with his father currently? mother: no. mr lawrence: why – why is that? mother: so all my answers to your question all depends – depending on when [x] returns from the father’s place, his behaviour and the time took to settle him down.[19]
mr lawrence: and you agree that, then, if time that [x] is spending with his father is reduced, then he will probably spend a lot less time, or less time, with his grandparents and his sisters? mother: it has nothing to do with me, it depends on how the father allocates the time. mr lawrence: well, if [x] is only spending six hours during the day on one saturday a month with his dad, then he is only going to have that six-hour period to spend with his father, with his grandparents and with his sisters. that’s right, isn’t it? mother: it depends on his father. mr lawrence: and they won’t be able to have dinner together, will they? mother: it’s not – it’s not up to me to decide. mr lawrence: well, if – what – what time does [x] have dinner? mother: usually around six pm. mr lawrence: so if he goes back to your care at 4 o’clock in the afternoon he’s not going to be having dinner with his father or any of his relations on his father’s side. that’s right, isn’t it? mother: you can have a late lunch in a nice restaurant if you want to.
mr lawrence: but in your opinion, do you think it’s important for [x] to spend one-on-one time with his father? mother: i don’t want to comment. his honour: that’s not an answer to the question. that’s a refusal to answer the question. so please answer mr lawrence’s question. mother: so you’re asking me whether [x] spends one-on-one time with his father is important, correct? mr lawrence: yes. mother: yes.
is very, very happy spending time with his father and his grandparents
to which she responded
i accept that.
the family report and the evidence of dr k  lowden] did not express any concerns about physical abuse or neglect by the father or grandparents [clearly meaning of the child, not the mother] although she quibbles about whether the child is treated with enough respect.
when asked to detail what a father should do, [ms lowden] said he should teach a child to be respectful, show the child that he is loved and teach the child how to do things properly. she expressed doubt that [ms lowden] can do any of these things and could not identify any of his other strengths as a father. she could not describe in specific detail any clear benefits to [x] from visiting his father and paternal kin. she was equivocal about whether [x] had a warm emotional connection to his father. repeated probing did not elicit unequivocal confirmation about whether the child greeted his father affectionately or enjoyed visits. [ms lowden] conceded that [x] sometimes seems excited to see his father but attributed this solely to the child’s expectation that he would be given toys.   lowden] minimised the benefit of the sibling relationship saying that “[x] does not mention his sisters” and although she was willing to vaguely concede that it was beneficial for [x] to have contact with his paternal grandparents she could not name any positive benefits likely to ensure you.   lowden] did not outline any program for progressing the father’s time. probing revealed no clear schedule. when asked when [x] would be ready for overnight stays she said vaguely “when he is older”. further probing suggested that [ms lowden] thinks that [x] will not be ready before he is 10.  e mother] confirmed that [x] likes talking on the phone.   lowden] claims that [ms lowden] threatened to kill her during the marriage and that she fears that he might ultimately carry through this threat if she finally escapes his control. q: why has he waited so long? a: he may be hoping for a better court outcome. q: what are your fears if the court reduces [x’s] time? are you afraid of attack on yourself or the child? [ms lowden] did not specify fears for her personal safety but said [ms lowden] might attempt to abduct [x] again.   lowden] presents as a caring, attentive mother who can anticipate and meet her son’s needs capably – except in the area of honouring his affectional ties to paternal kin. while she does not openly present as embittered in her discourse about the father and his family, she seems unable to view the paternal kin through [x’s] eyes.   lowden] could identify no parenting or co-parenting strengths for [ms lowden]. her weakness he listed as “narcissistic, manipulative, gaslighter, verbally and mentally abusive, lying, incredibly cold”. while he appears to recognise [ms lowden’s] significance for [x], he does not identify her as [x’s] emotional mainstay. ... in answer to the question “who is closest to this child’s heart?” he answered “possibly me, the father (he always asks if he can live with me)”. in answer to a question about who meets most of [x’s] dependency needs he minimised those needs (unrealistically given the child’s age) without making any reference to essential inputs by the mother.”   lowden] did not express of vehement hostility towards or obsessive interest in his ex-wife [ms lowden] – which would have been concerning signs 2 years post-separation in a man for whom coercively controlling spousal abuse has been alleged. while [ms lowden] seems to be devoted to [x] and able to prioritise his son’s needs, he did not strike me as a reflective man. i doubt that he spends much time pondering the inner workings of himself or others.
in a short observation [x] presented as a child who is normally socialised for age, who has warm trusting relationships with both parents and other kindly people in his life. he seems to value all his attachment relationships.
he chose the radiantly happy face (no. 5) for “playing with friends at lunchtime, playing soccer, visiting auntie ms j and the girls, staying with dad, nan and yeye (this is the chinese word for grandfather which [x] applies to both grandfathers. he calls both grandmothers nan). he chose the neutral face (no 3) for “staying home with mum”   was animated and happy in his interaction with his father who was attentive and responsive to [x’s] overtures and interests. [ms lowden] provided appropriate structure and limits ... [ms lowden] suggested i walk back to the car with them to meet “[ms g]”. [x] said enthusiastically “[ms g]!” and greeted her in a friendly manner at the car.”
both parents say that their co-parenting is worse than is reported by 98% of parents. such dysfunctional ratings suggest that shared an equal pr is likely to be unworkable.
tend to be self-righteously intolerant of the faults of others while blind to their own.
that both parents should obtain it to a marked degree augers very poorly for the ability of [mr lowden] to maintain objectivity and child-focus in the communication as co-parents.  ] [ms lowden] claims that [x’s] contact with his father either overnight or more often than monthly would be deleterious but does not seem to have supported that contention with any of objectively-verified evidence of the father’s harmfulness. ... i am inclined to doubt patriarchal terrorism is a risk factor in this case. ... [51] to restrict [x’s] contact with his father and paternal kin to the level [ms lowden] proposes would imply a significant loss of social capital for [x], which has not been justified by anything which emerged during this assessment – prompting the conjecture that [ms lowden] may be motivated by old jealousies and resentments which lead her to view paternal kin as noxious. ... [53] [x] ... presents as a normal, happy child who is probably reacting to the stress of having two homes. while [x] is said to have displayed some recent behavioural problems, their cause is unclear. ... nor is it clear that reducing [x’s] time with his father would be the best remedy. a better intervention would be for [x’s] parents to make best efforts to shield him from any acrimony arising from this dispute, ... the court needs to consider how orders might reduce or mitigate tense transitions for [x]. [54] ... although able to empathise normally with their children over a wide range of everyday interactions, many parents who are embroiled in intractable conflict post-separation show little ability to see the other parent through the child’s eyes. as a result they attribute a child’s difficulty with post-separation parenting arrangements to the deficits of the other parent rather than locating the child’s dilemma within the context of the parental conflict. i consider this to be true of both these parents.   lowden] claims in her pleadings (and at interview) that [x] displayed age-regressed behaviour once overnights began with his father. this is also a credible claim . children are made anxious by unpredictability. predictability gives children some illusion of control over the world. [x’s] circumstances in early 2018 were utterly beyond his control or his comprehension. he would have been unable to predict the likely duration of any separation or ascribe any meaning to it. [ms lowden] attributes [x’s] distress (nightmares and bed-wetting) to the impact of overnight separation from her and considers reducing the father’s visits to be the solution. however, [x’s] predicament does not necessarily reflect parental incapacity on the part of either parent, nor [x’s] greater preference for or emotional dependence on one parent rather than the other. [x’s] dilemma is more likely located in the nonsensicalness of adult actions from his point of view. such bafflement could be very anxiety-provoking for a child. it would be terrifying for a young child to think his parents mean him harm. even to doubt that his want the best for him would worry a child. what other conclusion can a young child reach if his parents repeatedly do things that make him unhappy for no good reason he can see? neither parent appears to have insight into how his/her attitudes and actions might worry or confuse [x]. sometimes children are naughty and defiant to all adults in authority (including teachers) if their most important adults let them down.
the father accepts that the mother is the primary caregiver
though i’m not so sure that that opinion is borne out by the material in the report.
the child is of an age to tolerate separation from his mother during alternate fortnights and school holidays
and that each parent has adequate capacity to provide for the child’s needs and that the attitude to the child and the responsibilities of parenthood are adequately demonstrated by both parents.
the main risk to [x’s] peace of mind arises from mutual parental acrimony.  ] no serious risk of harm for the father was substantiated by anything that emerged from this assessment. unless the evidentiary material shows otherwise, the father’s proposed visitation schedule is deemed to serve the child’s interests better than the mother’s proposal ... [x] needs to be shielded from adult acrimony and a consistent, regular contact schedule – though expressed in an odd manner the clear meaning of the opinion is that [x] needs to be shielded from adult acrimony and that [x] needs there to be a regular contact schedule ... [60] minimisation of handovers in person. it would be better if most weekend visits occurred in city b so that handovers could occur at school friday afternoons and monday mornings. [61] both parents should join our family wizard and use it routinely.
he’s not going to have the same opportunity to develop the relationships with the paternal kin, with his sisters and, as they marry, their children and so on, as he would if he can do the – according to the father’s proposal, including holiday stays.
he has established meaningful, warm relationships with his sisters, his father’s ex-wife, his paternal grandparents, and even [ms g], who has had a more peripheral role until recently.
mr strik: doctor, unless i’ve mistake in your report, it’s the case that you actually recommend more time – being six nights per month – than what the father is seeking, being five nights per month, is that right? dr k: yes. well, i think it would be better – i don’t care about the number of nights. i just care about trying to minimise that child being – moving between parents. so that was my – my recommendation. it would be better if they could go from friday afternoon at school to monday morning at school. ... but i think that would be preferable, not because of the number of nights but to avoid being in the same – for that poor kid to be in the presence of both parents at once.
mr strik: the mother fled from the father with the child in early february 2018 and the father did not see the child for some six or so weeks. does that – her insistence for the father to conduct all drop-offs, does that give you any insight or otherwise, explanation as to her level of fear of the father? dr k: well, it’s inconsistent, isn’t it, with saying you fear someone because mostly when people have been the victims of abuse, they have phobic avoidance. they display phobic avoidance towards their alleged perpetrator and would prefer to avoid them at all costs. so it is not consistent with the – with the way in which women who were formerly terrorised behave. no.
mr strik: in terms of the mother’s proposal, a proposal moving forward is that the father has six hours for the indefinite future per month with the father? dr k: so she wants him to only see the child in daytime. mr strik: daytime, 10 till 4 pm, if i’m correct? dr k: yes. mr strik: is that a – and the child is currently seeing his father two nights per month. is that something that’s realistic at all? dr k: no, but it would be realistic if there was proof that he was – if the child was at harm in sleepovers. you know, if, for example, the father was a drunken driver and had – intended to take the child for a long drive, blah, blah, blah. if there is no proof of immediate risk of harm, i consider that a ridiculous proposal.
... what happens when children are stressed is they regress developmentally. and, as i – i have dealt with this in the report, i think. it stresses children to be caught in the middle of adult conflict, the sort of tension he has it handovers. it also stresses them when they’re asked to do something which is developmentally just a little bit harder for them and they haven’t got enough scaffolding or support or external stress reduction to assist them. now, because – so, for example, when children start having overnights with the father, even though – i’m not talking about this case in particular. even though nothing adverse happens in those overnights, if the mother is hostile to that even beginning and the child is coping with the stress of a change, they might start regressing and one of the things that would help is if the mother can down regulate them, help them, soothe them, make them feel comfortable coming back in, etcetera. now, when – when that doesn’t happen, you’re seeing things like bedwetting continuing. but also what makes it worse is parents then ascribe it to the other person and, in fact, very often it’s not – the problem is not that either of the parents are maltreating, it’s that it’s a stressful situation for the child and – and whatever might effectively – be an effective external down regulator of stress at either end of the coming and going isn’t there and that’s due to the non-cooperation between the parents. so i can’t say what would cause that except that it’s not unusual for children to behave like that when they’re stressed and transitions are stressful.
no. i don’t think so. i think it was the essence of self-righteousness. i would say that coercive, controlling behaviour, if we’re talking about it in a marital and spousal abuse sense is something different .... i don’t think it says anything about the pattern of the marital relationship.
she was allowed to drive a car, she chose, i think, where they lived, she worked – you know, this is not a pattern of someone who is completely dominated, controlled and socially isolated.
well, i think it that – i don’t know if this is practical in view of all the evidence. i would say if one weekend the father could – or his nominee could do friday after school to monday before school with staying at [city b] or however they manage that, and next weekend he was returned on the sunday afternoon because i think doing it too often is just too much for him, particularly two weeks in a row. and i don’t know if anyone got to the bottom of why [x] might have been acting up at school or what any particular problem he might have at school might be. but anything that school specific that’s stressing him, you don’t want to start him off on the wrong foot two mondays in a row, i don’t think.
the submissions
actually little evidence that the mother’s anxiety is significant and ongoing.
his work roster is difficult enough without vying for the prized school holiday time at his workplace.
save for the father’s working roster, this case would ordinarily be one of half-time
i think the practicality of the distance between the parents would also mitigate against any equal time order and also the parents inability to get on, to communicate.
this is a little bit of a theme which is entirely consistent with the mother’s concerns.
... it is clear that the child will benefit from a meaningful relationship with both parents and that that is something that is currently doable even under the regime proposed by the mother, although somewhat, you might say, stymied, we would say safer in a greater risk management.
the law  whether the child spending equal time with each parent would be in the best interest of the child,[24] and (b) whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[25]   whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[25]
a discretionary judgment concerning the parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.[27]  ) assess whether that risk is an acceptable risk or an unacceptable risk, (15) if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (16) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.  ) if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (16) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.  ) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.  ] in considering an allegation of sexual abuse, the court should not make a positive finding that the allegation is true unless the court is so satisfied according to the civil standard of proof, with due regard to the factors mentioned in briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 at 362 ... [23] no doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a positive finding that the allegation is well-founded. in all but the most extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be made respecting custody and access. there will be cases also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless ... [24] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child’s welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child’s paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  1] ... we accept as a matter of practice, a trial judge will almost inevitably be required in a case where sexual abuse allegations are raised to consider whether abuse has been proven on the balance of probabilities as well as considering whether or not an unacceptable risk of abuse exists ...  ] in his recent paper entitled ‘unacceptable risk – a return to basics’ the hon. john fogarty a.m. set out his summary of the principles emerging from m and m as follows:
1 the decisive issue is and always remains the best interests of that child. all other issues are subservient. 2 the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term ‘unacceptable risk’. it is an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable. 3 where past abuse of a child is alleged it is usually neither necessary nor desirable to reach a definitive conclusion on that issue. where, however, that is done the briginshaw civil standard of proof applies. 4 the circumstance, if it be so, that the allegation of past abuse is not proved in accordance with briginshaw, does not impede reliance upon those circumstances in determining whether there is an unacceptable risk. 5 the concentration in these cases should normally be upon the question whether there is an unacceptable risk to the child. 6 the onus of proof in reaching that conclusion is the ordinary civil standard. 7 but the components which go to make up that conclusion need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of unacceptable risk from the accumulation of factors, none or some only of which, are proved to that standard.
and thereafter expanded some points contained in the summary.  ] frequently, (i would respectfully venture, too frequently) “risk” is referred to as an all-embracing term, a “general” finding of which can (purportedly) be seen to have some form of “ipso facto consequences” for the orders made. yet, “risk” is, without more, but a convenient description, orders must, surely, address its constituent components which must, axiomatically, vary according to the circumstances of each case. [72] in that respect, it is both interesting and instructive to refer to what has been said about this issue first by the honourable john fogarty am, and, secondly, by an english author, (the latter qualified as both a psychiatrist and a barrister.) [73] the latter said:
risk assessment in any situation involves, in essence, the asking of the following questions: (1) what harmful outcome is potentially present in this situation? (2) what is the probability of this outcome coming about? (3) what risks are probable in this situation in the short, medium and long term? (4) what are the factors that could increase or decrease the risk that is probable? (5) what measures are available whose deployment could mitigate the risks that are probable? (b. mahendra, ‘psychiatric risk assessment in family and child law’ (2008) 38 family law 569).  ] mr fogarty, writing in the australian journal of family law said this (20 ajfl 249 at 254-5):
... the reality is that all courts deal with issues of "risk" and degrees of risk (however described) in various situations and that concept is increasingly used in legislation. risk is difficult to define in a way which is not ultimately circular. but it is an inevitable part of life at all its levels. it is inherently risky to breathe, eat, drink, walk, drive, work, invest and play. the world is full of different risks and consequences and everyone is prone to dangers. we confront varying levels of risk everyday. people frequently face potentially dangerous situations, not many live at home in complete isolation to avoid getting in harms way. most people try to avoid what they perceive to be risk, some willingly take on high risk activities. risk involves two component, the degree of "likelihood" of the happening of an event, and the possible consequences (good or bad) if it does [cases and citations omitted]. individuals in their assessment of some risks may focus more on one than the other of these components. but at some point it usually becomes necessary for that person to make a judgment of the risk and whether it can/should be taken. where the risk relates to a third person to whom one owes a responsibility, it is likely in the nature of things that the estimate will be conservative. risks are relative and usually involve trade-offs. crossing the road with oncoming traffic to catch the last connection to the airport involves the risk of being hit by a car or the risk of missing the plane. very much a balancing exercise of facts, experience and intuition, but essentially which risk carries the greater detriment (usually the car). then there is the common experience of a mother watching her child cross a road to go to school. the risk is seen as greater (although it may not be) because the consequences may be death or injury to the child and because the responsibilities of the mother will be seen by her as greater than for herself or another adult .... at times the courts and the legislature have attempted to give an indication of the content or quality of the risk -- otherwise “risk” may mean any risk, however small or unlikely. hence the use of adjectives such as “serious”, “grave”, “real”, “appreciable” and “unacceptable”.  ] i respectfully agree, as i also do with mr fogarty’s statement (which also has echoes in the english author’s statement earlier quoted) that:
... unacceptable risk in the high court’s formulation [in m v m (1988) 166 clr 69] requires two separate steps. is there a risk, and is it unacceptable? the concentration by the high court is upon both the nature and the degree of risk in the particular case. its formulation is all about balance. in some cases a risk is "acceptable" when balanced against other factors and other orders. the object of safeguards is to convert an unacceptable situation to an acceptable one where that is feasible and is of "benefit to the child". it is, as i suggested earlier, calibrated to its use in individual cases. it is unrelated to the exoneration or otherwise of the alleged abuser, it is all about the bests interests of the child and protection from risk
section 60cc – the primary considerations.
is there any need to protect this child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse or neglect?
is there any need to protect this child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to family violence?
is there any need to protect this child from physical or psychological harm from being exposed to family violence?
intimidation and threats to kill her, manipulation, controlling behaviour and financial abuse
by the father.[28]
that, in 2010, the father threatened to kill her, telling her that he would then hand himself into the police
she gives no sworn evidence of any such event, nor was the father cross examined in relation to any such event.
is there benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents? ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.  ] the act sets out in s 60cc several matters for the court to consider in determining what is in the child’s best interests but does not seek to mandate that any one or other matter becomes determinative in any particular case. for the purposes of this case the legislation requires that there be a primary consideration given to the benefit of the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents but it does not purport to prescribe how that meaningful relationship is best promoted in the circumstances of any one case.
and later, at paragraph 36 said:  ] it seems to me that the final conclusion reached by the federal magistrate that the proposed relocation would jeopardise the relationship between the children and their father to an unacceptable extent was not at all consistent with the evidence that was before the federal magistrate. even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.  0] ... to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child... those adjectives mean that children need their parents to lead by example about self-discipline. children need to learn to develop the ability to relate to others. they need to learn about the privileges and responsibility which will devolve upon them as parents. those are fundamental parts of the meaningful relationship. ...
it is not open to a judge to use section 144 of the evidence act to “inform” him or herself of matters in respect of which reasonable minds might differ.
section 60cc – the additional considerations.
any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views.
the nature of the relationship of the child with each of his parents and other persons, including grandparents and other relatives.
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, to spend time with child, and to communicate with the child.
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parents obligation to maintain the child.
the likely effect of any changes in the child circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his parents.
the practical difficulty and expense of the child spending time with and communicating with his father and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.  has been used to long commutes since infancy and cope well with road trips, enjoying his interaction with the parent driving.
the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person (including grandparents and his sisters) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant.
the attitude to the child, and the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents.
any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.
any family violence orders.  lowden] reported that she took an avo against [ms lowden], when the police were in the process of returning [x] to her care. she reported that, as far as she is aware, [ms lowden] had an avo taken against him, by colleagues, in 2013.
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.
parental responsibility
what orders should be made in relation to the time to be spent by the child with the father?
consideration of the balance of the orders sought  that the father is permitted to ... authorise a nominee to collect the child from school (in accordance with order 5 below) for the purposes of the child spending time with the father as provided for by order 3,
associate: dated: 25 august 2022
dated: 25 august 2022
[1] i note that while the icl’s minute refers to a subparagraph 1(d), no such paragraph appears on the document.[2] transcript 29 march 2021, page 244 line 21 to page 245 line 36.[3] transcript 30 march 2021 page 348 lines 42 to 43.[4] transcript 30 march 2021 page 354 lines 44 to 46.[5] transcript 30 march 2021 page 348 lines 43 to 47.[6] transcript 23 september 2020 page 133 line 40 to 41.[7] transcript 22 september 2021 pages 70 to 74.[8] transcript 23 september 2021 page 168-169, 171.[9] transcript 29 march 2021 page 229.[10] transcript 22 september 2020 page 89 to 96.[11] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4ab(1).[12] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4ab(2)(g).[13] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4ab(2)(h).[14] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4ab(2)(i).[15] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4ab(2)(j).[16] transcript 21 september 2020 pages 22 and 30.[17] transcript 21 september 2020 page 20.[18] transcript 21 september 2020, page 39 to 40.[19] transcript 21 september 2020 pages 32 to 34.[20] transcript 21 september 2020 pages 36 to 37.[21] transcript 22 september 2021 page 48.[22] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(2).[23] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(4).[24] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(a).[25] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(b).[26] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(c).[27] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21, [18].[28] exhibit a5.[29] i am aware that goode & goode dealt primarily with interim orders, however i consider the full court’s discussion on the aforementioned matter to be authoritative in any event.