last updated: 23 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
brooker & brooker [2022] fedcfamc2f 1144
orders
the court orders that:  each alternate saturday from 10am to 3pm. (b) for two hours on each child’s birthday. (c) for two hours on the mother’s birthday. (d) from 1pm to 4pm on christmas day alternating with boxing day in each second year. (e) for three hours on mother’s day. (f) any time the children would spend with the mother be suspended on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   for two hours on each child’s birthday. (c) for two hours on the mother’s birthday. (d) from 1pm to 4pm on christmas day alternating with boxing day in each second year. (e) for three hours on mother’s day. (f) any time the children would spend with the mother be suspended on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   for two hours on the mother’s birthday. (d) from 1pm to 4pm on christmas day alternating with boxing day in each second year. (e) for three hours on mother’s day. (f) any time the children would spend with the mother be suspended on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   from 1pm to 4pm on christmas day alternating with boxing day in each second year. (e) for three hours on mother’s day. (f) any time the children would spend with the mother be suspended on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   for three hours on mother’s day. (f) any time the children would spend with the mother be suspended on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   any time the children would spend with the mother be suspended on father’s day. (g) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   that the mother submit to random urinalysis and/or cdt testing at intervals of not more than three months at such times as determined by the father (giving not less than 7 days’ notice in writing) and shall produce to him a negative test result. (b) that the mother provide a written authority to dr c to provide to the father a copy of all and any reports which dr c sends to the mother’s referring general practitioner, (c) that the mother continue to attend upon dr c, or other psychologist or psychiatrist recommended by him, at the frequency recommended by dr c, (d) that the mother comply with all prescriptions for medication from dr c, or other treating psychologist or psychiatrist, (e) that the mother immediately notify dr c, or such other treating psychologist or psychiatrist, if she intends to cease complying with any medication prescribed to her by them, (f) that an undertaking to the court be given within 7 days by each of the mother’s parents that they shall forthwith notify the father by phone and in writing, in the event of the mother’s hospitalisation, (g) that the mother abstain from consuming any illicit or illegal drugs including methamphetamines.   that the mother provide a written authority to dr c to provide to the father a copy of all and any reports which dr c sends to the mother’s referring general practitioner, (c) that the mother continue to attend upon dr c, or other psychologist or psychiatrist recommended by him, at the frequency recommended by dr c, (d) that the mother comply with all prescriptions for medication from dr c, or other treating psychologist or psychiatrist, (e) that the mother immediately notify dr c, or such other treating psychologist or psychiatrist, if she intends to cease complying with any medication prescribed to her by them, (f) that an undertaking to the court be given within 7 days by each of the mother’s parents that they shall forthwith notify the father by phone and in writing, in the event of the mother’s hospitalisation, (g) that the mother abstain from consuming any illicit or illegal drugs including methamphetamines.   that the mother continue to attend upon dr c, or other psychologist or psychiatrist recommended by him, at the frequency recommended by dr c, (d) that the mother comply with all prescriptions for medication from dr c, or other treating psychologist or psychiatrist, (e) that the mother immediately notify dr c, or such other treating psychologist or psychiatrist, if she intends to cease complying with any medication prescribed to her by them, (f) that an undertaking to the court be given within 7 days by each of the mother’s parents that they shall forthwith notify the father by phone and in writing, in the event of the mother’s hospitalisation, (g) that the mother abstain from consuming any illicit or illegal drugs including methamphetamines.   that the mother comply with all prescriptions for medication from dr c, or other treating psychologist or psychiatrist, (e) that the mother immediately notify dr c, or such other treating psychologist or psychiatrist, if she intends to cease complying with any medication prescribed to her by them, (f) that an undertaking to the court be given within 7 days by each of the mother’s parents that they shall forthwith notify the father by phone and in writing, in the event of the mother’s hospitalisation, (g) that the mother abstain from consuming any illicit or illegal drugs including methamphetamines.   that the mother immediately notify dr c, or such other treating psychologist or psychiatrist, if she intends to cease complying with any medication prescribed to her by them, (f) that an undertaking to the court be given within 7 days by each of the mother’s parents that they shall forthwith notify the father by phone and in writing, in the event of the mother’s hospitalisation, (g) that the mother abstain from consuming any illicit or illegal drugs including methamphetamines.   that an undertaking to the court be given within 7 days by each of the mother’s parents that they shall forthwith notify the father by phone and in writing, in the event of the mother’s hospitalisation, (g) that the mother abstain from consuming any illicit or illegal drugs including methamphetamines.   that the mother abstain from consuming any illicit or illegal drugs including methamphetamines.   via telephone as agreed between the parties and failing agreement, each thursday at 7.00pm, with the mother to instigate the call. (b) by letters, cards and gifts at any time.   by letters, cards and gifts at any time.   should the cause of suspension be a positive drug test for methamphetamine time shall recommence when she has returned two clear urinalysis test results no less than 14 days apart, and no more than 21 days apart. (b) should the cause of suspension be hospitalisation with respect to mental health, time shall recommence the first saturday 14 days after such discharge.   should the cause of suspension be hospitalisation with respect to mental health, time shall recommence the first saturday 14 days after such discharge.
reasons for judgment
judge boyle:
background
applications
issues  what the risk is to the children if they do not see their mother, (b) what the risk is to the children if they do not see their father, (c) what the risk is to the children if they do not see their siblings, and ms d, (d) what the likelihood is of the father relinquishing care of the children should there be an order for time with the mother, (e) whether the mother is able to care for the children should the father relinquish their care, (f) what the views are of the children about the various proposals, and how their maturity is relevant to any views expressed.   what the risk is to the children if they do not see their father, (c) what the risk is to the children if they do not see their siblings, and ms d, (d) what the likelihood is of the father relinquishing care of the children should there be an order for time with the mother, (e) whether the mother is able to care for the children should the father relinquish their care, (f) what the views are of the children about the various proposals, and how their maturity is relevant to any views expressed.   what the risk is to the children if they do not see their siblings, and ms d, (d) what the likelihood is of the father relinquishing care of the children should there be an order for time with the mother, (e) whether the mother is able to care for the children should the father relinquish their care, (f) what the views are of the children about the various proposals, and how their maturity is relevant to any views expressed.   what the likelihood is of the father relinquishing care of the children should there be an order for time with the mother, (e) whether the mother is able to care for the children should the father relinquish their care, (f) what the views are of the children about the various proposals, and how their maturity is relevant to any views expressed.   whether the mother is able to care for the children should the father relinquish their care, (f) what the views are of the children about the various proposals, and how their maturity is relevant to any views expressed.   what the views are of the children about the various proposals, and how their maturity is relevant to any views expressed.
documents relied on  application for final orders filed 3 may 2021. (b) affidavit of mr brooker filed 29 april 2022. (c) affidavit of ms d filed 29 april 2022. (d) affidavit of dr c filed 10 march 2022.   affidavit of mr brooker filed 29 april 2022. (c) affidavit of ms d filed 29 april 2022. (d) affidavit of dr c filed 10 march 2022.   affidavit of ms d filed 29 april 2022. (d) affidavit of dr c filed 10 march 2022.   affidavit of dr c filed 10 march 2022.   response to application for final orders filed 18 march 2022. (b) affidavits of ms brooker filed 29 april 2022 and 1 june 2022. (c) affidavits of ms o filed 29 april 2022 and 1 june 2022. (d) affidavits of mr p filed 29 april 2022 and 1 june 2022. (e) affidavit of dr q filed 18 march 2022.   affidavits of ms brooker filed 29 april 2022 and 1 june 2022. (c) affidavits of ms o filed 29 april 2022 and 1 june 2022. (d) affidavits of mr p filed 29 april 2022 and 1 june 2022. (e) affidavit of dr q filed 18 march 2022.   affidavits of ms o filed 29 april 2022 and 1 june 2022. (d) affidavits of mr p filed 29 april 2022 and 1 june 2022. (e) affidavit of dr q filed 18 march 2022.   affidavits of mr p filed 29 april 2022 and 1 june 2022. (e) affidavit of dr q filed 18 march 2022.   affidavit of dr q filed 18 march 2022.
primary considerations
section 60cc(2) the primary considerations are: (a) benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parents.(b) the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
additional considerations
section 60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views.
section 60cc(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),andsection 60cc(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents,
section 60cc(3)(c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,
section 60cc(3)(ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child
section 60cc(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living
section 60cc(3)(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
section 60cc(3)(f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent of other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs.
section 60cc(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,
section 60cc(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, andsection 60cc(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:(i) the nature of the order,(ii) the circumstances in which the order was made,(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order,(iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,(v) any other relevant matter,
section 60cc(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceeding in relation to the children
parental responsibility
independent children’s lawyer costs
conclusion
associate: dated: 25 august 2022
dated: 25 august 2022