last updated: 6 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
talley & patterson [2022] fedcfamc2f 1203
orders
the court declares that:
the court orders that:
costs applications  a minute of order setting out the quantum of costs sought (including the basis for that quantum), (b) any affidavit/s or evidence in support of the application, and (c) written submissions in support of the costs application,   any affidavit/s or evidence in support of the application, and (c) written submissions in support of the costs application,   written submissions in support of the costs application,
by no later than 4:00pm on 3 october 2022.
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction  she did not receive the advice required by section 90uj(1)(b) from a legal practitioner about the effect of the agreement on her rights and about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice should have been provided to her, of making the agreement, or, in the alternative, (2) the financial agreement should be set aside as being void for uncertainty under section 90um(1)(e).   the financial agreement should be set aside as being void for uncertainty under section 90um(1)(e).   the wife did receive the requisite advice from the legal practitioner under section 90uj(1)(b) and that in all respects the financial agreement is binding upon the parties, or, in the alternative, if the husband was not successful in satisfying the court that the wife had received the requisite advice, (2) the court should find that nevertheless it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the parties (section 90uj(1a)) and so make a declaration to that effect under section 90uj(1b).   the court should find that nevertheless it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the parties (section 90uj(1a)) and so make a declaration to that effect under section 90uj(1b).
the proceedings
the material relied upon at hearing  her initiating application filed 1 july 2019, (2) her affidavit affirmed 18 june 2019 and filed 1 july 2019, and containing as purported annexure “a” (there was no annexure note signed by the witness to the affidavit) a copy of the financial agreement, (3) her financial statement of the wife sworn or affirmed 18 june 2019 and filed 1 july 2019, and (4) outline of submissions of applicant prepared by mr moutasallem and filed 12 may 2021.   her affidavit affirmed 18 june 2019 and filed 1 july 2019, and containing as purported annexure “a” (there was no annexure note signed by the witness to the affidavit) a copy of the financial agreement, (3) her financial statement of the wife sworn or affirmed 18 june 2019 and filed 1 july 2019, and (4) outline of submissions of applicant prepared by mr moutasallem and filed 12 may 2021.   her financial statement of the wife sworn or affirmed 18 june 2019 and filed 1 july 2019, and (4) outline of submissions of applicant prepared by mr moutasallem and filed 12 may 2021.   outline of submissions of applicant prepared by mr moutasallem and filed 12 may 2021.   exhibit a1 – all of the documents produced on subpoena by e lawyers, and (2) exhibit a2 – a letter dated 5 may 2021 from darby jones lawyers (solicitors for the wife) to mullick & associates (solicitors for the husband), and a letter dated 6 may 2021 from mullick & associates to darby jones lawyers.   exhibit a2 – a letter dated 5 may 2021 from darby jones lawyers (solicitors for the wife) to mullick & associates (solicitors for the husband), and a letter dated 6 may 2021 from mullick & associates to darby jones lawyers.   his response to application for final orders filed 13 september 2019, (2) his affidavit sworn 12 september 2019 and filed 14 september 2019 (3) financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 12 september 2019 and filed 14 september 2019, and (4) the respondent’s case outline prepared by mr flaherty and filed 6 may 2021.   his affidavit sworn 12 september 2019 and filed 14 september 2019 (3) financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 12 september 2019 and filed 14 september 2019, and (4) the respondent’s case outline prepared by mr flaherty and filed 6 may 2021.   financial statement of the husband sworn or affirmed 12 september 2019 and filed 14 september 2019, and (4) the respondent’s case outline prepared by mr flaherty and filed 6 may 2021.   the respondent’s case outline prepared by mr flaherty and filed 6 may 2021.
the orders sought by the parties  an order pursuant to section 90um(5) of the act that the binding financial agreement dated 18 april 2016 be set aside. (2) an [sic] declaration that the binding financial agreement be declared void for uncertainty. (3) an order pursuant to section 90um(6) of the act for a financial adjustment in favour of the applicant, by way of a transfer of the b street, suburb c property to the applicant, or such other proportion that is determined to be just and equitable by the court. (4) costs. (5) any further or such order court deems fit.   an [sic] declaration that the binding financial agreement be declared void for uncertainty. (3) an order pursuant to section 90um(6) of the act for a financial adjustment in favour of the applicant, by way of a transfer of the b street, suburb c property to the applicant, or such other proportion that is determined to be just and equitable by the court. (4) costs. (5) any further or such order court deems fit.   an order pursuant to section 90um(6) of the act for a financial adjustment in favour of the applicant, by way of a transfer of the b street, suburb c property to the applicant, or such other proportion that is determined to be just and equitable by the court. (4) costs. (5) any further or such order court deems fit.   costs. (5) any further or such order court deems fit.   any further or such order court deems fit.
section 90um circumstances in which court may set aside a financial agreement or termination agreement (1) a court may make an order setting aside, for the purposes of this act, a part viiiab financial agreement or a part viiiab termination agreement if, and only if, the court is satisfied that: ...   if the agreement is a part viiiab financial agreement covered by section 90ue - subsection (5) applies.
... (5) this subsection applies if:   at least 1 of the spouse parties to the agreement was not provided, before signing the agreement, with independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party and about the advantages and disadvantages to that party of making the agreement, or (b) if this advice was provided to at least 1 of the spouse parties to the agreement – that party was not provided with a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that this advice was given to that party,
and it would be unjust and inequitable, having regard to the eligible agreed matters (within the meaning of section 90ue) for the agreement, if the court does not set the agreement aside.
90um circumstances in which court may set aside a financial agreement or termination agreement ... (6) a court may, on an application by a person who was a party to the part viiiab financial agreement that has been set aside, or by any other interested person, make such order or orders (including an order for the transfer of property) as it considers just and equitable for the purpose of preserving or adjusting the rights of persons who were parties to that financial agreement and any other interested persons.   a declaration that the financial agreement entered into by the parties dated 18 april 2016 (‘the agreement’), is a pt viiiab financial agreement pursuant to the family law act 1975 (cth). (2) a declaration that the agreement is binding on the parties pursuant to s 90uj(1b) of the family law act 1975 (cth). (3) an order that the parties forthwith take all necessary steps and execute all necessary documents to cause the sale of the property known as b street, suburb c (‘the b street, suburb c property’) and failing such agreement at a price to be determined by the proper officer of the real estate institute or [sic] nsw or their nominee and that the proceeds of the said sale be distributed as follows: – (a) payment of agents commission and advertising expenses an [sic] legal expenses of the sale, (b) payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent [the husband] pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent (4) if the b street, suburb c property fails to be sold by private treaty within three (3) months from the date of these orders then each party to take all necessary steps and execute all necessary documents to cause the b street, suburb c property be sold by public auction at the earliest possible date thereafter at a reserve price agreed by the parties and failing such agreement at a reserve price to be determined by the proper officer of the real estate institute or [sic] nsw or their nominee and that the proceeds of the said sale be distributed as follows: – (a) payment of agents commission and advertising expenses and legal expenses of the sale, (b) payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent (5) pending the completion of the sale of the b street, suburb c property, the applicant to pay to the respondent an occupation fee for her continued occupation of the b street, suburb c property such occupation fee to be calculated at the rate of $263 per week commencing 5 may 2019 (being three (3) months after the date of final separation of the parties) until the completion date of the sale of the b street, suburb c property. (6) the application filed by the applicant on 1 july 2019, be dismissed. (7) the applicant to pay the respondent’s costs either as agreed or assessed.   a declaration that the agreement is binding on the parties pursuant to s 90uj(1b) of the family law act 1975 (cth). (3) an order that the parties forthwith take all necessary steps and execute all necessary documents to cause the sale of the property known as b street, suburb c (‘the b street, suburb c property’) and failing such agreement at a price to be determined by the proper officer of the real estate institute or [sic] nsw or their nominee and that the proceeds of the said sale be distributed as follows: – (a) payment of agents commission and advertising expenses an [sic] legal expenses of the sale, (b) payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent [the husband] pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent (4) if the b street, suburb c property fails to be sold by private treaty within three (3) months from the date of these orders then each party to take all necessary steps and execute all necessary documents to cause the b street, suburb c property be sold by public auction at the earliest possible date thereafter at a reserve price agreed by the parties and failing such agreement at a reserve price to be determined by the proper officer of the real estate institute or [sic] nsw or their nominee and that the proceeds of the said sale be distributed as follows: – (a) payment of agents commission and advertising expenses and legal expenses of the sale, (b) payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent (5) pending the completion of the sale of the b street, suburb c property, the applicant to pay to the respondent an occupation fee for her continued occupation of the b street, suburb c property such occupation fee to be calculated at the rate of $263 per week commencing 5 may 2019 (being three (3) months after the date of final separation of the parties) until the completion date of the sale of the b street, suburb c property. (6) the application filed by the applicant on 1 july 2019, be dismissed. (7) the applicant to pay the respondent’s costs either as agreed or assessed.   an order that the parties forthwith take all necessary steps and execute all necessary documents to cause the sale of the property known as b street, suburb c (‘the b street, suburb c property’) and failing such agreement at a price to be determined by the proper officer of the real estate institute or [sic] nsw or their nominee and that the proceeds of the said sale be distributed as follows: – (a) payment of agents commission and advertising expenses an [sic] legal expenses of the sale, (b) payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent [the husband] pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent (4) if the b street, suburb c property fails to be sold by private treaty within three (3) months from the date of these orders then each party to take all necessary steps and execute all necessary documents to cause the b street, suburb c property be sold by public auction at the earliest possible date thereafter at a reserve price agreed by the parties and failing such agreement at a reserve price to be determined by the proper officer of the real estate institute or [sic] nsw or their nominee and that the proceeds of the said sale be distributed as follows: – (a) payment of agents commission and advertising expenses and legal expenses of the sale, (b) payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent (5) pending the completion of the sale of the b street, suburb c property, the applicant to pay to the respondent an occupation fee for her continued occupation of the b street, suburb c property such occupation fee to be calculated at the rate of $263 per week commencing 5 may 2019 (being three (3) months after the date of final separation of the parties) until the completion date of the sale of the b street, suburb c property. (6) the application filed by the applicant on 1 july 2019, be dismissed. (7) the applicant to pay the respondent’s costs either as agreed or assessed.   payment of agents commission and advertising expenses an [sic] legal expenses of the sale, (b) payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent [the husband] pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent   payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent [the husband] pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent   payment of any monies payable to the respondent [the husband] pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent   the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent   50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent  ) 50% to the respondent   if the b street, suburb c property fails to be sold by private treaty within three (3) months from the date of these orders then each party to take all necessary steps and execute all necessary documents to cause the b street, suburb c property be sold by public auction at the earliest possible date thereafter at a reserve price agreed by the parties and failing such agreement at a reserve price to be determined by the proper officer of the real estate institute or [sic] nsw or their nominee and that the proceeds of the said sale be distributed as follows: – (a) payment of agents commission and advertising expenses and legal expenses of the sale, (b) payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent (5) pending the completion of the sale of the b street, suburb c property, the applicant to pay to the respondent an occupation fee for her continued occupation of the b street, suburb c property such occupation fee to be calculated at the rate of $263 per week commencing 5 may 2019 (being three (3) months after the date of final separation of the parties) until the completion date of the sale of the b street, suburb c property. (6) the application filed by the applicant on 1 july 2019, be dismissed. (7) the applicant to pay the respondent’s costs either as agreed or assessed.   payment of agents commission and advertising expenses and legal expenses of the sale, (b) payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent   payment of any money due and owing to the mortgagee, (c) payment of any monies payable to the respondent pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent   payment of any monies payable to the respondent pursuant to any orders of this court, (d) the net balance to be divided between the parties as follows: – (i) 50% to the applicant, and (ii) 50% to the respondent   pending the completion of the sale of the b street, suburb c property, the applicant to pay to the respondent an occupation fee for her continued occupation of the b street, suburb c property such occupation fee to be calculated at the rate of $263 per week commencing 5 may 2019 (being three (3) months after the date of final separation of the parties) until the completion date of the sale of the b street, suburb c property. (6) the application filed by the applicant on 1 july 2019, be dismissed. (7) the applicant to pay the respondent’s costs either as agreed or assessed.   the application filed by the applicant on 1 july 2019, be dismissed. (7) the applicant to pay the respondent’s costs either as agreed or assessed.   the applicant to pay the respondent’s costs either as agreed or assessed.
... has power to make an order for the payment, by a party to the agreement to another party to the agreement, of interest on an amount payable under the agreement, from the time when the amount became or becomes due and payable, at a rate not exceeding the rate prescribed by the applicable rules of court.
the evidence
that the parties each state and warrant to the other party that as recorded in this agreement and as certified in an annexure to this agreement that before this agreement was signed by him or her, he or she was provided with independent legal advice from a legal practitioner on the following matters:   the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party, and (b) the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of making the agreement.
i, [mr e] solicitor of [e lawyers], and being independently instructed by [ms talley] certify the following:
1. this statement is an annexure to this section 90uc financial agreement entered into between [mr patterson] and [ms talley]. 2. i provided my client with independent legal advice prior to entering into this agreement as to the following matters:
a. the effect of this agreement on their rights, and b. the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to my client of making this agreement.
dated: 10/4/16
arrangements were made for me to attend the offices of [e lawyers] where i was introduced to a man who identified as “[mr e]” who introduced himself to me as a “lawyer”.
... pointed to several locations on the bfa for me to sign, and i did so. this meeting lasted no more than several minutes and at the conclusion of the meeting, [mr e] invited me to prepare a will. i then left [mr e]’s office and did not hear from him again. i did not retain for my records a copy of the bfa. a copy was obtained by my solicitors from [mr patterson’s] solicitors. [mr e] did not give me any advice whatsoever.   patterson] found him on the internet.
mr flaherty: he [the solicitor mr e] was familiar to you when you saw him?
to which she responded:
wife: yes.
mr flaherty: when you went in there you saw the solicitor and you spoke to him about the contents of the pre-nup? wife: i spoke to him, yes, he produced some documents which i know now where the bfa and they’re dated april 2016 and he showed me on the documents, on the bfa where it required my signature and i did so, then it took like several minutes or so and then on the conclusion of the meeting he offered to prepare a will for me. mr flaherty: you discussed the contents of the document with him? wife: as i was there he just pointed out where to sign, i signed, he took several minutes, then... mr flaherty: he discussed the contents of the document with you, did he not? wife: no. mr flaherty: he didn’t? wife: he showed me where i needed to sign, so, i did, it took several minutes or so and then on finishing he said “would you like me to prepare a will for you” and i left. mr flaherty: you had an opportunity to read the document with [mr e]. wife: no mr flaherty: are you saying he denied you the opportunity to read it? wife: yes.
you have not asked him to come to court?
yes we did.
mr flaherty: he charged you a fee for this occasion? wife: yes. mr flaherty: you went there to get advice? wife: yes. mr flaherty: why pay money for advice you didn’t get? wife: i don’t know. i didn’t get any advice. i paid him and he did not do a proper job. he did not provide me with what he was supposed to provide me. mr flaherty: you signed the document without reading it, without knowing what’s in it? wife: yes. mr flaherty: when you signed it, what did you think you were signing? wife: the bfa. mr flaherty: you knew you were signing a binding financial agreement? wife: yes. mr flaherty: you knew it would affect the financial relationship between yourself and the respondent, did you not? wife: yes. mr flaherty: you are there for the purpose of getting advice from this particular solicitor about its contents, weren’t you? wife: yes. mr flaherty: you say you signed it without being given opportunity to read it? wife: yes. mr flaherty: you say you signed it without knowing what was in it? wife: yes. mr flaherty: despite all of that you paid a fee? wife: yes.
mr flaherty: you signed at the bottom? wife: yes. mr flaherty: you are not saying that annexure b was inaccurate at that time. is that an accurate at 10 april 2016 statement of your property at that time? wife: yes. mr flaherty: you signed it knowing it was accurate? wife: yes. mr flaherty: in order to know it was accurate at the time you must’ve read it. wife: yes. mr flaherty: not only that, you must have discussed the contents of it with the solicitor. isn’t that right? wife: yes. mr flaherty: let me put it to you in a general form. i’m suggesting to you that not only did you discuss that page with the solicitor, you discussed the whole document with the solicitor. isn’t that right? wife: yes.
mr moutasallem: this [mr flaherty] asked you “did you discuss the whole of the bfa with your solicitor” – do you remember that question? wife: he didn’t say it like you did. yeah, he asked me that question and i said yes. mr moutasallem: why did you say yes? wife: because i thought i was ... he asked me did i .... um .... about the car and everything, did i go to a solicitor about that, writing what i, like, my car was worth and everything, and i said yes. i didn’t know he was talking about the bfa. does that make sense?
... joined her and her son shortly after the auction for a drink and spent some money on the poker machines. i told the applicant what had happened at the auction.
the law
separation is taken to have occurred when the parties have been living separately for no less than 3 months and one party notifies the other in writing that they intend to end the de facto relationship. the parties will not be taken to have separated if they have been living separately solely due to holidays, illness or business.   the agreement is signed by all parties, and (b) before signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party and about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to that party of making the agreement, and (c) either before or after signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that the advice referred to in paragraph (b) was provided to that party (whether or not the statement is annexed to the agreement), and (ca) a copy of the statement referred to in paragraph (c) that was provided to a spouse party is given to the other spouse party or to a legal practitioner for the other spouse party, and (d) the agreement as not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.   if the agreement is signed by all parties, and (2) one or more of the requirements in subsection (1) (b), (c) and (ca) are not satisfied, and (3) the court is satisfied that it would be unjust or inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made), and (4) the agreement has not been terminated or set aside by the court, then the court may make an order under section 90uj(1b) declaring that the part viiiab financial agreement is binding on the parties on the application of a party seeking enforcement, despite the absence of those formal requirements.   one or more of the requirements in subsection (1) (b), (c) and (ca) are not satisfied, and (3) the court is satisfied that it would be unjust or inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made), and (4) the agreement has not been terminated or set aside by the court, then the court may make an order under section 90uj(1b) declaring that the part viiiab financial agreement is binding on the parties on the application of a party seeking enforcement, despite the absence of those formal requirements.   the court is satisfied that it would be unjust or inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made), and (4) the agreement has not been terminated or set aside by the court, then the court may make an order under section 90uj(1b) declaring that the part viiiab financial agreement is binding on the parties on the application of a party seeking enforcement, despite the absence of those formal requirements.   the agreement has not been terminated or set aside by the court, then the court may make an order under section 90uj(1b) declaring that the part viiiab financial agreement is binding on the parties on the application of a party seeking enforcement, despite the absence of those formal requirements.
then the court may make an order under section 90uj(1b) declaring that the part viiiab financial agreement is binding on the parties on the application of a party seeking enforcement, despite the absence of those formal requirements.   the parties lived in a de facto relationship, (2) they have separated and are living separately and apart at the declaration time, and (3) in the opinion of the party making the declaration, there is no reasonable likelihood of cohabitation being resumed.   they have separated and are living separately and apart at the declaration time, and (3) in the opinion of the party making the declaration, there is no reasonable likelihood of cohabitation being resumed.   in the opinion of the party making the declaration, there is no reasonable likelihood of cohabitation being resumed.
in other words, if [section 90uj(1)(b)] is not satisfied in relation to the agreement, it may still be binding if pursuant to [section 90uj(1a)(c)] ‘it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties to the agreement (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made)’.[6]
is the financial agremeent binding on the parties pursuant to section 90uj?
there is no file note or follow-up letter that one may expect following a detailed solicitor-client meeting were a document as important as a bfa is signed.
... the applicant’s evidence as to the length of the conference is accepted, then the court should conclude that it was not possible for the solicitor to comply with the legislative requirements of the advice within such a short space of time.
... we do not accept that the absence of documentation is logically or necessarily “consistent” with a failure to give the required advice. the fact that it may be prudent practice to make a file note of having given the advice cannot be translated to either a finding that the advice was not given or even that it was consistent with the advice not being given, particularly when all of the evidence of the solicitor is taken into account, and the force of the certificate and the recitals in the agreement is recognised.
mr flaherty: you have not asked [the solicitor] to come to court? wife: yes we did. mr flaherty: he didn’t come? wife: no.
mr flaherty: you have not called the solicitor?
she answered:
wife: correct.
is the financial agreement void for uncertainty pursuant to section 90um(1)(e)?
this agreement is intended to solely deal with the separate property of the parties in the event of the breakdown of their de facto relationship without resort to litigation.
... an obvious and important inconsistency between the recitals and the rest of the binding financial agreement
and that by reason of the uncertainty in the text of the document it is void for uncertainty.   the parties to the contract (2) the principal undertakings which are only be found in the operative clauses, (3) the subject matter of the contract and any price, and that all were present, certain, and satisfied in the financial agreement.   the principal undertakings which are only be found in the operative clauses, (3) the subject matter of the contract and any price, and that all were present, certain, and satisfied in the financial agreement.   the subject matter of the contract and any price, and that all were present, certain, and satisfied in the financial agreement.
and that all were present, certain, and satisfied in the financial agreement.
... to solely deal with the separate property of the parties in the event of the breakdown of their de facto relationship.
and indeed that recital f refers only to the parties’ agreement to enter into the financial agreement:
to deal with the division of their separate property in the event of the breakdown of their relationship)
but there is no necessity in law that the recitals to an agreement, even a deed under seal, must refer to, summarise or explain the whole of the agreement itself as embodied in the operative clauses.
should the financial agreement be set aside under section 90um(1)(a)?
as to non-disclosure, the applicant will point to the failure of the respondent to disclose to her the true value of a property owned by him in [j street, suburb f] and the fact that it was sold. the respondent sold his property in [j street, suburb f] by way of public auction for $945,000 on 23 march 2016. notwithstanding that, the bfa incorrectly says that the [j street, suburb f] property is worth $800,000.  5] but, as it seems to me, the section does not make material non-disclosure fraudulent per se. fraud for the purposes of s 90k (1)(a) can, plainly, include material non-disclosure, but not every material non-disclosure is fraudulent. the inclusion of the phrase in parenthesis in s 90k (1)(a) is explained in my view by the desirability of making clear what might otherwise not clearly emerge from the position at common law or in equity. as a general proposition, at common law a finding of fraud in and about an agreement requires (among other things) a misrepresentation. a misrepresentation is, generally speaking, not constituted by silence or non-disclosure (material or otherwise). (see for example magill, united dominions corp ltd v brian pty ltd [1985] hca 49, (1985) 157 clr 1 at 5 – 6, [1985] hca 49, 60 alr 741 at 742 – 3 per gibbs cj.) [126] an exception exists to the general principle with respect to some classes of agreement where there can be said to be a duty to disclose. contracts of insurance are the most familiar example. it might be argued analogously that agreements that satisfy a definition within the act ought to embrace a fundamental principle enshrined in this court’s rules made pursuant to the same act, namely the duty of full and frank disclosure. but, rather than leave that issue for argument, the act has made the position clear by the specifying that fraud for the purposes of s 90k (1)(a) can be constituted by material non-disclosure. ... [133] further, and crucially, i have been taken to no evidence which points to, or from which it can be inferred, that any such failure to disclose as does exist in that respect was done so with any intention to deceive. as i have said, in my view, [s 90k (1)(a) (incorrectly referred to as s 90g (1)(a) in the published judgment)] requires that to be proved before a finding of fraud pursuant to that section is made. even if material non-disclosure is proved (which, in my view, it is not) that is of itself, insufficient.
the husband’s application for enforcement of the financial agreement
conclusion
4. costs.
7. the applicant pay to the respondent’s costs [sic] either as agreed or assessed.
associate: dated: 5 september 2022
dated: 5 september 2022
[1] lincoln (deceased) & moore [2016] famca 547, [85]-[101] (carew j), frederick & frederick [2019] famcafc 87, [2]-[3].[2] dobbs & dobbs [2021] famcafc 78, [12]-[17].[3] grainger & bloomfield and anor [2015] famcafc 221, [59]-[73].[4] paragraph 9 of the wife’s affidavit, paragraph 25 of the wife’s initiating application.[5] family law act 1975 (cth) s 90ua.[6] logan & logan [2013] famcafc 151, [35].[7] hoult & hoult [2013] famcafc 109, [60], [254] (‘hoult [2013]’).  hoult & hoult [2013] famcafc 109, [62], [96]-[97], [276].
[9] hoult & hoult [2013] famcafc 109, [98]-[99].[10] hoult & hoult [2013] famcafc 109, [279]; logan & logan [2013] famcafc 151, [51]; wallace & stelzer and anor [2013] famcafc 199, [103].[11] bilal & omar [2015] famcafc 30, [39], [43], discussing mann v carnell [1999] hca 66.[12] jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298.[13] upper hunter county district council v australian chilling & freezing co [1968] hca 8; (1968) 118 clr 429, 436-437 (barwick cj).[14] axelsen v o’brien [1949] hca 18; (1949) 80 clr 219, 226 (dixon j).[15] abc v australian performing rights association inc [1973] hca 36; (1973) 129 clr 99, 109 (gibbs j in dissent). though his honour was in dissent, his honour’s judgment on this matter has been followed many times.[16] meehan v jones [1982] hca 52; (1982) 149 clr 571; wn hillas & co ltd v arcos [1932] ukhl 2.[17] bridge wholesale acceptance corp (australia) ltd v burnard (1992) 27 nswlr 415.[18] upper hunter county district council v australian chilling & freezing co [1968] hca 8; (1968) 118 clr 429; trustees executors and agency company ltd & anor v peters [1960] hca 16; (1960) 102 clr 537.[19] the australian guarantee corporation ltd v balding [1930] hca 10; (1930) 43 clr 140, 150-153 (isaacs j).[20] i am conscious that his honour’s judgment was set aside on appeal in hoult & hoult [2013] famcafc 109, however i consider his honour’s comments here remain helpful.