last updated: 23 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
nisbett & nisbett [2022] fedcfamc2f 1461
orders
the court orders by consent that:  x born in 2012, (b) y born in 2015, and (c) z born in 2015   y born in 2015, and (c) z born in 2015   z born in 2015  llectively referred to herein as “the children”).
and the court orders that:
live with and spend time arrangements  each alternate week commencing 12 september 2022 with the father from the conclusion of school on monday (or 9:00am if monday is a non-school day) until the following monday at the commencement of school (or 9:00am. if that day is a non-school day). (b) each other alternate week commencing 19 september 2022 with the mother from the conclusion of school on monday (or 9:00am if monday is a non-school day) until the commencement of school the following monday (or 9:00am. if that day is a non-school day). (c) as otherwise agreed between the parents in writing.   each other alternate week commencing 19 september 2022 with the mother from the conclusion of school on monday (or 9:00am if monday is a non-school day) until the commencement of school the following monday (or 9:00am. if that day is a non-school day). (c) as otherwise agreed between the parents in writing.   as otherwise agreed between the parents in writing.
and the court orders by consent that:  with the mother for mother's day each year from 4:00 p.m. on the day prior to mother's day until 4:00 p.m. on mother's day. (b) with the father for father's day each year from 4:00 p.m. on the day prior to father's day until 4:00 p.m. on father's day. (c) for christmas in all odd numbered years the children spend time with the mother from 4:00 p.m. christmas eve until 4:00 p.m. christmas day and with the father from 4:00 p.m. on christmas day until 4:00 p.m. boxing day. (d) for christmas in all even numbered years the children spend time with the father from 4:00 p.m. christmas eve until 4:00 p.m. christmas day and with the mother from 4:00 p.m. christmas day until 4:00 p.m. boxing day.   with the father for father's day each year from 4:00 p.m. on the day prior to father's day until 4:00 p.m. on father's day. (c) for christmas in all odd numbered years the children spend time with the mother from 4:00 p.m. christmas eve until 4:00 p.m. christmas day and with the father from 4:00 p.m. on christmas day until 4:00 p.m. boxing day. (d) for christmas in all even numbered years the children spend time with the father from 4:00 p.m. christmas eve until 4:00 p.m. christmas day and with the mother from 4:00 p.m. christmas day until 4:00 p.m. boxing day.   for christmas in all odd numbered years the children spend time with the mother from 4:00 p.m. christmas eve until 4:00 p.m. christmas day and with the father from 4:00 p.m. on christmas day until 4:00 p.m. boxing day. (d) for christmas in all even numbered years the children spend time with the father from 4:00 p.m. christmas eve until 4:00 p.m. christmas day and with the mother from 4:00 p.m. christmas day until 4:00 p.m. boxing day.   for christmas in all even numbered years the children spend time with the father from 4:00 p.m. christmas eve until 4:00 p.m. christmas day and with the mother from 4:00 p.m. christmas day until 4:00 p.m. boxing day.   each wednesday the children are in the care of the other parent between 5.30pm and 6pm, with the parent with whom the children are living to make the call and the other parent to facilitate the call, and (b) at any other reasonable time requested by the children and with each party to do all things to facilitate such communication taking place.   at any other reasonable time requested by the children and with each party to do all things to facilitate such communication taking place.
communication  keep the other advised at all times of their respective residential and email addresses and mobile telephone numbers. (b) advise the other immediately in the event that the children, or any of them suffers any serious illness or injury. (c) keep the other advised of any specialist medical appointment in relation to the children and authorise the other to attend the same. (d) ensure that all medications as may have been prescribed for the children shall be administered in accordance with the directions from the children's medical practitioner whilst in their care, and each party shall provide the other with the medication and information regarding such medication or treatment. (e) authorise any medical practitioner upon whom the children may attend from time to time to communicate with the other with respect to the children's medical conditions and/or requirements. (f) advise the other of all sporting and extracurricular activities which the children are participating in and permit the other to attend the same. (g) be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the children’s school. (h) authorise all schools at which the children may attend from time to time to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all reports, notices and photographs in relation to the children. (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance in respect to the children's progress at such institutions. (iii) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.   advise the other immediately in the event that the children, or any of them suffers any serious illness or injury. (c) keep the other advised of any specialist medical appointment in relation to the children and authorise the other to attend the same. (d) ensure that all medications as may have been prescribed for the children shall be administered in accordance with the directions from the children's medical practitioner whilst in their care, and each party shall provide the other with the medication and information regarding such medication or treatment. (e) authorise any medical practitioner upon whom the children may attend from time to time to communicate with the other with respect to the children's medical conditions and/or requirements. (f) advise the other of all sporting and extracurricular activities which the children are participating in and permit the other to attend the same. (g) be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the children’s school. (h) authorise all schools at which the children may attend from time to time to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all reports, notices and photographs in relation to the children. (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance in respect to the children's progress at such institutions. (iii) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.   keep the other advised of any specialist medical appointment in relation to the children and authorise the other to attend the same. (d) ensure that all medications as may have been prescribed for the children shall be administered in accordance with the directions from the children's medical practitioner whilst in their care, and each party shall provide the other with the medication and information regarding such medication or treatment. (e) authorise any medical practitioner upon whom the children may attend from time to time to communicate with the other with respect to the children's medical conditions and/or requirements. (f) advise the other of all sporting and extracurricular activities which the children are participating in and permit the other to attend the same. (g) be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the children’s school. (h) authorise all schools at which the children may attend from time to time to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all reports, notices and photographs in relation to the children. (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance in respect to the children's progress at such institutions. (iii) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.   ensure that all medications as may have been prescribed for the children shall be administered in accordance with the directions from the children's medical practitioner whilst in their care, and each party shall provide the other with the medication and information regarding such medication or treatment. (e) authorise any medical practitioner upon whom the children may attend from time to time to communicate with the other with respect to the children's medical conditions and/or requirements. (f) advise the other of all sporting and extracurricular activities which the children are participating in and permit the other to attend the same. (g) be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the children’s school. (h) authorise all schools at which the children may attend from time to time to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all reports, notices and photographs in relation to the children. (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance in respect to the children's progress at such institutions. (iii) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.   authorise any medical practitioner upon whom the children may attend from time to time to communicate with the other with respect to the children's medical conditions and/or requirements. (f) advise the other of all sporting and extracurricular activities which the children are participating in and permit the other to attend the same. (g) be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the children’s school. (h) authorise all schools at which the children may attend from time to time to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all reports, notices and photographs in relation to the children. (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance in respect to the children's progress at such institutions. (iii) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.   advise the other of all sporting and extracurricular activities which the children are participating in and permit the other to attend the same. (g) be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the children’s school. (h) authorise all schools at which the children may attend from time to time to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all reports, notices and photographs in relation to the children. (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance in respect to the children's progress at such institutions. (iii) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.   be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the children’s school. (h) authorise all schools at which the children may attend from time to time to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all reports, notices and photographs in relation to the children. (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance in respect to the children's progress at such institutions. (iii) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.   authorise all schools at which the children may attend from time to time to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all reports, notices and photographs in relation to the children. (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance in respect to the children's progress at such institutions. (iii) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.   provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all reports, notices and photographs in relation to the children. (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance in respect to the children's progress at such institutions. (iii) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.  ) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance in respect to the children's progress at such institutions. (iii) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.  i) permit the other to participate in all activities and attend all functions to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to sports days/carnivals, parent teacher interviews, concerts, or any other similar occasion.   such communication be in writing for non-urgent matters and via phone call for urgent matters only, and (b) the communication be child focussed.   the communication be child focussed.
x
restraints  doing or saying anything to the children in the presence or hearing of the children which may be derogatory of the other party or detrimental to the relationship each party has with the children, (b) denigrating or speaking negatively about the other party or the other party’s family or household members in the presence or within hearing of the children, (c) discussing these proceedings with or in the presence and/or hearing of the children, and (d) using physical force to discipline the children.   denigrating or speaking negatively about the other party or the other party’s family or household members in the presence or within hearing of the children, (c) discussing these proceedings with or in the presence and/or hearing of the children, and (d) using physical force to discipline the children.   discussing these proceedings with or in the presence and/or hearing of the children, and (d) using physical force to discipline the children.   using physical force to discipline the children.
family report  ms j be provided with the following: (i) any report received from the department of families, fairness and housing, (ii) all court documents filed in these proceedings, and (iii) if requested, a copy of any documents produced pursuant to subpoenas filed on behalf of the parties and released for inspection. (b) ms j shall be at liberty, in her discretion, to liaise with any school, medical practitioner and/or allied health practitioner upon whom the children or any of them currently attend and the parties shall provide all authorisations necessary to facilitate that contact if required, (c) it is requested that ms j’s report address the following matters: (i) any agreement reached between the parties, (ii) identification of key issues requiring resolution, (iii) any views expressed by children, (iv) the impact of the issues and dispute before the court on the children, (v) any factors concerning the psychological functioning of the parties and how those factors impact upon the best interests of the children (if at all), and (vi) any other matters that ms j considers important to the welfare and best interests of the children.   any report received from the department of families, fairness and housing, (ii) all court documents filed in these proceedings, and (iii) if requested, a copy of any documents produced pursuant to subpoenas filed on behalf of the parties and released for inspection.  ) all court documents filed in these proceedings, and (iii) if requested, a copy of any documents produced pursuant to subpoenas filed on behalf of the parties and released for inspection.  i) if requested, a copy of any documents produced pursuant to subpoenas filed on behalf of the parties and released for inspection.   ms j shall be at liberty, in her discretion, to liaise with any school, medical practitioner and/or allied health practitioner upon whom the children or any of them currently attend and the parties shall provide all authorisations necessary to facilitate that contact if required, (c) it is requested that ms j’s report address the following matters: (i) any agreement reached between the parties, (ii) identification of key issues requiring resolution, (iii) any views expressed by children, (iv) the impact of the issues and dispute before the court on the children, (v) any factors concerning the psychological functioning of the parties and how those factors impact upon the best interests of the children (if at all), and (vi) any other matters that ms j considers important to the welfare and best interests of the children.   it is requested that ms j’s report address the following matters: (i) any agreement reached between the parties, (ii) identification of key issues requiring resolution, (iii) any views expressed by children, (iv) the impact of the issues and dispute before the court on the children, (v) any factors concerning the psychological functioning of the parties and how those factors impact upon the best interests of the children (if at all), and (vi) any other matters that ms j considers important to the welfare and best interests of the children.   any agreement reached between the parties, (ii) identification of key issues requiring resolution, (iii) any views expressed by children, (iv) the impact of the issues and dispute before the court on the children, (v) any factors concerning the psychological functioning of the parties and how those factors impact upon the best interests of the children (if at all), and (vi) any other matters that ms j considers important to the welfare and best interests of the children.  ) identification of key issues requiring resolution, (iii) any views expressed by children, (iv) the impact of the issues and dispute before the court on the children, (v) any factors concerning the psychological functioning of the parties and how those factors impact upon the best interests of the children (if at all), and (vi) any other matters that ms j considers important to the welfare and best interests of the children.  i) any views expressed by children, (iv) the impact of the issues and dispute before the court on the children, (v) any factors concerning the psychological functioning of the parties and how those factors impact upon the best interests of the children (if at all), and (vi) any other matters that ms j considers important to the welfare and best interests of the children.  ) the impact of the issues and dispute before the court on the children, (v) any factors concerning the psychological functioning of the parties and how those factors impact upon the best interests of the children (if at all), and (vi) any other matters that ms j considers important to the welfare and best interests of the children.   any factors concerning the psychological functioning of the parties and how those factors impact upon the best interests of the children (if at all), and (vi) any other matters that ms j considers important to the welfare and best interests of the children.  ) any other matters that ms j considers important to the welfare and best interests of the children.   the cost of ms j’s report (indicated to be $3,500 plus gst) be borne by the father at first instance.
future directions
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
background
matters in dispute
... in making interim decisions the court will still often be faced with conflicting facts, little helpful evidence and disputes between the parents as to what constitutes the best interests of the child. however, the legislative pathway must be followed. 82. in an interim case that would involve the following:   identifying the competing proposals of the parties, (b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing, (c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, (d) considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.
“i’m going to drop a lawsuit on your ass – your fucked”.
associate: dated: 3 november 2022
dated: 3 november 2022