last updated: 13 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cording & cording (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1229
orders
the court orders that:  any educational decisions for either of the children, and (b) any medical decisions for either of the children including specialist appointments or counselling appointments.   any medical decisions for either of the children including specialist appointments or counselling appointments.
term time  from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) thursday to the commencement of school (or 9:00am) monday on each alternate week commencing on the first thursday after the mother relocates, and (b) from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) thursday to the commencement of school (or 9:00am) friday on every other alternate week commencing on the second thursday after the mother relocates.   from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) thursday to the commencement of school (or 9:00am) friday on every other alternate week commencing on the second thursday after the mother relocates.   the children shall stay overnight in accommodation that is within a radius of a 90-minute drive from the place where the children attend school, and (b) no less than 4:00pm on the seventh day before the term time is to commence, the mother shall notify the father by text message of her intention to exercise time and the full residential address of the accommodation specified at order 8(a),   no less than 4:00pm on the seventh day before the term time is to commence, the mother shall notify the father by text message of her intention to exercise time and the full residential address of the accommodation specified at order 8(a),
failing which and unless otherwise agreed, the father is at liberty to notify the mother (by text message) of his decision to refuse to permit the children to spend time with the mother on that particular specified weekend.
special occasions and holiday time  during the autumn, winter and spring school holidays – (i) in 2022 and every following alternate year – with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of the preceding school term until 12:00noon on the middle sunday, and with the father from 12:00noon on the middle sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am) on the first day of the next school term, and (ii) in 2023 and every following alternate year – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on the last day of the preceding school term until 12:00noon on the middle sunday, and with the mother from 12:00noon on the middle sunday until 4:00pm on the last sunday before the new school term commences, and (b) during the summer school holidays – (i) in 2022 and every following alternate year – with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the father from 12:00noon on 8 january until the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, and (ii) in 2023 and every following alternate year – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the mother from 12:00noon on 8 january until 4:00pm on the last sunday before the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, (c) mother’s day weekend – with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday, (d) father’s day weekend – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday.   in 2022 and every following alternate year – with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of the preceding school term until 12:00noon on the middle sunday, and with the father from 12:00noon on the middle sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am) on the first day of the next school term, and (ii) in 2023 and every following alternate year – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on the last day of the preceding school term until 12:00noon on the middle sunday, and with the mother from 12:00noon on the middle sunday until 4:00pm on the last sunday before the new school term commences, and  ) in 2023 and every following alternate year – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on the last day of the preceding school term until 12:00noon on the middle sunday, and with the mother from 12:00noon on the middle sunday until 4:00pm on the last sunday before the new school term commences, and   during the summer school holidays – (i) in 2022 and every following alternate year – with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the father from 12:00noon on 8 january until the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, and (ii) in 2023 and every following alternate year – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the mother from 12:00noon on 8 january until 4:00pm on the last sunday before the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, (c) mother’s day weekend – with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday, (d) father’s day weekend – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday.   in 2022 and every following alternate year – with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the father from 12:00noon on 8 january until the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, and (ii) in 2023 and every following alternate year – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the mother from 12:00noon on 8 january until 4:00pm on the last sunday before the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1,  ) in 2023 and every following alternate year – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the mother from 12:00noon on 8 january until 4:00pm on the last sunday before the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1,   mother’s day weekend – with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday, (d) father’s day weekend – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday.   father’s day weekend – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday.   during the autumn and spring school holidays in 2023 and every following year – (i) with the mother for ten (10) consecutive nights from 9:00am on the day after the last day of the preceding school term until 12:00noon 11 days later, and (ii) with the father for the balance of the holiday time and until the commencement of school (or 9:00am) on the first day of the next school term, (b) during the winter school holidays in 2023 and every following year – (i) with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of the preceding school term until 12:00noon on the middle sunday, and (ii) with the father from 12:00noon on the middle sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am) on the first day of the next school term, (c) during the summer school holidays – (i) in 2022 and every following alternate year – with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the father from 12:00noon on 8 january until the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, and (ii) in 2023 and every following alternate year – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the mother from 12:00noon on 8 january until 4:00pm on the last sunday before the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, (d) mother’s day weekend – with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday provided that:- (i) the children shall stay overnight in accommodation that is within a radius of a 90-minute drive from the place where the children attend school, and (ii) no less than 4:00pm on the seventh day before the mother’s day weekend, the mother shall notify the father by text message of her intention to exercise time and the full residential address of the accommodation specified at order 8(a) & order 8(b),   with the mother for ten (10) consecutive nights from 9:00am on the day after the last day of the preceding school term until 12:00noon 11 days later, and (ii) with the father for the balance of the holiday time and until the commencement of school (or 9:00am) on the first day of the next school term,  ) with the father for the balance of the holiday time and until the commencement of school (or 9:00am) on the first day of the next school term,   during the winter school holidays in 2023 and every following year – (i) with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of the preceding school term until 12:00noon on the middle sunday, and (ii) with the father from 12:00noon on the middle sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am) on the first day of the next school term, (c) during the summer school holidays – (i) in 2022 and every following alternate year – with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the father from 12:00noon on 8 january until the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, and (ii) in 2023 and every following alternate year – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the mother from 12:00noon on 8 january until 4:00pm on the last sunday before the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, (d) mother’s day weekend – with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday provided that:- (i) the children shall stay overnight in accommodation that is within a radius of a 90-minute drive from the place where the children attend school, and (ii) no less than 4:00pm on the seventh day before the mother’s day weekend, the mother shall notify the father by text message of her intention to exercise time and the full residential address of the accommodation specified at order 8(a) & order 8(b),   with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of the preceding school term until 12:00noon on the middle sunday, and (ii) with the father from 12:00noon on the middle sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am) on the first day of the next school term,  ) with the father from 12:00noon on the middle sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am) on the first day of the next school term,   during the summer school holidays – (i) in 2022 and every following alternate year – with the mother from 9:00am on the day after the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the father from 12:00noon on 8 january until the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, and (ii) in 2023 and every following alternate year – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on the last day of term 4 until 12:00noon on 8 january, and with the mother from 12:00noon on 8 january until 4:00pm on the last sunday before the first day that the children are required to return to school for the commencement of term 1, (d) mother’s day weekend – with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday provided that:- (i) the children shall stay overnight in accommodation that is within a radius of a 90-minute drive from the place where the children attend school, and (ii) no less than 4:00pm on the seventh day before the mother’s day weekend, the mother shall notify the father by text message of her intention to exercise time and the full residential address of the accommodation specified at order 8(a) & order 8(b),   mother’s day weekend – with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday provided that:- (i) the children shall stay overnight in accommodation that is within a radius of a 90-minute drive from the place where the children attend school, and (ii) no less than 4:00pm on the seventh day before the mother’s day weekend, the mother shall notify the father by text message of her intention to exercise time and the full residential address of the accommodation specified at order 8(a) & order 8(b),   the children shall stay overnight in accommodation that is within a radius of a 90-minute drive from the place where the children attend school, and (ii) no less than 4:00pm on the seventh day before the mother’s day weekend, the mother shall notify the father by text message of her intention to exercise time and the full residential address of the accommodation specified at order 8(a) & order 8(b),  ) no less than 4:00pm on the seventh day before the mother’s day weekend, the mother shall notify the father by text message of her intention to exercise time and the full residential address of the accommodation specified at order 8(a) & order 8(b),
failing which and unless otherwise agreed, the father is at liberty to notify the mother (by text message) of his decision to refuse to permit the children to spend time with the mother on that weekend.   father’s day weekend – with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm) on friday until 4:00pm on sunday provided that if such weekend falls on a weekend that would otherwise be spent by the children with the mother, then order 8 is suspended for that weekend and instead the children shall spend time with the mother on the following weekend in accordance with order 8.
changeover   where time with the mother or father commences from the conclusion/commencement of school - the party with care will collect/deliver the children from/to school, and otherwise (b) if the mother does relocate in accordance with order 5 - all changeovers to facilitate time being spent pursuant to orders 5 and 9 shall occur at the c service station, town d, and (c) if the mother does not relocate in accordance with order 5 – all changeovers to facilitate time being spent pursuant to orders 8 and 10 shall occur at the town e service centre.   if the mother does relocate in accordance with order 5 - all changeovers to facilitate time being spent pursuant to orders 5 and 9 shall occur at the c service station, town d, and (c) if the mother does not relocate in accordance with order 5 – all changeovers to facilitate time being spent pursuant to orders 8 and 10 shall occur at the town e service centre.   if the mother does not relocate in accordance with order 5 – all changeovers to facilitate time being spent pursuant to orders 8 and 10 shall occur at the town e service centre.
communication  on each tuesday and thursday between 5:30pm and 6:00pm, and (b) on each of the children’s birthdays, the calling party’s birthday and christmas day at times agreed upon in writing by the parties,   on each of the children’s birthdays, the calling party’s birthday and christmas day at times agreed upon in writing by the parties,
and to facilitate this order, the calling party shall call the other party’s mobile telephone and the other party shall ensure that the children are available to receive the call and are afforded privacy during the call.
overseas travel  within 14 days of receipt by one party (‘the receiving party’) from the other party (‘the travelling party’) of the necessary documents to apply for and enable the provision of an australian travel document (‘the application’), the receiving party shall do all acts and things necessary to complete, sign and return the necessary documents to the travelling party, (b) the travelling party shall be responsible for the costs of the application.   the travelling party shall be responsible for the costs of the application.   the particulars of such holiday including a copy of the travel itinerary, country(ies) to be visited and the periods of such proposed travel, (b) copies of the confirmed return airline tickets and details of flights and accommodation.   copies of the confirmed return airline tickets and details of flights and accommodation.
injunctions   denigrating the other party in the presence or hearing of the child/ren and from permitting the child/ren to remain in the presence or hearing of another person denigrating the other party, and (b) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the child/ren and from permitting the child/ren to remain in the presence or hearing of another person doing so.   discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the child/ren and from permitting the child/ren to remain in the presence or hearing of another person doing so.
miscellaneous matters  copy/ies of the child/ren’s school progress reports (as these become available), (b) copy/ies of the child/ren’s school photograph order forms (if requested by the mother), (c) copy/ies of any notice (including about parent-teacher interviews), newsletters or access to electronic school communication applications (apps or portals) through which parents receive information from the school (as may be applicable).   copy/ies of the child/ren’s school photograph order forms (if requested by the mother), (c) copy/ies of any notice (including about parent-teacher interviews), newsletters or access to electronic school communication applications (apps or portals) through which parents receive information from the school (as may be applicable).   copy/ies of any notice (including about parent-teacher interviews), newsletters or access to electronic school communication applications (apps or portals) through which parents receive information from the school (as may be applicable).
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction  with whom x and y should live, in circumstances where the mother’s principal position was to relocate with the girls to the town x, queensland and the father’s principal position was for the implementation of an equal time regime in the girls’ current locale, (b) what time the girls should spend with the other parent if equal time was not ordered?   what time the girls should spend with the other parent if equal time was not ordered?   the father shall have sole parental responsibility for the girls, (b) the girls shall live with the father, (c) if within three calendar months, the mother returns to within close proximity of the girls’ school, then the girls shall time with the mother for spend five nights a fortnight in school terms and half school holidays, (d) up until the mother relocates (or in the event she doesn’t) then, the girls shall spend time with the mother during school terms on the first, third and sixth weekends provided such time occurs within 90 minutes’ drive from the girls’ school, (e) the girls will spend large periods of time with each parent during school holidays, (f) on tuesdays and thursdays, the girls shall have communication with the party in whose care they are not in, (g) various actions to occur to support the allocation of parental responsibility and to otherwise protect the girls from exposure to parental conflict, (h) the icl’s costs application be dismissed.   the girls shall live with the father, (c) if within three calendar months, the mother returns to within close proximity of the girls’ school, then the girls shall time with the mother for spend five nights a fortnight in school terms and half school holidays, (d) up until the mother relocates (or in the event she doesn’t) then, the girls shall spend time with the mother during school terms on the first, third and sixth weekends provided such time occurs within 90 minutes’ drive from the girls’ school, (e) the girls will spend large periods of time with each parent during school holidays, (f) on tuesdays and thursdays, the girls shall have communication with the party in whose care they are not in, (g) various actions to occur to support the allocation of parental responsibility and to otherwise protect the girls from exposure to parental conflict, (h) the icl’s costs application be dismissed.   if within three calendar months, the mother returns to within close proximity of the girls’ school, then the girls shall time with the mother for spend five nights a fortnight in school terms and half school holidays, (d) up until the mother relocates (or in the event she doesn’t) then, the girls shall spend time with the mother during school terms on the first, third and sixth weekends provided such time occurs within 90 minutes’ drive from the girls’ school, (e) the girls will spend large periods of time with each parent during school holidays, (f) on tuesdays and thursdays, the girls shall have communication with the party in whose care they are not in, (g) various actions to occur to support the allocation of parental responsibility and to otherwise protect the girls from exposure to parental conflict, (h) the icl’s costs application be dismissed.   up until the mother relocates (or in the event she doesn’t) then, the girls shall spend time with the mother during school terms on the first, third and sixth weekends provided such time occurs within 90 minutes’ drive from the girls’ school, (e) the girls will spend large periods of time with each parent during school holidays, (f) on tuesdays and thursdays, the girls shall have communication with the party in whose care they are not in, (g) various actions to occur to support the allocation of parental responsibility and to otherwise protect the girls from exposure to parental conflict, (h) the icl’s costs application be dismissed.   the girls will spend large periods of time with each parent during school holidays, (f) on tuesdays and thursdays, the girls shall have communication with the party in whose care they are not in, (g) various actions to occur to support the allocation of parental responsibility and to otherwise protect the girls from exposure to parental conflict, (h) the icl’s costs application be dismissed.   on tuesdays and thursdays, the girls shall have communication with the party in whose care they are not in, (g) various actions to occur to support the allocation of parental responsibility and to otherwise protect the girls from exposure to parental conflict, (h) the icl’s costs application be dismissed.   various actions to occur to support the allocation of parental responsibility and to otherwise protect the girls from exposure to parental conflict, (h) the icl’s costs application be dismissed.   the icl’s costs application be dismissed.
the applicable law  emphasis)
reasonable practicality (5) in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have regard to: (a) how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant. note: paragraph (c) reference to future capacity--the court has power under section 13c to make orders for parties to attend family counselling or family dispute resolution or participate in courses, programs or services.
...the reality of the situation of parents and the child, not whether it is desirable that there be equal time spent by the child with each parent. the presumption in s 61da(1) is not determinative of the questions arising under s 65daa(1). section 65daa(1)(b) requires a practical assessment of whether equal time parenting is feasible.   emphasis and footnotes omitted)   emphasis and italicise with footnotes omitted)
the evidence  further amended initiating application filed 20 june 2022, (b) affidavit of mr cording filed 20 june 2022[4], (c) affidavit of ms f (‘f’) filed 4 august 2021[5], (d) outline of case of the father filed 12 july 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’, (e) various exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f4’.   affidavit of mr cording filed 20 june 2022[4], (c) affidavit of ms f (‘f’) filed 4 august 2021[5], (d) outline of case of the father filed 12 july 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’, (e) various exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f4’.   affidavit of ms f (‘f’) filed 4 august 2021[5], (d) outline of case of the father filed 12 july 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’, (e) various exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f4’.   outline of case of the father filed 12 july 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’, (e) various exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f4’.   various exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f4’.   amended response to initiating application filed 24 june 2022, (b) affidavit of ms cording filed 27 june 2022[6], (c) affidavit of mr p filed 24 june 2022, (d) outline of case of the mother filed 11 july 2022 including the minute of order (alternative proposal) circulated to the court and parties on the last day of the trial – marked exhibit ‘m1’, (e) various exhibits – marked exhibits ‘m2’ to ‘m5’.   affidavit of ms cording filed 27 june 2022[6], (c) affidavit of mr p filed 24 june 2022, (d) outline of case of the mother filed 11 july 2022 including the minute of order (alternative proposal) circulated to the court and parties on the last day of the trial – marked exhibit ‘m1’, (e) various exhibits – marked exhibits ‘m2’ to ‘m5’.   affidavit of mr p filed 24 june 2022, (d) outline of case of the mother filed 11 july 2022 including the minute of order (alternative proposal) circulated to the court and parties on the last day of the trial – marked exhibit ‘m1’, (e) various exhibits – marked exhibits ‘m2’ to ‘m5’.   outline of case of the mother filed 11 july 2022 including the minute of order (alternative proposal) circulated to the court and parties on the last day of the trial – marked exhibit ‘m1’, (e) various exhibits – marked exhibits ‘m2’ to ‘m5’.   various exhibits – marked exhibits ‘m2’ to ‘m5’.   outline of case of the icl filed 11 july 2022 – marked exhibit ‘icl1’, (b) proposed minute of orders sought by the icl – marked exhibit ‘icl2’, (c) notice of costs of the icl – marked exhibit ‘icl3’, (d) various exhibits – marked exhibits ‘icl4’ and ‘icl5’.   proposed minute of orders sought by the icl – marked exhibit ‘icl2’, (c) notice of costs of the icl – marked exhibit ‘icl3’, (d) various exhibits – marked exhibits ‘icl4’ and ‘icl5’.   notice of costs of the icl – marked exhibit ‘icl3’, (d) various exhibits – marked exhibits ‘icl4’ and ‘icl5’.   various exhibits – marked exhibits ‘icl4’ and ‘icl5’.
the parties’ proposals
chronology  attempting to have sex with the mother in the lounge room, (b) yelling and screaming at the mother, (c) hitting the walls in the hallway, and (d) standing in the walk-in wardrobe with a belt around his neck (during which time the mother observed the male friend trying to take off the belt).   yelling and screaming at the mother, (c) hitting the walls in the hallway, and (d) standing in the walk-in wardrobe with a belt around his neck (during which time the mother observed the male friend trying to take off the belt).   hitting the walls in the hallway, and (d) standing in the walk-in wardrobe with a belt around his neck (during which time the mother observed the male friend trying to take off the belt).   standing in the walk-in wardrobe with a belt around his neck (during which time the mother observed the male friend trying to take off the belt).   the parties to have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) the girls to live with the mother, (c) the girls to spend time with the father in a regime starting with overnight fortnightly weekend time of two consecutive nights and increasing to four nights a fortnight being three consecutive nights each alternate weekend and one mid-week overnight in the other week, (d) communication between the parties and the parties and the girls, (e) the father to submit to random drug tests on 24 hours’ notice from the mother.   the girls to live with the mother, (c) the girls to spend time with the father in a regime starting with overnight fortnightly weekend time of two consecutive nights and increasing to four nights a fortnight being three consecutive nights each alternate weekend and one mid-week overnight in the other week, (d) communication between the parties and the parties and the girls, (e) the father to submit to random drug tests on 24 hours’ notice from the mother.   the girls to spend time with the father in a regime starting with overnight fortnightly weekend time of two consecutive nights and increasing to four nights a fortnight being three consecutive nights each alternate weekend and one mid-week overnight in the other week, (d) communication between the parties and the parties and the girls, (e) the father to submit to random drug tests on 24 hours’ notice from the mother.   communication between the parties and the parties and the girls, (e) the father to submit to random drug tests on 24 hours’ notice from the mother.   the father to submit to random drug tests on 24 hours’ notice from the mother.
m: how long do you have this christmas break for holidays? i’m trying to put a plan together for the girls and hopefully come up with something more suitable. can you please send me any holidays you have or can take over christmas and any other school holidays you will be allowed to have off next year please. ..... m: hi [mr cording], i’d prefer if we didn’t discuss days and holidays etc in front of the girls unless it is locked in. i asked about the holidays so i can know in general how much time and roughly when you have off during the year and next year do (sic) i could come up with a suitable plan and hopefully will have a new plan sorted by court so it can be easy and stress free. i have plans theses (sic) holidays. the time you have will stay the same which is every second thursday and alternate every second weekend. we can discuss more about the end of year holidays and parenting plan for future. m: hi [mr cording], at some point this week can we go over plans for next year? f: yeah sure what do you have in mind? m: i’m thinking for us to discuss this properly we should attempt going to mediation? f: that depends on how far apart our views are. firstly can we talk about october holidays m: we won’t be talking about any holidays until we can come to an arrangement for next year. there are no holidays in the orders, i have given you extra time already. f: what about next year i’m confused what are we trying to sort out m: are you willing to do mediation or we can work it out in person with another person to witness? f: isn’t txt better but i don’t know what we’re trying to sort i’m interested in holidays time m: what we have spoken about previously on the phone about relocation. you know we have discussed this. currently there are no holidays and only every second weekend abd (sic) every second thursday. f: yeah that’s correct i don’t want to move and i don’t want the girls going to the [town x] they are settled in there (sic) schools we have family here   situational dysregulation, and (b) character illogical dysregulation (endemic).   character illogical dysregulation (endemic).   the girls to live with the mother and spend four nights a fortnight with the father (from friday to monday in week one and from thursday to friday in week two), as well as half school holidays with each party, (b) the allocation of a trial in august 2021, and (c) notations were made to the effect that the father would adhere to the treatment regime specified therein for y and x until, in the case of x the alleged cause of the treatment plan (namely coeliac disease) was ruled out   the allocation of a trial in august 2021, and (c) notations were made to the effect that the father would adhere to the treatment regime specified therein for y and x until, in the case of x the alleged cause of the treatment plan (namely coeliac disease) was ruled out   notations were made to the effect that the father would adhere to the treatment regime specified therein for y and x until, in the case of x the alleged cause of the treatment plan (namely coeliac disease) was ruled out
monday 06.12.2021 at 4:35pm the mother: hi [mr cording], as you know there’s a school strike tomorrow at the school. i’ve tried to get school work for home-schooling but the teachers said they’ve just been doing movies and reading books etc. i’ll do the same. but wanted to let you know i’ll be with them in qld after the strike home schooling as we have no where else to go. i’ll have them in school monday for you to pick up. also trying to work out if we can arrange christmas day. the father: no girls need to be at school wed, thurs, friday the mother: well we have no home. i’m home schooling them even though the teachers said they haven’t been doing work.
unfortunately we are not providing work for home schooling on strike day. at this point on the term majority of our work is christmas related, songs, stories and short films. ...  the parties to have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) the girls to live with the father and spend time with the mother each alternate weekend provided the mother could secure accommodation in the town z area, (c) the girls to remain enrolled at the girls’ school, (d) the girls to spend time with the mother during the winter and spring 2022 school holidays for 10 consecutive days and for half of the summer school holidays, (e) the girls to have equal time with both parties in the event that the mother could secure accommodation in the town z area.   the girls to live with the father and spend time with the mother each alternate weekend provided the mother could secure accommodation in the town z area, (c) the girls to remain enrolled at the girls’ school, (d) the girls to spend time with the mother during the winter and spring 2022 school holidays for 10 consecutive days and for half of the summer school holidays, (e) the girls to have equal time with both parties in the event that the mother could secure accommodation in the town z area.   the girls to remain enrolled at the girls’ school, (d) the girls to spend time with the mother during the winter and spring 2022 school holidays for 10 consecutive days and for half of the summer school holidays, (e) the girls to have equal time with both parties in the event that the mother could secure accommodation in the town z area.   the girls to spend time with the mother during the winter and spring 2022 school holidays for 10 consecutive days and for half of the summer school holidays, (e) the girls to have equal time with both parties in the event that the mother could secure accommodation in the town z area.   the girls to have equal time with both parties in the event that the mother could secure accommodation in the town z area.   the mother saying that she had secured accommodation but not disclosing where, (b) the father asking about where the mother’s accommodation was, (c) the mother saying it was in town e, (d) the mother asking what geographical area (in his view) encompassed the ‘the town z area’ (as set out at order 4 of the june 2022 orders) after the father’s non-committal responses to the weekend occurring, and (e) finally, after the weekend had been and gone, the father stating that he thought the definition meant anywhere in the town z lga.   the father asking about where the mother’s accommodation was, (c) the mother saying it was in town e, (d) the mother asking what geographical area (in his view) encompassed the ‘the town z area’ (as set out at order 4 of the june 2022 orders) after the father’s non-committal responses to the weekend occurring, and (e) finally, after the weekend had been and gone, the father stating that he thought the definition meant anywhere in the town z lga.   the mother saying it was in town e, (d) the mother asking what geographical area (in his view) encompassed the ‘the town z area’ (as set out at order 4 of the june 2022 orders) after the father’s non-committal responses to the weekend occurring, and (e) finally, after the weekend had been and gone, the father stating that he thought the definition meant anywhere in the town z lga.   the mother asking what geographical area (in his view) encompassed the ‘the town z area’ (as set out at order 4 of the june 2022 orders) after the father’s non-committal responses to the weekend occurring, and (e) finally, after the weekend had been and gone, the father stating that he thought the definition meant anywhere in the town z lga.   finally, after the weekend had been and gone, the father stating that he thought the definition meant anywhere in the town z lga.   to say that they wanted to stay with him, (b) to tell the mother they wanted to stay with him more, (c) that he pays for their mother to have them, or (d) that the mother did want to be with the girls and that the mother wanted to leave the girls here (in nsw) and that the mother did not want to see us even when the mother was allowed to.   to tell the mother they wanted to stay with him more, (c) that he pays for their mother to have them, or (d) that the mother did want to be with the girls and that the mother wanted to leave the girls here (in nsw) and that the mother did not want to see us even when the mother was allowed to.   that he pays for their mother to have them, or (d) that the mother did want to be with the girls and that the mother wanted to leave the girls here (in nsw) and that the mother did not want to see us even when the mother was allowed to.   that the mother did want to be with the girls and that the mother wanted to leave the girls here (in nsw) and that the mother did not want to see us even when the mother was allowed to.   the current evidence from the father is set out paragraph 16 of the father’s evidence which is to the effect that he does not drink excessively, (b) since the final orders were made (when a restraint was imposed upon the father about not drinking in excess of the legal driving limit) there was no evidence to support a finding that he has behaved inconsistently with that restraint and/or that his parental capacity has been impinged by his drinking, (c) the events related to the father’s excessive use of alcohol appear to be historical, and (d) whilst the child expert expressed in the family report having some concerns about the impact of alcohol on the father’s parenting capacity, i did not hear any persuasive evidence to suggest either that the father’s alcohol consumption remains excessive and/or that his parenting capacity is impinged to a degree that would cause a risk of harm issue for the girls whilst they are in his household.   since the final orders were made (when a restraint was imposed upon the father about not drinking in excess of the legal driving limit) there was no evidence to support a finding that he has behaved inconsistently with that restraint and/or that his parental capacity has been impinged by his drinking, (c) the events related to the father’s excessive use of alcohol appear to be historical, and (d) whilst the child expert expressed in the family report having some concerns about the impact of alcohol on the father’s parenting capacity, i did not hear any persuasive evidence to suggest either that the father’s alcohol consumption remains excessive and/or that his parenting capacity is impinged to a degree that would cause a risk of harm issue for the girls whilst they are in his household.   the events related to the father’s excessive use of alcohol appear to be historical, and (d) whilst the child expert expressed in the family report having some concerns about the impact of alcohol on the father’s parenting capacity, i did not hear any persuasive evidence to suggest either that the father’s alcohol consumption remains excessive and/or that his parenting capacity is impinged to a degree that would cause a risk of harm issue for the girls whilst they are in his household.   whilst the child expert expressed in the family report having some concerns about the impact of alcohol on the father’s parenting capacity, i did not hear any persuasive evidence to suggest either that the father’s alcohol consumption remains excessive and/or that his parenting capacity is impinged to a degree that would cause a risk of harm issue for the girls whilst they are in his household.
analysis – primary considerations
section 60cc(2)(a)
section 60cc(2)(b)
family violence  he punched a hole in a door in about 2018, (b) he presented as emotionally dysregulated at the event r in september 2018.   he presented as emotionally dysregulated at the event r in september 2018.
neglect
analysis – additional considerations
section 60cc(3)(a)
section 60cc(3)(b)  the girls have spent their days with him on that property, and (b) the father has heavily relied on his parents to care for them (if i accept what the mother says).   the father has heavily relied on his parents to care for them (if i accept what the mother says).
section 60cc(3)(d)
section 60cc(3)(e)
section 60cc(3)(f)   the mother did not demonstrate that she sees any significant benefit in the girls’ relationships with the father, the paternal grandparents or her own parents, (b) the mother holds an unjustified and poor view of the father’s parenting capacity (and the assistance derived from the support given by the paternal grandmother), (c) the mother has been unable to prioritise the needs of the girls above her own, putting at risk the girls’ intellectual and emotional needs.   the mother holds an unjustified and poor view of the father’s parenting capacity (and the assistance derived from the support given by the paternal grandmother), (c) the mother has been unable to prioritise the needs of the girls above her own, putting at risk the girls’ intellectual and emotional needs.   the mother has been unable to prioritise the needs of the girls above her own, putting at risk the girls’ intellectual and emotional needs.   in june 2020, the mother was deliberately disingenuous with the father about her intention to relocate in 2021, taking a course of action which was aimed to coerce him into agreeing to her plans in exchange for the girls being able to spend holiday time with him in circumstances where she obliquely observed there were no orders in place permitting such time. ultimately the court had to determine the parental dispute about holiday time, which led to the girls spending holidays with both parties, in circumstances where it may have been possible for the girls to do so much earlier, (b) in march 2021, the mother manipulated the father into allowing her to collect the girls earlier than ordered because of the poor driving conditions, only to then drive the girls over four hours to queensland to spend time with her and not tell the father of her intentions, (c) in may 2021, the mother collected the girls from school on a monday after they had spent time with the father and then decided they needed the rest of the week off from school (which meant that they missed out spending time with the father on the thursday night). the mother explained that the girls were sick but this did not stop her from then driving the girls to queensland for the week, (d) in late 2021 the mother relocated to queensland with the girls and (despite her evidence to the contrary) i am satisfied that she did not tell the father of her intention to do so beforehand, but rather informed him on 6 december 2021 as a fait accompli. even if i accept that the move was a temporary arrangement, she agreed that despite the transient nature of her relocation, she had not recently been looking for work back in the area near to where the girls live and that without this work it was improbable that she could secure and afford accommodation. her evidence was entirely unsatisfactory, (e) from early december 2021 onwards, the mother decided that she could home-school the girls remotely in queensland every other week of the school terms. it was common ground that on occasions the mother would collect the girls early from school on the monday when she was due to have them live with her for the week and drop them off late on the following monday when they returned to live with the father. it was common ground that the drive was over four hours each way and the mother would do the return trip in the one day. this meant that, for example, to collect the girls at the start of her week, the mother would be in the car for over eight hours, the last four or so of which was when the girls were also with her. conversely the mother’s decision meant that the girls travelled over four hours before they started school on the monday when they were returned to the local area. the mother saw no issue with this pattern of travel or any safety concerns for the girls. (f) by april 2022, u was openly opposed to a continuation of the home-schooling regime but the mother rejected any alternative which would require her to physically return the girls to the classroom. in one school record, she was recorded as saying that the girls’ wellbeing (in staying with her) was more important than their schooling. (g) on the last day of term 1 2022, the mother arrived at school before 3:00pm and removed the girls from their classrooms. she did so in contravention of the final orders and against the wishes of u. when asked to explain her reasoning, she said that the girls were aware of her plan because she had told them (but not the father) the night before and she wanted to maximise the time the girls spent with p and his children in town w on their holiday. again, the mother was unrepentant about her actions even though it entailed the girls not participating in the easter hat parade with their classmates and at which their maternal and paternal grandparents were to attend, (h) on 2 may 2022, the mother attended the school to collect the girls early. u and the mother were in discussions about the school’s concern that the mother was not following the final orders and the det’s expectations of parents in ensuring school attendance. the mother was unrepentant and called the police. the police attended the school and supported the school’s interpretation of the final orders but said that ultimately the dispute was outside of their remit. the mother left the school without the girls. the mother returned at 3:00pm and observed y’s legs with band-aids on them and y telling her she was in pain. the mother was highly critical of y’s presentation and the father’s failure to care for y, but nonetheless decided the best thing to do was to drive back over the queensland border. the mother was unrepentant about her part in the confrontation at the school, her decision to involve the police and despite y’s presentation, the necessity for her to travel immediately to the town x and seek medical treatment there rather than locally, and (i) in addition, i observe that even now, her alternative proposal identifies her intention to travel with the girls to queensland during school term weekends when they live with her, albeit she explicitly says that their school days will not be interrupted. based on their lived experience, what this looks like for the girls is that there is at least a possibility that the mother will drive them over four (4) hours on a friday from after school, to spend two (2) or three (3) nights in queensland, then drive them back, either on sunday afternoon/evening or before dawn on monday (so that they arrive at school by 9:00am). if the mother’s intention is to do this regularly, then the court would be concerned, because in the past the mother has made this trip during times of severe weather patterns, when a child has required medical attention and despite it meaning that the mother has driven for over eight (8) hours without any significant rest. in addition, how alert the girls would be in school on the day of or after the trip is also unknown (although i accept this was not the subject of any particularly persuasive evidence before me). leaving aside then the impacts on the girls’ capacity to engage in schoolwork, but taking account of the evidence, the mother’s stated intention only reaffirms how impaired her parental capacity has become because of her desire to pursue the relationship with p and his family.   in march 2021, the mother manipulated the father into allowing her to collect the girls earlier than ordered because of the poor driving conditions, only to then drive the girls over four hours to queensland to spend time with her and not tell the father of her intentions, (c) in may 2021, the mother collected the girls from school on a monday after they had spent time with the father and then decided they needed the rest of the week off from school (which meant that they missed out spending time with the father on the thursday night). the mother explained that the girls were sick but this did not stop her from then driving the girls to queensland for the week, (d) in late 2021 the mother relocated to queensland with the girls and (despite her evidence to the contrary) i am satisfied that she did not tell the father of her intention to do so beforehand, but rather informed him on 6 december 2021 as a fait accompli. even if i accept that the move was a temporary arrangement, she agreed that despite the transient nature of her relocation, she had not recently been looking for work back in the area near to where the girls live and that without this work it was improbable that she could secure and afford accommodation. her evidence was entirely unsatisfactory, (e) from early december 2021 onwards, the mother decided that she could home-school the girls remotely in queensland every other week of the school terms. it was common ground that on occasions the mother would collect the girls early from school on the monday when she was due to have them live with her for the week and drop them off late on the following monday when they returned to live with the father. it was common ground that the drive was over four hours each way and the mother would do the return trip in the one day. this meant that, for example, to collect the girls at the start of her week, the mother would be in the car for over eight hours, the last four or so of which was when the girls were also with her. conversely the mother’s decision meant that the girls travelled over four hours before they started school on the monday when they were returned to the local area. the mother saw no issue with this pattern of travel or any safety concerns for the girls. (f) by april 2022, u was openly opposed to a continuation of the home-schooling regime but the mother rejected any alternative which would require her to physically return the girls to the classroom. in one school record, she was recorded as saying that the girls’ wellbeing (in staying with her) was more important than their schooling. (g) on the last day of term 1 2022, the mother arrived at school before 3:00pm and removed the girls from their classrooms. she did so in contravention of the final orders and against the wishes of u. when asked to explain her reasoning, she said that the girls were aware of her plan because she had told them (but not the father) the night before and she wanted to maximise the time the girls spent with p and his children in town w on their holiday. again, the mother was unrepentant about her actions even though it entailed the girls not participating in the easter hat parade with their classmates and at which their maternal and paternal grandparents were to attend, (h) on 2 may 2022, the mother attended the school to collect the girls early. u and the mother were in discussions about the school’s concern that the mother was not following the final orders and the det’s expectations of parents in ensuring school attendance. the mother was unrepentant and called the police. the police attended the school and supported the school’s interpretation of the final orders but said that ultimately the dispute was outside of their remit. the mother left the school without the girls. the mother returned at 3:00pm and observed y’s legs with band-aids on them and y telling her she was in pain. the mother was highly critical of y’s presentation and the father’s failure to care for y, but nonetheless decided the best thing to do was to drive back over the queensland border. the mother was unrepentant about her part in the confrontation at the school, her decision to involve the police and despite y’s presentation, the necessity for her to travel immediately to the town x and seek medical treatment there rather than locally, and (i) in addition, i observe that even now, her alternative proposal identifies her intention to travel with the girls to queensland during school term weekends when they live with her, albeit she explicitly says that their school days will not be interrupted. based on their lived experience, what this looks like for the girls is that there is at least a possibility that the mother will drive them over four (4) hours on a friday from after school, to spend two (2) or three (3) nights in queensland, then drive them back, either on sunday afternoon/evening or before dawn on monday (so that they arrive at school by 9:00am). if the mother’s intention is to do this regularly, then the court would be concerned, because in the past the mother has made this trip during times of severe weather patterns, when a child has required medical attention and despite it meaning that the mother has driven for over eight (8) hours without any significant rest. in addition, how alert the girls would be in school on the day of or after the trip is also unknown (although i accept this was not the subject of any particularly persuasive evidence before me). leaving aside then the impacts on the girls’ capacity to engage in schoolwork, but taking account of the evidence, the mother’s stated intention only reaffirms how impaired her parental capacity has become because of her desire to pursue the relationship with p and his family.   in may 2021, the mother collected the girls from school on a monday after they had spent time with the father and then decided they needed the rest of the week off from school (which meant that they missed out spending time with the father on the thursday night). the mother explained that the girls were sick but this did not stop her from then driving the girls to queensland for the week, (d) in late 2021 the mother relocated to queensland with the girls and (despite her evidence to the contrary) i am satisfied that she did not tell the father of her intention to do so beforehand, but rather informed him on 6 december 2021 as a fait accompli. even if i accept that the move was a temporary arrangement, she agreed that despite the transient nature of her relocation, she had not recently been looking for work back in the area near to where the girls live and that without this work it was improbable that she could secure and afford accommodation. her evidence was entirely unsatisfactory, (e) from early december 2021 onwards, the mother decided that she could home-school the girls remotely in queensland every other week of the school terms. it was common ground that on occasions the mother would collect the girls early from school on the monday when she was due to have them live with her for the week and drop them off late on the following monday when they returned to live with the father. it was common ground that the drive was over four hours each way and the mother would do the return trip in the one day. this meant that, for example, to collect the girls at the start of her week, the mother would be in the car for over eight hours, the last four or so of which was when the girls were also with her. conversely the mother’s decision meant that the girls travelled over four hours before they started school on the monday when they were returned to the local area. the mother saw no issue with this pattern of travel or any safety concerns for the girls. (f) by april 2022, u was openly opposed to a continuation of the home-schooling regime but the mother rejected any alternative which would require her to physically return the girls to the classroom. in one school record, she was recorded as saying that the girls’ wellbeing (in staying with her) was more important than their schooling. (g) on the last day of term 1 2022, the mother arrived at school before 3:00pm and removed the girls from their classrooms. she did so in contravention of the final orders and against the wishes of u. when asked to explain her reasoning, she said that the girls were aware of her plan because she had told them (but not the father) the night before and she wanted to maximise the time the girls spent with p and his children in town w on their holiday. again, the mother was unrepentant about her actions even though it entailed the girls not participating in the easter hat parade with their classmates and at which their maternal and paternal grandparents were to attend, (h) on 2 may 2022, the mother attended the school to collect the girls early. u and the mother were in discussions about the school’s concern that the mother was not following the final orders and the det’s expectations of parents in ensuring school attendance. the mother was unrepentant and called the police. the police attended the school and supported the school’s interpretation of the final orders but said that ultimately the dispute was outside of their remit. the mother left the school without the girls. the mother returned at 3:00pm and observed y’s legs with band-aids on them and y telling her she was in pain. the mother was highly critical of y’s presentation and the father’s failure to care for y, but nonetheless decided the best thing to do was to drive back over the queensland border. the mother was unrepentant about her part in the confrontation at the school, her decision to involve the police and despite y’s presentation, the necessity for her to travel immediately to the town x and seek medical treatment there rather than locally, and (i) in addition, i observe that even now, her alternative proposal identifies her intention to travel with the girls to queensland during school term weekends when they live with her, albeit she explicitly says that their school days will not be interrupted. based on their lived experience, what this looks like for the girls is that there is at least a possibility that the mother will drive them over four (4) hours on a friday from after school, to spend two (2) or three (3) nights in queensland, then drive them back, either on sunday afternoon/evening or before dawn on monday (so that they arrive at school by 9:00am). if the mother’s intention is to do this regularly, then the court would be concerned, because in the past the mother has made this trip during times of severe weather patterns, when a child has required medical attention and despite it meaning that the mother has driven for over eight (8) hours without any significant rest. in addition, how alert the girls would be in school on the day of or after the trip is also unknown (although i accept this was not the subject of any particularly persuasive evidence before me). leaving aside then the impacts on the girls’ capacity to engage in schoolwork, but taking account of the evidence, the mother’s stated intention only reaffirms how impaired her parental capacity has become because of her desire to pursue the relationship with p and his family.   in late 2021 the mother relocated to queensland with the girls and (despite her evidence to the contrary) i am satisfied that she did not tell the father of her intention to do so beforehand, but rather informed him on 6 december 2021 as a fait accompli. even if i accept that the move was a temporary arrangement, she agreed that despite the transient nature of her relocation, she had not recently been looking for work back in the area near to where the girls live and that without this work it was improbable that she could secure and afford accommodation. her evidence was entirely unsatisfactory, (e) from early december 2021 onwards, the mother decided that she could home-school the girls remotely in queensland every other week of the school terms. it was common ground that on occasions the mother would collect the girls early from school on the monday when she was due to have them live with her for the week and drop them off late on the following monday when they returned to live with the father. it was common ground that the drive was over four hours each way and the mother would do the return trip in the one day. this meant that, for example, to collect the girls at the start of her week, the mother would be in the car for over eight hours, the last four or so of which was when the girls were also with her. conversely the mother’s decision meant that the girls travelled over four hours before they started school on the monday when they were returned to the local area. the mother saw no issue with this pattern of travel or any safety concerns for the girls. (f) by april 2022, u was openly opposed to a continuation of the home-schooling regime but the mother rejected any alternative which would require her to physically return the girls to the classroom. in one school record, she was recorded as saying that the girls’ wellbeing (in staying with her) was more important than their schooling. (g) on the last day of term 1 2022, the mother arrived at school before 3:00pm and removed the girls from their classrooms. she did so in contravention of the final orders and against the wishes of u. when asked to explain her reasoning, she said that the girls were aware of her plan because she had told them (but not the father) the night before and she wanted to maximise the time the girls spent with p and his children in town w on their holiday. again, the mother was unrepentant about her actions even though it entailed the girls not participating in the easter hat parade with their classmates and at which their maternal and paternal grandparents were to attend, (h) on 2 may 2022, the mother attended the school to collect the girls early. u and the mother were in discussions about the school’s concern that the mother was not following the final orders and the det’s expectations of parents in ensuring school attendance. the mother was unrepentant and called the police. the police attended the school and supported the school’s interpretation of the final orders but said that ultimately the dispute was outside of their remit. the mother left the school without the girls. the mother returned at 3:00pm and observed y’s legs with band-aids on them and y telling her she was in pain. the mother was highly critical of y’s presentation and the father’s failure to care for y, but nonetheless decided the best thing to do was to drive back over the queensland border. the mother was unrepentant about her part in the confrontation at the school, her decision to involve the police and despite y’s presentation, the necessity for her to travel immediately to the town x and seek medical treatment there rather than locally, and (i) in addition, i observe that even now, her alternative proposal identifies her intention to travel with the girls to queensland during school term weekends when they live with her, albeit she explicitly says that their school days will not be interrupted. based on their lived experience, what this looks like for the girls is that there is at least a possibility that the mother will drive them over four (4) hours on a friday from after school, to spend two (2) or three (3) nights in queensland, then drive them back, either on sunday afternoon/evening or before dawn on monday (so that they arrive at school by 9:00am). if the mother’s intention is to do this regularly, then the court would be concerned, because in the past the mother has made this trip during times of severe weather patterns, when a child has required medical attention and despite it meaning that the mother has driven for over eight (8) hours without any significant rest. in addition, how alert the girls would be in school on the day of or after the trip is also unknown (although i accept this was not the subject of any particularly persuasive evidence before me). leaving aside then the impacts on the girls’ capacity to engage in schoolwork, but taking account of the evidence, the mother’s stated intention only reaffirms how impaired her parental capacity has become because of her desire to pursue the relationship with p and his family.   from early december 2021 onwards, the mother decided that she could home-school the girls remotely in queensland every other week of the school terms. it was common ground that on occasions the mother would collect the girls early from school on the monday when she was due to have them live with her for the week and drop them off late on the following monday when they returned to live with the father. it was common ground that the drive was over four hours each way and the mother would do the return trip in the one day. this meant that, for example, to collect the girls at the start of her week, the mother would be in the car for over eight hours, the last four or so of which was when the girls were also with her. conversely the mother’s decision meant that the girls travelled over four hours before they started school on the monday when they were returned to the local area. the mother saw no issue with this pattern of travel or any safety concerns for the girls. (f) by april 2022, u was openly opposed to a continuation of the home-schooling regime but the mother rejected any alternative which would require her to physically return the girls to the classroom. in one school record, she was recorded as saying that the girls’ wellbeing (in staying with her) was more important than their schooling. (g) on the last day of term 1 2022, the mother arrived at school before 3:00pm and removed the girls from their classrooms. she did so in contravention of the final orders and against the wishes of u. when asked to explain her reasoning, she said that the girls were aware of her plan because she had told them (but not the father) the night before and she wanted to maximise the time the girls spent with p and his children in town w on their holiday. again, the mother was unrepentant about her actions even though it entailed the girls not participating in the easter hat parade with their classmates and at which their maternal and paternal grandparents were to attend, (h) on 2 may 2022, the mother attended the school to collect the girls early. u and the mother were in discussions about the school’s concern that the mother was not following the final orders and the det’s expectations of parents in ensuring school attendance. the mother was unrepentant and called the police. the police attended the school and supported the school’s interpretation of the final orders but said that ultimately the dispute was outside of their remit. the mother left the school without the girls. the mother returned at 3:00pm and observed y’s legs with band-aids on them and y telling her she was in pain. the mother was highly critical of y’s presentation and the father’s failure to care for y, but nonetheless decided the best thing to do was to drive back over the queensland border. the mother was unrepentant about her part in the confrontation at the school, her decision to involve the police and despite y’s presentation, the necessity for her to travel immediately to the town x and seek medical treatment there rather than locally, and (i) in addition, i observe that even now, her alternative proposal identifies her intention to travel with the girls to queensland during school term weekends when they live with her, albeit she explicitly says that their school days will not be interrupted. based on their lived experience, what this looks like for the girls is that there is at least a possibility that the mother will drive them over four (4) hours on a friday from after school, to spend two (2) or three (3) nights in queensland, then drive them back, either on sunday afternoon/evening or before dawn on monday (so that they arrive at school by 9:00am). if the mother’s intention is to do this regularly, then the court would be concerned, because in the past the mother has made this trip during times of severe weather patterns, when a child has required medical attention and despite it meaning that the mother has driven for over eight (8) hours without any significant rest. in addition, how alert the girls would be in school on the day of or after the trip is also unknown (although i accept this was not the subject of any particularly persuasive evidence before me). leaving aside then the impacts on the girls’ capacity to engage in schoolwork, but taking account of the evidence, the mother’s stated intention only reaffirms how impaired her parental capacity has become because of her desire to pursue the relationship with p and his family.   by april 2022, u was openly opposed to a continuation of the home-schooling regime but the mother rejected any alternative which would require her to physically return the girls to the classroom. in one school record, she was recorded as saying that the girls’ wellbeing (in staying with her) was more important than their schooling. (g) on the last day of term 1 2022, the mother arrived at school before 3:00pm and removed the girls from their classrooms. she did so in contravention of the final orders and against the wishes of u. when asked to explain her reasoning, she said that the girls were aware of her plan because she had told them (but not the father) the night before and she wanted to maximise the time the girls spent with p and his children in town w on their holiday. again, the mother was unrepentant about her actions even though it entailed the girls not participating in the easter hat parade with their classmates and at which their maternal and paternal grandparents were to attend, (h) on 2 may 2022, the mother attended the school to collect the girls early. u and the mother were in discussions about the school’s concern that the mother was not following the final orders and the det’s expectations of parents in ensuring school attendance. the mother was unrepentant and called the police. the police attended the school and supported the school’s interpretation of the final orders but said that ultimately the dispute was outside of their remit. the mother left the school without the girls. the mother returned at 3:00pm and observed y’s legs with band-aids on them and y telling her she was in pain. the mother was highly critical of y’s presentation and the father’s failure to care for y, but nonetheless decided the best thing to do was to drive back over the queensland border. the mother was unrepentant about her part in the confrontation at the school, her decision to involve the police and despite y’s presentation, the necessity for her to travel immediately to the town x and seek medical treatment there rather than locally, and (i) in addition, i observe that even now, her alternative proposal identifies her intention to travel with the girls to queensland during school term weekends when they live with her, albeit she explicitly says that their school days will not be interrupted. based on their lived experience, what this looks like for the girls is that there is at least a possibility that the mother will drive them over four (4) hours on a friday from after school, to spend two (2) or three (3) nights in queensland, then drive them back, either on sunday afternoon/evening or before dawn on monday (so that they arrive at school by 9:00am). if the mother’s intention is to do this regularly, then the court would be concerned, because in the past the mother has made this trip during times of severe weather patterns, when a child has required medical attention and despite it meaning that the mother has driven for over eight (8) hours without any significant rest. in addition, how alert the girls would be in school on the day of or after the trip is also unknown (although i accept this was not the subject of any particularly persuasive evidence before me). leaving aside then the impacts on the girls’ capacity to engage in schoolwork, but taking account of the evidence, the mother’s stated intention only reaffirms how impaired her parental capacity has become because of her desire to pursue the relationship with p and his family.   on the last day of term 1 2022, the mother arrived at school before 3:00pm and removed the girls from their classrooms. she did so in contravention of the final orders and against the wishes of u. when asked to explain her reasoning, she said that the girls were aware of her plan because she had told them (but not the father) the night before and she wanted to maximise the time the girls spent with p and his children in town w on their holiday. again, the mother was unrepentant about her actions even though it entailed the girls not participating in the easter hat parade with their classmates and at which their maternal and paternal grandparents were to attend, (h) on 2 may 2022, the mother attended the school to collect the girls early. u and the mother were in discussions about the school’s concern that the mother was not following the final orders and the det’s expectations of parents in ensuring school attendance. the mother was unrepentant and called the police. the police attended the school and supported the school’s interpretation of the final orders but said that ultimately the dispute was outside of their remit. the mother left the school without the girls. the mother returned at 3:00pm and observed y’s legs with band-aids on them and y telling her she was in pain. the mother was highly critical of y’s presentation and the father’s failure to care for y, but nonetheless decided the best thing to do was to drive back over the queensland border. the mother was unrepentant about her part in the confrontation at the school, her decision to involve the police and despite y’s presentation, the necessity for her to travel immediately to the town x and seek medical treatment there rather than locally, and (i) in addition, i observe that even now, her alternative proposal identifies her intention to travel with the girls to queensland during school term weekends when they live with her, albeit she explicitly says that their school days will not be interrupted. based on their lived experience, what this looks like for the girls is that there is at least a possibility that the mother will drive them over four (4) hours on a friday from after school, to spend two (2) or three (3) nights in queensland, then drive them back, either on sunday afternoon/evening or before dawn on monday (so that they arrive at school by 9:00am). if the mother’s intention is to do this regularly, then the court would be concerned, because in the past the mother has made this trip during times of severe weather patterns, when a child has required medical attention and despite it meaning that the mother has driven for over eight (8) hours without any significant rest. in addition, how alert the girls would be in school on the day of or after the trip is also unknown (although i accept this was not the subject of any particularly persuasive evidence before me). leaving aside then the impacts on the girls’ capacity to engage in schoolwork, but taking account of the evidence, the mother’s stated intention only reaffirms how impaired her parental capacity has become because of her desire to pursue the relationship with p and his family.   on 2 may 2022, the mother attended the school to collect the girls early. u and the mother were in discussions about the school’s concern that the mother was not following the final orders and the det’s expectations of parents in ensuring school attendance. the mother was unrepentant and called the police. the police attended the school and supported the school’s interpretation of the final orders but said that ultimately the dispute was outside of their remit. the mother left the school without the girls. the mother returned at 3:00pm and observed y’s legs with band-aids on them and y telling her she was in pain. the mother was highly critical of y’s presentation and the father’s failure to care for y, but nonetheless decided the best thing to do was to drive back over the queensland border. the mother was unrepentant about her part in the confrontation at the school, her decision to involve the police and despite y’s presentation, the necessity for her to travel immediately to the town x and seek medical treatment there rather than locally, and (i) in addition, i observe that even now, her alternative proposal identifies her intention to travel with the girls to queensland during school term weekends when they live with her, albeit she explicitly says that their school days will not be interrupted. based on their lived experience, what this looks like for the girls is that there is at least a possibility that the mother will drive them over four (4) hours on a friday from after school, to spend two (2) or three (3) nights in queensland, then drive them back, either on sunday afternoon/evening or before dawn on monday (so that they arrive at school by 9:00am). if the mother’s intention is to do this regularly, then the court would be concerned, because in the past the mother has made this trip during times of severe weather patterns, when a child has required medical attention and despite it meaning that the mother has driven for over eight (8) hours without any significant rest. in addition, how alert the girls would be in school on the day of or after the trip is also unknown (although i accept this was not the subject of any particularly persuasive evidence before me). leaving aside then the impacts on the girls’ capacity to engage in schoolwork, but taking account of the evidence, the mother’s stated intention only reaffirms how impaired her parental capacity has become because of her desire to pursue the relationship with p and his family.   in addition, i observe that even now, her alternative proposal identifies her intention to travel with the girls to queensland during school term weekends when they live with her, albeit she explicitly says that their school days will not be interrupted. based on their lived experience, what this looks like for the girls is that there is at least a possibility that the mother will drive them over four (4) hours on a friday from after school, to spend two (2) or three (3) nights in queensland, then drive them back, either on sunday afternoon/evening or before dawn on monday (so that they arrive at school by 9:00am). if the mother’s intention is to do this regularly, then the court would be concerned, because in the past the mother has made this trip during times of severe weather patterns, when a child has required medical attention and despite it meaning that the mother has driven for over eight (8) hours without any significant rest. in addition, how alert the girls would be in school on the day of or after the trip is also unknown (although i accept this was not the subject of any particularly persuasive evidence before me). leaving aside then the impacts on the girls’ capacity to engage in schoolwork, but taking account of the evidence, the mother’s stated intention only reaffirms how impaired her parental capacity has become because of her desire to pursue the relationship with p and his family.
section 60cc(3)(i)
section 60cc(3)(j) (k)
section 60cc(3)(l)  what the father says to the girls, (b) what the father feeds the girls (in particular x), (c) what the father asks the girls to do to him, and (d) the father’s decision to expose the girls to guns.   what the father feeds the girls (in particular x), (c) what the father asks the girls to do to him, and (d) the father’s decision to expose the girls to guns.   what the father asks the girls to do to him, and (d) the father’s decision to expose the girls to guns.   the father’s decision to expose the girls to guns.
section 60cc(3)(m)  when she lived in the local area, and the girls lived with her and spent substantial and significant time with the father - the mother acted in a manner which did not support the promotion of the girls’ relationship with him,[50] and (b) when she did not live in local area and the girls lived equally between them, the mother’s behaviours escalated to the point where she was not only in conflict with the father but also with u over her decision to unilaterally remove the girls from school at the end of term 1 2022, in direct conflict with the final orders which provided that the girls were to live with the father until 3:00pm on the last day of term.   when she did not live in local area and the girls lived equally between them, the mother’s behaviours escalated to the point where she was not only in conflict with the father but also with u over her decision to unilaterally remove the girls from school at the end of term 1 2022, in direct conflict with the final orders which provided that the girls were to live with the father until 3:00pm on the last day of term.
conclusion - equal time or substantial & significant time?
equal time  the mother failing to inform the father of her intention to relocate before doing so in late 2020 and despite a notation made in orders of the court in november 2019 to the effect that she had no intention (in the foreseeable future) of moving away from town z, (b) the parties being unable to agree on the girls’ education in circumstances where the mother unilaterally engaged them in home-schooling against the father’s wishes and (ultimately) the requirements of the girls’ school, (c) the mother continuing to hold unsubstantiated concerns about the father’s ability to physically provide an appropriate diet for x and in a more general sense, a safe living environment, (d) the father reneging on an informal agreement in march 2022 which resulted in the girls not seeing their mother for three (3) weeks.   the parties being unable to agree on the girls’ education in circumstances where the mother unilaterally engaged them in home-schooling against the father’s wishes and (ultimately) the requirements of the girls’ school, (c) the mother continuing to hold unsubstantiated concerns about the father’s ability to physically provide an appropriate diet for x and in a more general sense, a safe living environment, (d) the father reneging on an informal agreement in march 2022 which resulted in the girls not seeing their mother for three (3) weeks.   the mother continuing to hold unsubstantiated concerns about the father’s ability to physically provide an appropriate diet for x and in a more general sense, a safe living environment, (d) the father reneging on an informal agreement in march 2022 which resulted in the girls not seeing their mother for three (3) weeks.   the father reneging on an informal agreement in march 2022 which resulted in the girls not seeing their mother for three (3) weeks.
substantial and significant time
conclusion – is it reasonably practicable?
the mother’s proposal
the father’s proposal
the icl’s proposal
reflections on the parties’ proposals  should the mother be unable to effectively quarantine her poor attitude from the girls when they are spending substantial and significant time with her - the frequent transitions between households that i intend to order will be a protective factor for the girls’ best interests and welfare, and (b) should the mother be unable to effectively quarantine her poor attitude from the girls when they spend time with her that is not substantial and significant - the time spent in the mother’s household (that i intend to order) will similarly be a protective factor for the girls’ best interests and welfare.   should the mother be unable to effectively quarantine her poor attitude from the girls when they spend time with her that is not substantial and significant - the time spent in the mother’s household (that i intend to order) will similarly be a protective factor for the girls’ best interests and welfare.   defined the parameters of what holiday time looks like so as to avoid the girls’ school days being unnecessarily shortened due to travel issues, and (b) prohibited the accommodation enjoyed by the girls during any weekend time spent with the mother being located outside a radius of 90-minute drive from their school, in the event that the mother does not return to the local area as foreshadowed by her, and (c) defined changeovers to occur at the girls’ school wherever practicable to do so.   prohibited the accommodation enjoyed by the girls during any weekend time spent with the mother being located outside a radius of 90-minute drive from their school, in the event that the mother does not return to the local area as foreshadowed by her, and (c) defined changeovers to occur at the girls’ school wherever practicable to do so.   defined changeovers to occur at the girls’ school wherever practicable to do so.
conclusion   they will benefit from having a meaningful relationship with both their parents, (b) the mother says that she is able to relocate her residence to within a 45-minute driving radius from the girls’ school, (c) the mother has some limitations to her capacity to support the girls having a meaningful relationship with the father, (d) the mother has some limitations on her capacity to meet the emotional and intellectual needs of the girls, (e) regular weekly time between the girls and the mother will ensure that they get a balanced view of each parents’ household and ameliorate any negativity that may arise in the mother’s household.   the mother says that she is able to relocate her residence to within a 45-minute driving radius from the girls’ school, (c) the mother has some limitations to her capacity to support the girls having a meaningful relationship with the father, (d) the mother has some limitations on her capacity to meet the emotional and intellectual needs of the girls, (e) regular weekly time between the girls and the mother will ensure that they get a balanced view of each parents’ household and ameliorate any negativity that may arise in the mother’s household.   the mother has some limitations to her capacity to support the girls having a meaningful relationship with the father, (d) the mother has some limitations on her capacity to meet the emotional and intellectual needs of the girls, (e) regular weekly time between the girls and the mother will ensure that they get a balanced view of each parents’ household and ameliorate any negativity that may arise in the mother’s household.   the mother has some limitations on her capacity to meet the emotional and intellectual needs of the girls, (e) regular weekly time between the girls and the mother will ensure that they get a balanced view of each parents’ household and ameliorate any negativity that may arise in the mother’s household.   regular weekly time between the girls and the mother will ensure that they get a balanced view of each parents’ household and ameliorate any negativity that may arise in the mother’s household.
the applicable law, analysis & conclusion – costs  the father is a professional and his exposure to his own legal costs arising from these proceedings is estimated to be about $45,000. the father has the ongoing care of the girls and in order to satisfy a costs order of $25,000 made against him as a result of the mother’s successful appeal, he has had to sell a property that he retained from the parties’ property settlement. (b) the mother has secured some work as a hospitality worker and uses that income to save for trips to nsw to spend time with the girls and to otherwise save for bond and future rent payments in the event she returns to nsw. she is otherwise reliant on p and other family members for financial support. whatever money the mother has received from the parties’ property settlement has been dissipated, most likely at least in part on legal fees in these protracted proceedings.   the mother has secured some work as a hospitality worker and uses that income to save for trips to nsw to spend time with the girls and to otherwise save for bond and future rent payments in the event she returns to nsw. she is otherwise reliant on p and other family members for financial support. whatever money the mother has received from the parties’ property settlement has been dissipated, most likely at least in part on legal fees in these protracted proceedings.   in the father’s case, he provides the girls with primary financial support and his ability to do so may be impinged by having to pay a costs order, and (b) in the mother’s case, she uses all her income to fund either trips to see the girls or to secure her return to nsw to see them even more, and her ability to do either of these things will be impinged by having to pay a costs order.   in the mother’s case, she uses all her income to fund either trips to see the girls or to secure her return to nsw to see them even more, and her ability to do either of these things will be impinged by having to pay a costs order.
associate: dated: 12 september 2022
dated: 12 september 2022
[1] unless otherwise specified any reference to legislation shall be a reference to the family law act 1975 (cth)[2] u v u at [80][3] morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230 at [72] & [73][4] referred to as ‘c’ with paragraphs and annexures identified in square brackets[5] referred to as ‘f’ with paragraphs identified in square brackets[6] referred to as ‘c’ with paragraphs and annexures identified in square brackets[7] referred to as ‘fr’ with numbered paragraphs identified [8] exhibit ‘m1’[9] rs [5][10] exhibit ‘f4’[11] rs[37][12] c [41a.][13] exhibit ‘f4’[14] c[50][15] c[44e.][16] c[6], rs[61][17] fr [40][18] c[15][19] c[8][20] c[45] & annex. g[21] c[102][22] c annex “e”[23] c [87], annex ‘c-5’[24] c [127a.xiv][25] c [127 xv.][26] c [127a.xv][27] fr [93][28] c [127f.][29] c [125][30] see her oral evidence about the june 2020 text messages[31] exhibit ‘m5’[32] fr [92][33] c [127c. & d.][34] c [128[35] exhibit ‘m1’[36] exhibit ‘m1’ at page 17[37] c [41 c.] & annex ‘c-3’[38] see fr-31[39] fr[93][40] c [69]-[72][41] c [25][42] c [22][43] c [128][44] f [3, 4 & 6][45] c [127 b.][46] c [127 c. – h.][47] noting, for example, the mother’s decision to remove the girls from school earlier this year to accommodate a family holiday in town w and the apparent misalignment of the two states’ school holidays.[48] see s60cc(3)(d)[49] see ams v aif at [145][50] see for example the events around 18 march 2021[51] see mazorski & albright[52] see u v u[53] see mrr v grr[54] see the june 2022 orders.[55] see u v u[56] exhibit ‘icl3’[57] section 117(3)