last updated: 13 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bosley & bosley [2022] fedcfamc2f 1232
orders
the court orders that:  from after school friday until 6:00pm sunday, each alternate weekend in school terms. (b) from after school friday until 4:00pm saturday, each alternate weekend in the other weeks, in school terms. (c) during school holidays, for the time in orders 3(a) and 3(b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5:00pm christmas eve, until 1:00pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2023, from 1:00pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 9:00am good friday, until 4:00pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 4:00pm on easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday. (g) on mother’s day from 5:00pm the night before until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   from after school friday until 4:00pm saturday, each alternate weekend in the other weeks, in school terms. (c) during school holidays, for the time in orders 3(a) and 3(b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5:00pm christmas eve, until 1:00pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2023, from 1:00pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 9:00am good friday, until 4:00pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 4:00pm on easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday. (g) on mother’s day from 5:00pm the night before until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   during school holidays, for the time in orders 3(a) and 3(b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5:00pm christmas eve, until 1:00pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2023, from 1:00pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 9:00am good friday, until 4:00pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 4:00pm on easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday. (g) on mother’s day from 5:00pm the night before until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5:00pm christmas eve, until 1:00pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2023, from 1:00pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 9:00am good friday, until 4:00pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 4:00pm on easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday. (g) on mother’s day from 5:00pm the night before until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5:00pm christmas eve, until 1:00pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2023, from 1:00pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 9:00am good friday, until 4:00pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 4:00pm on easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday. (g) on mother’s day from 5:00pm the night before until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5:00pm christmas eve, until 1:00pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2023, from 1:00pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day.  ) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2023, from 1:00pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day.   at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 9:00am good friday, until 4:00pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 4:00pm on easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday. (g) on mother’s day from 5:00pm the night before until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 9:00am good friday, until 4:00pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 4:00pm on easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday.  ) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 4:00pm on easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday.   on mother’s day from 5:00pm the night before until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   other times by mutual agreement.   at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1:00pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1:00pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (b) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 9:00am good friday, until 4:00pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 4:00pm easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday.   in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1:00pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1:00pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day.  ) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1:00pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day.   at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 9:00am good friday, until 4:00pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 4:00pm easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday.   in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2023, from 9:00am good friday, until 4:00pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 4:00pm easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday.  ) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2024, from 4:00pm easter saturday to 4:00pm easter monday.   by way of telephone, including facetime or skype, between 7:00pm and 7:30pm on each evening, and (b) such other times as requested by x and y.   such other times as requested by x and y.
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction  the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, (2) the children to live with their mother, (3) the children to spend defined time with their father each alternate weekend from friday to monday and in the other week from after school tuesday until the start of school wednesday, time during school holidays and time on special occasions.   the children to live with their mother, (3) the children to spend defined time with their father each alternate weekend from friday to monday and in the other week from after school tuesday until the start of school wednesday, time during school holidays and time on special occasions.   the children to spend defined time with their father each alternate weekend from friday to monday and in the other week from after school tuesday until the start of school wednesday, time during school holidays and time on special occasions.
1. orders one, three, four, five, six, seven, 12, 13, and 15 of the orders made by consent in the family court of australia at sydney on 10 april 2018 are discharged. 2. that the children [x] and [y] born [in] 2011 (‘the children’) live with their father. 3. that the children spend time with their mother as follows:
a. each alternate weekend from 5:00pm on friday until 7:00pm on sunday, b. during each school holiday period at the end of terms 1, 2, and 3, for seven consecutive nights incorporating the time in order (3)(a) and incorporating the time in order (3)(f) if easter falls in school holiday time, c. during the school holidays at the end of term of 4, for two blocks of seven consecutive nights at times agreed between the parties but failing agreement for the first and third weeks of such school holiday, the time commencing on the monday of each week, and with the time in order (3)(a) to be suspended during weeks 1 to 4 only of the christmas school holiday, d. on the children’s birthday by way of agreement and failing agreement from after school until 6:00pm during school days and from 10:00am until 1:00pm on weekends for years ending in order numbers and from after school until 8:00pm during school days and from 1:00pm until 8:00pm on weekends and for years ending in even numbers, unless order (3)(a) applies and the children are otherwise spending time with their mother, e. for christmas time in years ending in an even number from 3:00pm on christmas day at 6:00pm on boxing day and in years ending in an odd number from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 3:00pm on christmas day, f. at easter time, in years ending in an odd number from 9:00am on good friday until 4:00pm on easter saturday and in years ending in an even number, from 4:00pm on easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday, the time in order (3)(a) to be suspended during this period, g. on mother’s day, from 5:00pm the night before until 6:00pm on mother’s day, and h. at other times by mutual agreement between the parties
4. that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every two months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication and setting out any with errors given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder. 5. that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. 6. that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, [ms c], and so have the children reside other than with his mother, [ms c], the father must give notice to the mother and to the independent children’s lawyer no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children.
in the event that the respondent mother does not comply with the direction herein to file her response material, then the matter will proceed to undefended hearing on the basis of the applicant father’s application and evidence and any evidence presented by the independent children’s lawyer without further opportunity to the respondent mother to place evidence before the court.
the court has given advice to the respondent to consult with a legal aid duty solicitor at the lionel bowen building, 99 goulburn street, sydney, on level 4 on tuesday, 15 june 2021 to have a conference in relation to these proceedings.
but it seems that it was ultimately to no effect.
the court has, again, advised the respondent mother to attend to filing her response material in this matter and that she runs the risk of the matter proceeding on an undefended basis on the next occasion if she does not file her response material or if she files her response material after the deadline provide for in order 2.
the respondent mother has not complied with previous orders and has not filed any responding material in these proceedings.
the material relied upon  a case outline document prepared by ms jamieson and containing a minute of the orders sought by the father, (2) his amended initiating application filed for august 2021, (3) his affidavit adopted by electronic signature and dated 30 july 2021 and filed that day, (4) the affidavit of ms c, the paternal grandmother, adopted by electronic signature and dated 5 august 2021 and filed that day, and (5) the affidavit of dr d adopted by handwritten signature on 6 august 2021 and filed that day.   his amended initiating application filed for august 2021, (3) his affidavit adopted by electronic signature and dated 30 july 2021 and filed that day, (4) the affidavit of ms c, the paternal grandmother, adopted by electronic signature and dated 5 august 2021 and filed that day, and (5) the affidavit of dr d adopted by handwritten signature on 6 august 2021 and filed that day.   his affidavit adopted by electronic signature and dated 30 july 2021 and filed that day, (4) the affidavit of ms c, the paternal grandmother, adopted by electronic signature and dated 5 august 2021 and filed that day, and (5) the affidavit of dr d adopted by handwritten signature on 6 august 2021 and filed that day.   the affidavit of ms c, the paternal grandmother, adopted by electronic signature and dated 5 august 2021 and filed that day, and (5) the affidavit of dr d adopted by handwritten signature on 6 august 2021 and filed that day.   the affidavit of dr d adopted by handwritten signature on 6 august 2021 and filed that day.   exhibit a1 – letter dated 29 october 2019 from dr e, respiratory & sleep medicine physician to dr f in relation to the mother’s health and in particular in relation to review of the mother for excessive daytime hypersomnolence (also admitted into evidence at the interim hearing), (2) exhibit a2 – letter dated 21 november 2019 from dr g, consultant psychiatrist to dr e in relation to the mother’s referral for a psychiatric assessment prior to consideration of stimulant treatment for idiopathic hypersomnolence (also admitted into evidence at the interim hearing), (3) exhibit a3 – letter dated 21 june 2018 from dr h, consultant psychiatrist to dr j in relation to assessment of the mother for referral to “the dbt program at k clinic” (also admitted into evidence at the interim hearing), (4) exhibit a4 – mental health pre-admission form for the mother at healthscope dated 26 july 2018 (also admitted into evidence at the interim hearing), and (5) exhibit a5 – child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 23 december 2019 in relation to separate interviews with the parents on 19 december 2019 by family consultant ms l.   exhibit a2 – letter dated 21 november 2019 from dr g, consultant psychiatrist to dr e in relation to the mother’s referral for a psychiatric assessment prior to consideration of stimulant treatment for idiopathic hypersomnolence (also admitted into evidence at the interim hearing), (3) exhibit a3 – letter dated 21 june 2018 from dr h, consultant psychiatrist to dr j in relation to assessment of the mother for referral to “the dbt program at k clinic” (also admitted into evidence at the interim hearing), (4) exhibit a4 – mental health pre-admission form for the mother at healthscope dated 26 july 2018 (also admitted into evidence at the interim hearing), and (5) exhibit a5 – child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 23 december 2019 in relation to separate interviews with the parents on 19 december 2019 by family consultant ms l.   exhibit a3 – letter dated 21 june 2018 from dr h, consultant psychiatrist to dr j in relation to assessment of the mother for referral to “the dbt program at k clinic” (also admitted into evidence at the interim hearing), (4) exhibit a4 – mental health pre-admission form for the mother at healthscope dated 26 july 2018 (also admitted into evidence at the interim hearing), and (5) exhibit a5 – child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 23 december 2019 in relation to separate interviews with the parents on 19 december 2019 by family consultant ms l.   exhibit a4 – mental health pre-admission form for the mother at healthscope dated 26 july 2018 (also admitted into evidence at the interim hearing), and (5) exhibit a5 – child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 23 december 2019 in relation to separate interviews with the parents on 19 december 2019 by family consultant ms l.   exhibit a5 – child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 23 december 2019 in relation to separate interviews with the parents on 19 december 2019 by family consultant ms l.   exhibit icl1 – letter dated 25 march 2021 from ms m, psychologist n clinic addressed to whom it may concern in relation to the mothers mental health treatment progress at that time, ms m being the mother’s then treating psychologist, (2) exhibit icl2 – letter dated 4 august 2021 from dr d to ms jamieson in relation to the father’s treatment and care for mental health issues, and (3) exhibit icl3 – undated letter (referring to an email dated 27 july 2021), from ms o, principal of p school, to ms tin in relation to x.   exhibit icl2 – letter dated 4 august 2021 from dr d to ms jamieson in relation to the father’s treatment and care for mental health issues, and (3) exhibit icl3 – undated letter (referring to an email dated 27 july 2021), from ms o, principal of p school, to ms tin in relation to x.   exhibit icl3 – undated letter (referring to an email dated 27 july 2021), from ms o, principal of p school, to ms tin in relation to x.
the orders sought  that the parenting orders of the family court of australia dated 10 april 2018 are discharged in their entirety, being orders 1 – 22. (2) that the children, x and y born in 2018 live with the father. (3) that the father has sole parental responsibility in respect of the children’s long-term care, welfare and development, such long-term issues to include education, both current and future, religious and cultural upbringing, and health. (4) that the father will contact the mother before making a major long-term decision with respect to the children and attempt to come to an agreement and if an agreement cannot be reached, he will inform her of the decision that he has made. (5) that x spend time with the mother as follows: (a) from after school friday until 6 pm sunday, each alternate weekend in school terms. (b) from after school friday until 4 pm saturday, each alternate weekend in the other week, in school terms. (c) during school holidays, for the time in 3 (a) and 3 (b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement. (6) that the father is to encourage y to spend time with her mother in accordance with order 5 and otherwise y is to spend time with her mother by mutual agreement between the parties. (7) that the father spend time with the children, if not already in his care, as follows: (a) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (b) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 9 am good friday, until 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (8) during the periods in time in which the children are with either parent, they are at liberty to speak with the parent with whom they are not spending time: – (a) by way of telephone, including facetime or skype, between 7 pm and 7:30 pm on each evening, and (b) such other times as requested by x and y. (9) that each parent shall inform the other of any significant health, safety or welfare issues that occur whilst x and y are in their care, within 2 hours of the said event taking place. (10) that both parties are at liberty to attend any of x and y’s educational and sports events, in addition to all medical and extra-curricular activities. (11) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.   that the children, x and y born in 2018 live with the father. (3) that the father has sole parental responsibility in respect of the children’s long-term care, welfare and development, such long-term issues to include education, both current and future, religious and cultural upbringing, and health. (4) that the father will contact the mother before making a major long-term decision with respect to the children and attempt to come to an agreement and if an agreement cannot be reached, he will inform her of the decision that he has made. (5) that x spend time with the mother as follows: (a) from after school friday until 6 pm sunday, each alternate weekend in school terms. (b) from after school friday until 4 pm saturday, each alternate weekend in the other week, in school terms. (c) during school holidays, for the time in 3 (a) and 3 (b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement. (6) that the father is to encourage y to spend time with her mother in accordance with order 5 and otherwise y is to spend time with her mother by mutual agreement between the parties. (7) that the father spend time with the children, if not already in his care, as follows: (a) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (b) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 9 am good friday, until 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (8) during the periods in time in which the children are with either parent, they are at liberty to speak with the parent with whom they are not spending time: – (a) by way of telephone, including facetime or skype, between 7 pm and 7:30 pm on each evening, and (b) such other times as requested by x and y. (9) that each parent shall inform the other of any significant health, safety or welfare issues that occur whilst x and y are in their care, within 2 hours of the said event taking place. (10) that both parties are at liberty to attend any of x and y’s educational and sports events, in addition to all medical and extra-curricular activities. (11) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.   that the father has sole parental responsibility in respect of the children’s long-term care, welfare and development, such long-term issues to include education, both current and future, religious and cultural upbringing, and health. (4) that the father will contact the mother before making a major long-term decision with respect to the children and attempt to come to an agreement and if an agreement cannot be reached, he will inform her of the decision that he has made. (5) that x spend time with the mother as follows: (a) from after school friday until 6 pm sunday, each alternate weekend in school terms. (b) from after school friday until 4 pm saturday, each alternate weekend in the other week, in school terms. (c) during school holidays, for the time in 3 (a) and 3 (b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement. (6) that the father is to encourage y to spend time with her mother in accordance with order 5 and otherwise y is to spend time with her mother by mutual agreement between the parties. (7) that the father spend time with the children, if not already in his care, as follows: (a) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (b) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 9 am good friday, until 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (8) during the periods in time in which the children are with either parent, they are at liberty to speak with the parent with whom they are not spending time: – (a) by way of telephone, including facetime or skype, between 7 pm and 7:30 pm on each evening, and (b) such other times as requested by x and y. (9) that each parent shall inform the other of any significant health, safety or welfare issues that occur whilst x and y are in their care, within 2 hours of the said event taking place. (10) that both parties are at liberty to attend any of x and y’s educational and sports events, in addition to all medical and extra-curricular activities. (11) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.   that the father will contact the mother before making a major long-term decision with respect to the children and attempt to come to an agreement and if an agreement cannot be reached, he will inform her of the decision that he has made. (5) that x spend time with the mother as follows: (a) from after school friday until 6 pm sunday, each alternate weekend in school terms. (b) from after school friday until 4 pm saturday, each alternate weekend in the other week, in school terms. (c) during school holidays, for the time in 3 (a) and 3 (b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement. (6) that the father is to encourage y to spend time with her mother in accordance with order 5 and otherwise y is to spend time with her mother by mutual agreement between the parties. (7) that the father spend time with the children, if not already in his care, as follows: (a) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (b) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 9 am good friday, until 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (8) during the periods in time in which the children are with either parent, they are at liberty to speak with the parent with whom they are not spending time: – (a) by way of telephone, including facetime or skype, between 7 pm and 7:30 pm on each evening, and (b) such other times as requested by x and y. (9) that each parent shall inform the other of any significant health, safety or welfare issues that occur whilst x and y are in their care, within 2 hours of the said event taking place. (10) that both parties are at liberty to attend any of x and y’s educational and sports events, in addition to all medical and extra-curricular activities. (11) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.   that x spend time with the mother as follows: (a) from after school friday until 6 pm sunday, each alternate weekend in school terms. (b) from after school friday until 4 pm saturday, each alternate weekend in the other week, in school terms. (c) during school holidays, for the time in 3 (a) and 3 (b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement. (6) that the father is to encourage y to spend time with her mother in accordance with order 5 and otherwise y is to spend time with her mother by mutual agreement between the parties. (7) that the father spend time with the children, if not already in his care, as follows: (a) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (b) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 9 am good friday, until 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (8) during the periods in time in which the children are with either parent, they are at liberty to speak with the parent with whom they are not spending time: – (a) by way of telephone, including facetime or skype, between 7 pm and 7:30 pm on each evening, and (b) such other times as requested by x and y. (9) that each parent shall inform the other of any significant health, safety or welfare issues that occur whilst x and y are in their care, within 2 hours of the said event taking place. (10) that both parties are at liberty to attend any of x and y’s educational and sports events, in addition to all medical and extra-curricular activities. (11) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.   from after school friday until 6 pm sunday, each alternate weekend in school terms. (b) from after school friday until 4 pm saturday, each alternate weekend in the other week, in school terms. (c) during school holidays, for the time in 3 (a) and 3 (b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   from after school friday until 4 pm saturday, each alternate weekend in the other week, in school terms. (c) during school holidays, for the time in 3 (a) and 3 (b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   during school holidays, for the time in 3 (a) and 3 (b) and otherwise additional time by mutual agreement but for no more than 3 nights in one block. (d) on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   on x and y’s birthday, each year, by way of agreement. (e) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (f) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 5 pm christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day.  ) in years ending in odd numbers, commencing 2021, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day.   at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (g) on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 9 am good friday, under 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday.  ) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 4 pm on easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday.   on mothers day from 5 pm the night before until 6 pm on mothers day. (h) other times by mutual agreement.   that the father is to encourage y to spend time with her mother in accordance with order 5 and otherwise y is to spend time with her mother by mutual agreement between the parties. (7) that the father spend time with the children, if not already in his care, as follows: (a) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (b) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 9 am good friday, until 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (8) during the periods in time in which the children are with either parent, they are at liberty to speak with the parent with whom they are not spending time: – (a) by way of telephone, including facetime or skype, between 7 pm and 7:30 pm on each evening, and (b) such other times as requested by x and y. (9) that each parent shall inform the other of any significant health, safety or welfare issues that occur whilst x and y are in their care, within 2 hours of the said event taking place. (10) that both parties are at liberty to attend any of x and y’s educational and sports events, in addition to all medical and extra-curricular activities. (11) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.   that the father spend time with the children, if not already in his care, as follows: (a) at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (b) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 9 am good friday, until 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday. (8) during the periods in time in which the children are with either parent, they are at liberty to speak with the parent with whom they are not spending time: – (a) by way of telephone, including facetime or skype, between 7 pm and 7:30 pm on each evening, and (b) such other times as requested by x and y. (9) that each parent shall inform the other of any significant health, safety or welfare issues that occur whilst x and y are in their care, within 2 hours of the said event taking place. (10) that both parties are at liberty to attend any of x and y’s educational and sports events, in addition to all medical and extra-curricular activities. (11) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.   at christmas time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day. (b) at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 9 am good friday, until 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday.   in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 5 pm on christmas eve, under 1 pm christmas day afternoon, and (ii) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day.  ) in years ending in an even-number, commencing 2022, from 1 pm christmas day to 12 noon boxing day.   at easter time as follows: – (i) in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 9 am good friday, until 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday.   in years ending in an odd number, commencing 2021, from 9 am good friday, until 4 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday.  ) in years ending in even-numbered is, commencing 2022, from 4 pm easter saturday to 4 pm easter monday.   during the periods in time in which the children are with either parent, they are at liberty to speak with the parent with whom they are not spending time: – (a) by way of telephone, including facetime or skype, between 7 pm and 7:30 pm on each evening, and (b) such other times as requested by x and y. (9) that each parent shall inform the other of any significant health, safety or welfare issues that occur whilst x and y are in their care, within 2 hours of the said event taking place. (10) that both parties are at liberty to attend any of x and y’s educational and sports events, in addition to all medical and extra-curricular activities. (11) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.   by way of telephone, including facetime or skype, between 7 pm and 7:30 pm on each evening, and (b) such other times as requested by x and y.   that each parent shall inform the other of any significant health, safety or welfare issues that occur whilst x and y are in their care, within 2 hours of the said event taking place. (10) that both parties are at liberty to attend any of x and y’s educational and sports events, in addition to all medical and extra-curricular activities. (11) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.  ) that both parties are at liberty to attend any of x and y’s educational and sports events, in addition to all medical and extra-curricular activities. (11) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.  ) that both parties will be mindful of an attempt to make both x and y available to the other parent, should a weekend away or extended family outing be organised by the other parent and assist and facilitate both children to attend this family function. (12) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.  ) neither party shall denigrate the other or their family members in the presence or hearing of x and y and shall not support any third-party denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of x and y. (13) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.  ) that the mother attend upon her general practitioner at least every 2 months and obtain a medical report to be forwarded to the father setting out the current medication prescribed to the mother, confirmation or otherwise that the mother remains compliant with her medication, treatment, recommendations and referrals given to the mother for any specialist treatment for mental health issues and in relation to her sleep disorder and that the mother authorise by these orders her general medical practitioner or any other treating medical practitioner to provide to the father a medical report every 2 months and to communicate with the father any non-compliance or concerns the mother’s treaters may have in relation to the mother’s mental health. (14) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.  ) that in the event the mother suffers from a further episode of illness in relation to her mental health issues or her sleep disorder that requires hospitalisation, then the time that she is to spend with the children is to be suspended until such time as the mother’s treating medical practitioners have provided a written report to the father that her condition has returned to a satisfactory state. (15) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.  ) that in the event that the father intends to reside other than with his mother, ms c, and so have the children reside other than with his mother, ms c, the father must give notice to the mother no later than 14 days prior to such change of residence of his intention to so change his place of residence and the children’s place of residence and include details of the intended date of such change of residence and of his intended new place of residence for himself and the children. (16) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.  ) that the father must continue his treatment with dr d, or any other psychiatrist of his choosing, and must inform dr d, or any other treating psychiatrist, that if he requires hospitalisation, he must inform the mother within 24 hours of such occurrence, by email at ... com. (17) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.  ) that dr d, and any subsequent treating practitioner, of both the mother, the father and the children, are to be provided with a copy of these orders, along with the children’s schools. (18) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.  ) that the father will continue to facilitate counselling for the children, as recommended by their psychologist and/or general practitioner, and will give authority for the mother to obtain information regarding the children’s progress with any treating psychologist or counsellor. (19) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.  ) that if participation by the mother in any sessions is recommended by any psychologist or counsellor treating the children, the father will facilitate the children’s attendance, including y, and such attendance will be at the cost of the mother.   opposed the orders sought by the father that he have sole parental responsibility, (2) opposed that the children live with him, but in the event that an order was made that the children live with the father, the mother indicated that she agreed with the father’s order 5 in relation to the time that she should spend with the children except for: (a) 5(c), which she opposed on the basis that it was inadequate time, and (b) 5(e) on the basis that she sought that the arrangement as to odd and even years be reversed. (3) opposed the father’s order 6 in the sense that if the children were to live with the father then she sought that order 5 apply to both x and y, (4) agreed with orders 8 to 12 and 17 of the father’s orders, and (5) opposed orders 13 to 16, 18, and 19.   opposed that the children live with him, but in the event that an order was made that the children live with the father, the mother indicated that she agreed with the father’s order 5 in relation to the time that she should spend with the children except for: (a) 5(c), which she opposed on the basis that it was inadequate time, and (b) 5(e) on the basis that she sought that the arrangement as to odd and even years be reversed. (3) opposed the father’s order 6 in the sense that if the children were to live with the father then she sought that order 5 apply to both x and y, (4) agreed with orders 8 to 12 and 17 of the father’s orders, and (5) opposed orders 13 to 16, 18, and 19.   5(c), which she opposed on the basis that it was inadequate time, and (b) 5(e) on the basis that she sought that the arrangement as to odd and even years be reversed.   5(e) on the basis that she sought that the arrangement as to odd and even years be reversed.   opposed the father’s order 6 in the sense that if the children were to live with the father then she sought that order 5 apply to both x and y, (4) agreed with orders 8 to 12 and 17 of the father’s orders, and (5) opposed orders 13 to 16, 18, and 19.   agreed with orders 8 to 12 and 17 of the father’s orders, and (5) opposed orders 13 to 16, 18, and 19.   opposed orders 13 to 16, 18, and 19.
the evidence
major depressive disorder, recurrent, mod severe with melancholic features, in remission
and that his last hospitalisation was in february 2017. [dr d] reports that the father:
... has been consistently compliant with taking his medication. he does not experience any side-effects that would impact on his parental capacity.
on 24 may 2021, i was at home and had a call from the police. they told me that [ms bosley] had threatened self-harm during a phone conversation with a mortgage broker and that person had contacted the police. the police told me that [ms bosley] had refused to answer her door to the police despite them knocking, so they called the fire brigade to break down the door. she was not scheduled but visited by a mental health case worker from [region r] hospital ...
... has expressed a strong wish not spend time with [her mother]. each weekend, i have tried to encourage [y] to go with [x] and her mother. however she has refused.
should [y] wish to start spending time with her mother again, i will facilitate that at the same time that [x] spends. i will continue to encourage [y] to see and communicate with her mother and support her and their relationship.
i have no intention of changing the living arrangements. [mr bosley] and the children are welcome to continue to stay at my home. i enjoy having them with me.
i have witnessed [mr bosley] regularly attend with his psychiatrist and regularly take his medication. i have not observed any behaviour to make me concerned that he is not taking his medication or that he has any issues with his mental health.
there appears to be a long history of a poor co-parenting relationship with little direct communication between the parents, especially since late 2018/early 2019.
the law  whether the child spending equal time with each parent would be in the best interest of the child,[3] and (2) whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[4]   whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[4]
a discretionary judgment concerning the parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.[6]   assess whether that risk is an acceptable risk or an unacceptable risk, (2) if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (3) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.   if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (3) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.   decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.  ] in considering an allegation of sexual abuse, the court should not make a positive finding that the allegation is true unless the court is so satisfied according to the civil standard of proof, with due regard to the factors mentioned in briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 at 362 ... [23] no doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a positive finding that the allegation is well-founded. in all but the most extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be made respecting custody and access. there will be cases also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless ... [24] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child's welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  1] ... we accept as a matter of practice, a trial judge will almost inevitably be required in a case where sexual abuse allegations are raised to consider whether abuse has been proven on the balance of probabilities as well as considering whether or not an unacceptable risk of abuse exists ...  ] in his recent paper entitled ‘unacceptable risk – a return to basics’ the hon. john fogarty a.m. set out his summary of the principles emerging from m and m as follows:
1 the decisive issue is and always remains the best interests of that child. all other issues are subservient. 2 the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term ‘unacceptable risk’. it is an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable. 3 where past abuse of a child is alleged it is usually neither necessary nor desirable to reach a definitive conclusion on that issue. where, however, that is done the briginshaw civil standard of proof applies. 4 the circumstance, if it be so, that the allegation of past abuse is not proved in accordance with briginshaw, does not impede reliance upon those circumstances in determining whether there is an unacceptable risk. 5 the concentration in these cases should normally be upon the question whether there is an unacceptable risk to the child. 6 the onus of proof in reaching that conclusion is the ordinary civil standard. 7 but the components which go to make up that conclusion need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of unacceptable risk from the accumulation of factors, none or some only of which, are proved to that standard.
and thereafter expanded some points contained in the summary.  ] frequently, (i would respectfully venture, too frequently) “risk” is referred to as an all-embracing term, a “general” finding of which can (purportedly) be seen to have some form of “ipso facto consequences” for the orders made. yet, “risk” is, without more, but a convenient description, orders must, surely, address its constituent components which must, axiomatically, vary according to the circumstances of each case. [72] in that respect, it is both interesting and instructive to refer to what has been said about this issue first by the honourable john fogarty am, and, secondly, by an english author, (the latter qualified as both a psychiatrist and a barrister.) [73] the latter said:
risk assessment in any situation involves, in essence, the asking of the following questions: (1) what harmful outcome is potentially present in this situation? (2) what is the probability of this outcome coming about? (3) what risks are probable in this situation in the short, medium and long term? (4) what are the factors that could increase or decrease the risk that is probable? (5) what measures are available whose deployment could mitigate the risks that are probable? (b. mahendra, 'psychiatric risk assessment in family and child law' (2008) 38 family law 569).  ] mr fogarty, writing in the australian journal of family law said this (20 ajfl 249 at 254-5):
... the reality is that all courts deal with issues of "risk" and degrees of risk (however described) in various situations and that concept is increasingly used in legislation. risk is difficult to define in a way which is not ultimately circular. but it is an inevitable part of life at all its levels. it is inherently risky to breathe, eat, drink, walk, drive, work, invest and play. the world is full of different risks and consequences and everyone is prone to dangers. we confront varying levels of risk everyday. people frequently face potentially dangerous situations, not many live at home in complete isolation to avoid getting in harms way. most people try to avoid what they perceive to be risk, some willingly take on high risk activities. risk involves two component, the degree of "likelihood" of the happening of an event, and the possible consequences (good or bad) if it does [cases and citations omitted]. individuals in their assessment of some risks may focus more on one than the other of these components. but at some point it usually becomes necessary for that person to make a judgment of the risk and whether it can/should be taken. where the risk relates to a third person to whom one owes a responsibility, it is likely in the nature of things that the estimate will be conservative. risks are relative and usually involve trade-offs. crossing the road with oncoming traffic to catch the last connection to the airport involves the risk of being hit by a car or the risk of missing the plane. very much a balancing exercise of facts, experience and intuition, but essentially which risk carries the greater detriment (usually the car). then there is the common experience of a mother watching her child cross a road to go to school. the risk is seen as greater (although it may not be) because the consequences may be death or injury to the child and because the responsibilities of the mother will be seen by her as greater than for herself or another adult .... at times the courts and the legislature have attempted to give an indication of the content or quality of the risk -- otherwise “risk” may mean any risk, however small or unlikely. hence the use of adjectives such as “serious”, “grave”, “real”, “appreciable” and “unacceptable”.  ] i respectfully agree, as i also do with mr fogarty's statement (which also has echoes in the english author's statement earlier quoted) that:
... unacceptable risk in the high court's formulation [in m v m (1988) 166 clr 69] requires two separate steps. is there a risk, and is it unacceptable? the concentration by the high court is upon both the nature and the degree of risk in the particular case. its formulation is all about balance. in some cases a risk is "acceptable" when balanced against other factors and other orders. the object of safeguards is to convert an unacceptable situation to an acceptable one where that is feasible and is of "benefit to the child". it is, as i suggested earlier, calibrated to its use in individual cases. it is unrelated to the exoneration or otherwise of the alleged abuser, it is all about the bests interests of the child and protection from risk
is there benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents? ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.  ] the act sets out in s 60cc several matters for the court to consider in determining what is in the child’s best interests but does not seek to mandate that any one or other matter becomes determinative in any particular case. for the purposes of this case the legislation requires that there be a primary consideration given to the benefit of the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents but it does not purport to prescribe how that meaningful relationship is best promoted in the circumstances of any one case.
and later, at paragraph 36 said:  ] it seems to me that the final conclusion reached by the federal magistrate that the proposed relocation would jeopardise the relationship between the children and their father to an unacceptable extent was not at all consistent with the evidence that was before the federal magistrate. even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.  0] ... to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child... those adjectives mean that children need their parents to lead by example about self-discipline. children need to learn to develop the ability to relate to others. they need to learn about the privileges and responsibility which will devolve upon them as parents. those are fundamental parts of the meaningful relationship. ...
it is not open to a judge to use section 144 of the evidence act to “inform” him or herself of matters in respect of which reasonable minds might differ.
section 60cc – the primary considerations
section 60cc – the additional considerations as relevant.
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the children’s views.
the nature of the relationship of the children with each of the children’s parents and other persons including grandparents.
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the children, to spend time with the children, and to communicate with the children.
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parents obligations to maintain the children.
the likely effect of any change in the children circumstances, including the likely effect on the children of any separation from either of their parents or maternal grandmother.
the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the children’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.
the capacity of each of the children’s parents to provide for the needs of the children, including their emotional and intellectual needs.
you assert the children are at risk with the father, but you have taken no steps in the past three years to seek to remove the children from his day-to-day care and into your care. how do you explain that?
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background, including lifestyle, culture and traditions, of the children and of either of the children’s parents, and any other relevant characteristics of the children that the court thinks are relevant.
the attitude to the children, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the children’s parents.
any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family.
parental responsibility
what parenting orders are property be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration?
associate: dated: 12 september 2022
dated: 12 september 2022
[1] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(2).[2] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(4).[3] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(a).[4] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(b).[5] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(c).[6] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21, [18].[7] briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34; (1938) 60 clr 336.