last updated: 20 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
trenton & rasmussen [2022] fedcfamc2f 1254
orders
the court orders that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
mcclelland dcj:
the relevant statutory provisions applicable to proceedings in relation to children are set out in part vii of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”). section 60b sets out the objects and principles of part vii. these are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by:   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.
section 60b(4) notes that an additional object of part vii of the act is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child (“the convention”). article 19 of the convention requires parties to the convention to take steps, including through “judicial involvement”, to: protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the child. more generally, the act makes clear that in exercising its jurisdiction, the court has a responsibility to “protect the rights of children and to promote their welfare” (s 43(1)(c)), and to protect them from family violence (s 43(1)(ca)). the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility section 61da(1) provides that the court must apply a presumption that “it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child”. section 61da(4) provides that the presumption “may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child”. in this matter both parties seek an order for equal shared parental responsibility.[1] i will subsequently discuss why despite some reservations that i have, such an order is appropriate. paramount consideration in making parenting orders section 60ca provides that, in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to the child, the court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. this is also confirmed in section 65daa. section 60cc sets out the list of matters that the court must consider in determining what is in the child’s best interests. whilst the act requires the court to consider all section 60cc factors, the central issue in these proceedings is balancing the primary considerations set out in section 60cc(2) against one another. those considerations are:   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
in balancing these considerations, section 60cc(2a) of the act requires the court to give greater weight to the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence (s 60cc(2)(b)). additional considerations section 60cc(3) sets out additional considerations in determining what is in the child’s best interests. at this point it is sufficient to note that, broadly, those considerations deal with the following matters: issues relating to the children - their views, level of maturity, culture and relationships. issues relating to the parents – decision making, time spent with children, fulfilled obligations, attitude, capacity and exercise of responsibility. issues of family violence. effect of change. practical difficulty of implementation of orders. avoiding further proceedings. other relevant matters.  tnotes omitted) per the original)
3.1 august 2013, on two occasions, for a period of no more than 1 hour, 3.2 december 2013, for a period of 4 hours, 3.3 january 2014, for a period of 1 to 2 hours, 3.4 march 2014, for a period of 2 hours, 3.5 may 2014, for a period of 2 hours, 3.6 september 2014, for a period of 1 hour, and, 3.7 january 2015, for a period of 1 and a half hours.
associate: dated: 14 september 2022
dated: 14 september 2022