last updated: 20 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
manuel & pinner (no 3) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1235
orders
the court notes that:
on a final basis, the court orders by consent that:
the court further orders that:
parental responsibility
living arrangements  during school terms: (i) from after school (or 3:00pm if x does not attend school that day) on the friday that falls at the conclusion of weeks 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 of the school term until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday, and (b) during the school holiday periods at the conclusion of terms 1, 2 and 3: (i) from 9:00am on the first monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the following monday, (c) during the school holiday period commencing at the conclusion of term 4: (i) from 9:00am on the first monday of the holiday period until 9:00am the following monday, (ii) from 9:00am on the third monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fifth monday of the holiday period.   from after school (or 3:00pm if x does not attend school that day) on the friday that falls at the conclusion of weeks 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 of the school term until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday, and   during the school holiday periods at the conclusion of terms 1, 2 and 3: (i) from 9:00am on the first monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the following monday, (c) during the school holiday period commencing at the conclusion of term 4: (i) from 9:00am on the first monday of the holiday period until 9:00am the following monday, (ii) from 9:00am on the third monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fifth monday of the holiday period.   from 9:00am on the first monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the following monday,   during the school holiday period commencing at the conclusion of term 4: (i) from 9:00am on the first monday of the holiday period until 9:00am the following monday, (ii) from 9:00am on the third monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fifth monday of the holiday period.   from 9:00am on the first monday of the holiday period until 9:00am the following monday, (ii) from 9:00am on the third monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fifth monday of the holiday period.  ) from 9:00am on the third monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fifth monday of the holiday period.   during school terms: (i) from after school (or 3:00pm if x does not attend school that day) on the friday that falls at the conclusion of weeks 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 of the school term until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday, and (b) during the school holiday periods at the conclusion of terms 1, 2 and 3: (i) from 9:00am on the second monday of the holiday period until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday, (c) during the school holiday period commencing at the conclusion of term 4: (i) from 9:00am on the second monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fourth monday of the holiday period, (ii) from 9:00am on the sixth monday of the holiday period until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday.   from after school (or 3:00pm if x does not attend school that day) on the friday that falls at the conclusion of weeks 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 of the school term until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday, and   during the school holiday periods at the conclusion of terms 1, 2 and 3: (i) from 9:00am on the second monday of the holiday period until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday, (c) during the school holiday period commencing at the conclusion of term 4: (i) from 9:00am on the second monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fourth monday of the holiday period, (ii) from 9:00am on the sixth monday of the holiday period until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday.   from 9:00am on the second monday of the holiday period until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday,   during the school holiday period commencing at the conclusion of term 4: (i) from 9:00am on the second monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fourth monday of the holiday period, (ii) from 9:00am on the sixth monday of the holiday period until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday.   from 9:00am on the second monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fourth monday of the holiday period, (ii) from 9:00am on the sixth monday of the holiday period until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday.  ) from 9:00am on the sixth monday of the holiday period until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) on the following monday.
telephone communication  with his mother each saturday that he is in the father’s care, with the mother to initiate the call at 7:00pm, and (b) at any other time as sought/requested by x to either parent.   at any other time as sought/requested by x to either parent.
christmas  in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter: (i) from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day with his father, (ii) from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with his mother, (b) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter: (i) from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day with his mother, (ii) from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with his father.   from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day with his father, (ii) from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with his mother,  ) from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with his mother,   in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter: (i) from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day with his mother, (ii) from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with his father.   from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day with his mother, (ii) from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with his father.  ) from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with his father.
special occasions  x live with his mother from 9:00am each mother’s day until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) the following day, (b) x live with his father from 9:00am each father’s day until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) the following day, (c) on x’s birthday each year, the parent with whom he is living make him available to spend time with the other parent from after school (or 4:00pm if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm, (d) if the mother’s birthday or the father’s birthday falls on a day when x is living with the parent not having the birthday, the parent with whom x is living make him available to spend time with the other parent from after school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm, (e) on the birthday of any of x’s siblings, the parent with whom x is living shall facilitate x spending time with the sibling’s family on the sibling’s birthday from after school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm.   x live with his father from 9:00am each father’s day until before school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) the following day, (c) on x’s birthday each year, the parent with whom he is living make him available to spend time with the other parent from after school (or 4:00pm if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm, (d) if the mother’s birthday or the father’s birthday falls on a day when x is living with the parent not having the birthday, the parent with whom x is living make him available to spend time with the other parent from after school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm, (e) on the birthday of any of x’s siblings, the parent with whom x is living shall facilitate x spending time with the sibling’s family on the sibling’s birthday from after school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm.   on x’s birthday each year, the parent with whom he is living make him available to spend time with the other parent from after school (or 4:00pm if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm, (d) if the mother’s birthday or the father’s birthday falls on a day when x is living with the parent not having the birthday, the parent with whom x is living make him available to spend time with the other parent from after school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm, (e) on the birthday of any of x’s siblings, the parent with whom x is living shall facilitate x spending time with the sibling’s family on the sibling’s birthday from after school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm.   if the mother’s birthday or the father’s birthday falls on a day when x is living with the parent not having the birthday, the parent with whom x is living make him available to spend time with the other parent from after school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm, (e) on the birthday of any of x’s siblings, the parent with whom x is living shall facilitate x spending time with the sibling’s family on the sibling’s birthday from after school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm.   on the birthday of any of x’s siblings, the parent with whom x is living shall facilitate x spending time with the sibling’s family on the sibling’s birthday from after school (or 9:00am if x does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm.
changeover  changeover is to occur at x’s school if the changeover coincides with a time x is at school, and (b) changeover at all other times is to occur by the parent with whom x is about to commence living collecting him from the other parent’s residence.   changeover at all other times is to occur by the parent with whom x is about to commence living collecting him from the other parent’s residence.
travel  the travel dates fall within x’s time with the parent proposing the travel pursuant to these orders, (b) the parent proposing the travel advises the other parent of their intended travel, including location/s and dates, at least 60 days prior to the date of travel, and (c) the parent proposing the travel provides the other parent with copies of x’s flight details at least 21 days prior to travel.   the parent proposing the travel advises the other parent of their intended travel, including location/s and dates, at least 60 days prior to the date of travel, and (c) the parent proposing the travel provides the other parent with copies of x’s flight details at least 21 days prior to travel.   the parent proposing the travel provides the other parent with copies of x’s flight details at least 21 days prior to travel.
sharing of information  x seriously injuring himself, or falling seriously ill, (b) x requiring urgent medical treatment by a medical practitioner and/or ambulance crew, and (c) x being admitted to hospital.   x requiring urgent medical treatment by a medical practitioner and/or ambulance crew, and (c) x being admitted to hospital.   x being admitted to hospital.
x’s counsellor
the father’s psychologist
parenting program
restraints  abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent, their family or their partner to, or in front of, x, and (b) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed, or intended for use, in these proceedings to, with, or in the presence or hearing of, x, other than for the purposes of explaining the effect of these orders to him.   discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed, or intended for use, in these proceedings to, with, or in the presence or hearing of, x, other than for the purposes of explaining the effect of these orders to him.
costs
other
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
orders sought by the applicant
parental responsibility that the mother and father have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, [x], born [in] 2010 (“the child”). that the father have sole parental responsibility for the child, [x], born in 2010 (“the child”). care arrangements that the child live with the mother and father on a week about basis, with changeover to occur after school or 4:00pm each monday. that, notwithstanding these orders, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties: the child shall spend time with the mother from 9:00am on mother’s day until after school or 4:00pm the following day, the child shall spend time with the father from 9:00am on father’s day until after school or 4:00pm the following day, the child’s birthday, on which the parent with whom the child is living shall facilitate the child spending time with the other parent from after school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) until 8:00pm, the parent with whom the child is living shall facilitate the child spending time with the sibling’s family on the sibling’s birthday from after school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) until 8:00pm, that on each of the parent’s birthdays, if the birthday parent does not have care of the child on their birthday, the non-birthday parent shall facilitate time between the child and the birthday parent from after school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) until 7:00pm. that, for the purposes of these orders: changeover is to occur at the child’s school on the days that he is attending there, and changeover at all other times is to occur by the parent with whom the child is about to commence living with collecting the child from the other parent’s residence. absent any agreement between the parties in writing, the child spend time with his parents at christmas as follows: in 2018 and each alternate year thereafter, from 4:00pm christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day with his father, from 4:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day with his mother. in 2019 and each alternate year thereafter, from 4:00pmm christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day with his mother, from 4:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day with his father. the child is to have a single general practitioner being [v medical centre, w street, suburb v], act and, the primary general practitioner is to be [dr y], if [dr y] is unavailable then the child can be seen by [dr z] or [dr ab] or, in the event that all of those doctors are unavailable then the child can be taken to another doctor with the details to be provided to the other parent within 24 hours, in the event that these doctors cease their practice then the father shall choose a new general practitioner for the child, that the child attends [c school] and that neither parent shall change that enrolment unless otherwise agreed in writing. that the child will attend [c school] from 2022 and that, both parents will do all acts and things so as to facilitate the enrolment, neither parent shall change that enrolment unless otherwise agreed in writing. that the child will attend [c school] from 2022. that the child will attend [region ac school] from 2026. if for any reason the parent with whom the child is residing is unable to care for the child overnight, the child shall remain in that parent’s residence to be cared for overnight by that parent’s partner. if for any reason the resident parent’s partner is unable to care for the child overnight, the other parent shall be given the first option for the child in their absence for that overnight only. travel that in the event that either parent proposes to travel interstate overnight with the child, the travelling parent shall provide a minimum of 24 hours’ notice to the other parent. that the parents do all acts and things so as to facilitate the issue of a passport for the child and facilitate the renewal thereof. that the parents do all acts and things so as to facilitate the issue of new zealand citizenship to the child. that each parent be permitted to travel internationally with the child provided that the travelling parent provides to the other parent, 30 days prior to their intended travel (or 7 days prior if travelling to new zealand and the travel does not impact on the child’s time with the other parent), the following: all accommodation details, details of flights and other travel arrangements, contact details for the child whilst the child is away, and a proposal for makeup time (if applicable). that each parent be permitted to have a period of 14 consecutive days during the summer school holidays for an extended holiday, the parent wanting to take such an extended holiday is to give at least 2 months notice to the other parent. each parent facilitate this by suspending the normal week about care arrangement to allow this holiday, and the child have 2 weeks with each parent to ensure equal time. that the child be able to attend the [event b] event in 2021 and every alternate year with his father and, the mother facilitates swapping up to 4 days/nights to allow this to occur. that the child be able to attend the [event b] event in 2022 and every alternate year with his father and, the mother facilitates swapping up to 4 days/nights to allow this to occur. that the child be able to attend the [ad concert] [in] 2022 with his father and, the mother facilitates swapping up to 4 days/nights to allow this to occur. if the event is rescheduled then the mother will facilitate swapping of the new dates. communication the child is to have telephone communication with the non-resident parent each tuesday, wednesday and sunday at 6:00pm with the non-resident parent to initiate the call, or at any other time that the child expresses a wish to do so.’ the child is to have his own mobile phone that: is supplied by the father, the monthly cost for the phone account will be paid for by the father with the mother to reimburse the father 50% on the 1st of every month, the parents are to ensure that the phone is charged at all times, and the parents are to ensure that the phone is turned on when phone calls are to take place at scheduled times and accessible by the child at all times within 8:00am and 8:00pm. that each parent is to email the other parent before 8:00pm on the monday after the child has spent the week with them and include, but not limited to: general update on the child’s week details on any upcoming events details on any illnesses that each parent keep the other informed of their current residential address, mobile and/or landline telephone numbers and email address, and advise the other parent of any change thereto within 7 days of such change. that each of the parties, their servants and agents be hereby restrained by injunction from: abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other party, their family or their partner to, or in front of, the child, and discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with, or in the presence of hearing of, the child and from permitting any other person to do so. that both parents be permitted to liaise directly with the children’s school and sporting bodies to receive school notices, information, newsletters, school reports, school photographs and any other necessary information about the children’s progress. that each party is at liberty to attend at the child’s school for the purposes of any function or activity normally attended by parents. that in the event of childhood illness or emergency the parent with whom the child is living with shall contact the other parent forthwith to inform them. that each party shall keep the other informed of: the name and contact details for each of the children’s doctors, health care and other treatment providers, and any medical condition, significant illness, medical emergency or other significant health condition suffered by the child, and each parent shall comply with all directions and advice from treating medical professionals. that pursuant to sections 62b and 65da of the family law act 1975 the particulars of the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may follow if a person contravenes these orders and details of who can assist the parties adjust to and comply with an order are set out in the fact sheet attached hereto and these particulars are included in these orders. the parents agree to review these orders upon there being a significant change in the child’s circumstances. the parents intend to participate in dispute resolution in the event a disagreement arises in relation to these orders. neither parent shall relocate with the child from the canberra region unless agreed in writing. notation it is noted that the father intends to travel with the child in alternate years in january to new zealand to allow the child to spend time with his paternal family.
orders sought by the respondent
previous orders that all previous orders in relation to the child, [x], born [in] 2010 ([x]), are hereby discharged. parental responsibility that the mother have sole parental responsibility for [x]. living arrangements that [x] live with his mother. that each of the parents take all reasonable steps to ensure that [x] spends time with his father in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter as follows: during school terms: from after school (or 3:00pm if [x] does not attend school that day) on the friday that falls at the conclusion of weeks 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 of the school term until before school (or 9:00am if [x] does not attend school that day) on the following monday, and during the school holiday periods at the conclusion of terms 1, 2 and 3: from 9:00am on the first monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the following monday, during the school holiday period commencing at the conclusion of term 4: from 9:00am on the first monday of the holiday period until 9:00am the following monday, from 9:00am on the third monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fifth monday of the holiday period. that each of the parents take all reasonable steps to ensure that [x] spends time with his father in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter as follows: during school terms: from after school (or 3:00pm if [x] does not attend school that day) on the friday that falls at the conclusion of weeks 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 of the school term until before school (or 9:00am if [x] does not attend school that day) on the following monday, and during the school holiday periods at the conclusion of terms 1, 2 and 3: from 9:00am on the second monday of the holiday period until before school (or 9:00am if [x] does not attend school that day) on the following monday, during the school holiday period commencing at the conclusion of term 4: from 9:00am on the second monday of the holiday period until 9:00am on the fourth monday of the holiday period, from 9:00am on the sixth monday of the holiday period until before school (or 9:00am if [x] does not attend school that day) on the following monday. telephone communication that each of the parents take all reasonable steps to ensure that [x] communicates with this father each wednesday, with the father to initiate the call at 7:00pm. that each of the parents take all reasonable steps to ensure that [x] communicates with his mother each saturday that he is in the father’s care, with the mother to initiate the call at 7:00pm. christmas that each of the parents take all reasonable steps to ensure that [x] spends time with his parents at christmas time as follows: in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day with his father, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with his mother, in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day with his mother, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with his father. special occasions that, notwithstanding these orders, and unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents: [x] live with his mother from 9:00am each mother’s day until before school (or 9:00am if [x] does not attend school that day) the following day, [x] live with his father from 9:00am each father’s day until before school (or 9:00am if [x] does not attend school that day) the following day, on [x]’s birthday each year, the parent with whom he is living make him available to spend time with the other parent from after school (or 4:00pm if [x] does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm, if the mother’s birthday or the father’s birthday falls on a day when [x] is living with the parent not having the birthday, the parent with whom [x] is living make him available to spend time with the other parent from after school (or 9:00am if [x] does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm, on the birthday of any of [x]’s siblings, the parent with whom [x] is living shall facilitate [x] spending time with the sibling’s family on the sibling’s birthday from after school (or 9:00am if [x] does not attend school that day) until 8:00pm. changeover that, for the purposes of these orders: changeover is to occur at [x]’s school if the changeover coincides with a time [x] is at school, and changeover at all other times is to occur by the parent with whom [x] is about to commence living collecting him from the other parent’s residence. travel that, in the event that either parent proposes to travel interstate overnight with [x], the travelling parent shall advise the other parent of their intended travel at least 24 hours prior to leaving. that the parents do all things necessary to facilitate the issue of a passport for [x], and facilitate the renewal of the passport prior to the passport expiring, at their joint cost. that, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, the parents be permitted to take or send [x] to any country outside the commonwealth of australia where there is a “level 1” advice level in place as issued by the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade, provided that: the travel dates fall within [x]’s time with the parent proposing the travel pursuant to these orders, the parent proposing the travel advises the other parent of their intended travel, including location/s and dates, at least 60 days prior to the date of travel, and the parent proposing the travel provides the other parent with copies of [x]’s flight details at least 21 days prior to travel. sharing of information that each parent keep the other informed of their current resident address, mobile telephone number and email address, and advise the other of any change thereto within 7 days of any change. that each parent notify the other as soon as practicable of the following: [x] seriously injuring himself, or falling seriously ill, [x] requiring urgent medical treatment by a medical practitioner and/or ambulance crew, and [x] being admitted to hospital. that the mother, within 14 days of the date of these orders, authorise [x]’s school to provide the father with copies of all school reports, any other reports on school progress and behavioural issues, and all school circulars in relation to x. [x]’s counsellor that the mother do all things necessary to ensure that [x] attends upon a counsellor or psychologist ([x]’s counsellor) as needed, or as recommended by [x]’s counsellor. that the mother request that [x]’s counsellor speak to both parents about [x]’s emotional needs, and provide strategies to the parents for supporting [x]. that the mother request that [x]’s counsellor provide family counselling to [x] and the father to improve [x]’s confidence in sharing his emotions, opinions and wishes with his father. the father’s psychologist that the father attend upon a psychologist (the father’s psychologist) for the purposes of exploring his patterns of emotional regulation and conflict management. that, prior to any appointment with the father’s psychologist, the father provide to the father’s psychologist a copy of the family report dated 16 may 2022. parenting program that the parents participate in a parenting adolescents program, such as the ‘tuning into teens’ program. restraints that each of the parents, their servants and agents, be and are hereby restrained by injunction from: abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent, their family or their partner to, or in front of, [x], and discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed, or intended for use, in these proceedings to, with, or in the presence or hearing of, [x], other than for the purposes of explaining the effect of these orders to him. that the father be, and is hereby, restrained by injunction from contacting or attending [x]’s school without the mother’s written consent. that the father be, and is hereby, restrained from attending any of [x]’s sporting, extracurricular or social events during [x]’s time with his mother pursuant to these orders, without the mother’s written consent. vexatious litigant that pursuant to section 102qb(1)(b) of the family law act 1975 the father be declared a vexatious litigant and prohibited from instituting proceedings in the federal circuit and family court of australia without first obtaining leave of the court.
orders sought by the independent children’s lawyer
parental responsibility the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child, [x], born [in] 2010, subject to order 3 herein. in exercising sole parental responsibility for the child in accordance with order 2 herein, the mother shall: -   give the father reasonable notice of the decision to be made, (b) give the father a reasonable opportunity to express any views, (c) take into account any views expressed by the father, and (d) advise the father of her decision as soon as practicable.
living arrangements [x] shall live with the mother and spend time with the father as agreed and failing agreement, as follows: - during school terms (a) commencing in week 1 of the school term and each alternate week thereafter, from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm thursday to the commencement of school or 9.00am the following monday, and (b) commencing in week 2 of each school term and each alternate week thereafter from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm thursday to the commencement of school or 9.00am friday. during school holiday periods at the conclusion of terms 1, 2 and 3   commencing in week 1 of the school term and each alternate week thereafter, from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm thursday to the commencement of school or 9.00am the following monday, and (b) commencing in week 2 of each school term and each alternate week thereafter from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm thursday to the commencement of school or 9.00am friday.   commencing in week 2 of each school term and each alternate week thereafter from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm thursday to the commencement of school or 9.00am friday.   term school holiday time commences at 10.00am on the day following the last day requiring [x]’s attendance at school and concludes at 6.00pm on the last day prior to attendance at school the following term. (d) where the school holiday period (including the first and last day of the school holiday period per paragraph (c), above) comprises an uneven number of days changeover is to take place at 2.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period. (e) where the school holiday period (including the first and last day of the school holiday period per paragraph (c), above) comprises an even number of days, changeover shall occur at 6.00pm on the final day of the first half of the school holidays. for the avoidance of doubt, where the school holiday period comprises 16 days, changeover shall take place at 6.00pm on day 8. (f) for the first half of the school holiday periods in years ending in an even number and the second half of the school holiday period in years ending with an odd number.
christmas / new year school holidays   christmas school holidays commence at 10.00am on the day following the last day requiring attendance at school in term 4 and conclude at 6.00pm on the day prior to [x] commencing school in the following school year. (h) for the first half of the school holiday period in years ending in an even number (at the commencement of the holiday period) and the second half of the school holiday period in years ending with an odd number (at the commencement of the holiday period).
special days notwithstanding any other order, unless otherwise agreed in writing, [x] shall spend time with his parents at christmas as follows: in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter:   from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day with the father, (b) from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with the mother,
in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter:   from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day with the mother, (d) from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day with the father. notwithstanding any other order, unless otherwise agreed in writing, [x] shall spend time with each of his parents on special occasions as follows: (a) from 9.00am mother’s day to 9.00am the following day, with the mother, (b) from 9.00am father’s day to 9.00am the following day, with the father, (c) on his birthday, with the parent whom he is not otherwise spending time pursuant to orders 4 (g) and (h) hereof, from 9.00am to 2.00pm, (d) on each of the parents birthdays, with that parent, from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm to 8.00pm on a school day and from 9.00am to 2.00pm on a non-school day, (e) on his brother, [t]’s birthday, with the mother from 9.00am to 2.00pm.
telephone communication each parent shall take all reasonable steps to ensure [x] has available to him, whilst in that parents care, a mobile telephone with which he can communicate with the other parent. [x] may telephone or communicate with the other parent in accordance with his wishes. changeover changeover for the purpose of these orders shall be: -   at [x]’s school where changeover coincides with [x] being in attendance at school, and (b) at any other time by the parent with whom [x] is to commence spending time collecting him from the other parent’s residence.
travel in the event that either parent proposes to travel interstate overnight with [x], the travelling parent shall advise the other parent of their intended travel at least 24 hours prior to leaving. the parents to all things necessary to facilitate the issue of a passport for [x], and facilitate the renewal of the passport prior to the passport expiring, at their joint cost. unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, the parents be permitted to take or send [x] to any country outside the commonwealth of australia where there is a “level 1” advice level in place as issued by the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade, provided that:   the travel dates fall within [x]’s time with the parent proposing the travel pursuant to these orders, (b) the parent proposing the travel advises the other parent of their intended travel, including location/s and dates, at least 60 days prior to the date of travel, and (c) the parent proposing the travel provides the other parent with copies of [x]’s flights details at least 21 days prior to travel.
sharing of information each parent keep the other informed of their current resident address, mobile telephone number and email address, and advise the other of any change thereto within 7 days of any change. 14. each parent notify the other as soon as practicable of the following:   [x] seriously injuring himself, or falling seriously ill, (b) [x] requiring urgent medical treatment by a medical practitioner and/or ambulance crew, and (c) [x] being admitted to hospital. the mother, within 14 days of the date of these orders, authorise [x]’s school to provide the father with copies of all school reports, any other reports on school progress and behavioural issues, and all school circulars in relation to [x].
parenting program the parents participate in a parenting adolescents program, such as the ‘tuning into teens’ program. restraints each of the parents, their servants and agents, be and are hereby restrained by injunction from:   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent, their family or their partner to, or in front of, [x], and (b) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed, or intended for use, in these proceedings to, with, or in the presence or hearing of, [x], other than for the purposes of explaining the effect of these orders to him.
vexatious litigant the application of the mother seeking a declaration pursuant to section 102qb(1)(b) be dismissed. costs of independent children’s lawyer each of the parties pay the costs of the independent children’s lawyer in such proportion and amount as determined by the court.
the father’s evidence
60. the husband’s conduct in the running of the proceeding at trial was conduct which disrupted the trial on numerous occasions causing delay and at times, an almost complete inability to progress the trial. his conduct was a deliberate frustrating of the trial itself... ... 62. the husband repeatedly failed to comply with the directions of the court. he was on occasion offensive in his commentary and his behaviour, and so inappropriate as to compromise counsel for the wife’s capacity to cross-examine him and to be on occasion, contemptuous of the proceeding.
pre-hearing compliance check on 22nd march 2022
directed to
details of insult and / or behaviour
the court
mr manuel: bollocks. t 4
mr manuel: i don’t like lies, your honour. i don’t like lies. t4
the mother
mr manuel: no. ms pinner’s application is basically to take the child away from his dad. t 10
mr manuel: let me tell you i am a victim of the child – of the family court as a child. i’ve been through what ms pinner is attempting to do. you don’t like me. i know you don’t like me. t 11
mr manuel: guess what? i’m a result of the system. t 11
mr manuel: you, your honour. you don’t like me. i’m quite happy to accept that, but i’m a result of the system. i was a child who suffered with what ms pinner is asking for of an every second weekend father. you don’t like what i am? you don’t like who i am? fine, but this is what created me. it destroys children’s lives. t 11
interim hearing in relation to the father’s recusal and contempt application on 2nd may 2022
mr manuel: just because people don’t have the balls to stand up to this corruption is not my issue. t 2
mr manuel: i might start answering questions when you start answering questions. what law are you basing my refusal to access this room? i’ve asked that 20 times and nobody answers, but you demand answers from me. why is it one way... t 6
the court and the mother’s lawyer
mr manuel: i’ve got physical – i sat there last hearing, and i said, i’ve got physical evidence of contempt and lies by ms k, and you put me on mute. t 7
mr manuel: you seem to take issue with the fact that i’ve got a penis between my legs, and i’m sick of it. t 7
mr manuel: are you going to recuse yourself today for your utterly appalling behaviour over the last six, seven years? t 7
mr manuel: piss off. t 7
mr manuel: that’s it. you lied. you lied. i did - - - t 8
mr manuel: now, if they’re happy to have their human rights shat all over, that’s up to them. but i don’t accept that. i follow law. if everyone is happy to provide their private medical information, that’s up to them. but i choose not to, and you have no legal right to enforce it, do you, yes or no? - t 10
mr manuel: exactly, because of the lies that are told by just about everyone here. the lies - the last time we were here, when i got moved - pushed off into that room, i asked, “why am i in here? you asked to be here?” no, i didn’t. you just lied to my face. i didn’t ask to be there. why are you so happy to accept lies in this courtroom? t 11
mr manuel: you are bound by law. is there a law which bars me from crossing that threshold, yes or no? t 11
final hearing 25th and 26th may 2022
mr manuel: mr neville, i have a copy of the report. t 4
mr manuel: ...this is what the system does. this is what the family law system in the western world does. it destroys people’s lives. you have successfully done that. i could ask if you’re proud of that fact, but you won’t answer. t 4
mr manuel: i’ve proven you to be a liar. i’ve proven ms k to be a liar. i’ve proven ms l to be a liar. i’ve proven ms d to be a liar. and every time i do so, i’m told to shut up. t 5
mr manuel: i go back before. before i answer will i, i go back to the statement i’ve proven you to be a liar, i’ve proven ms k to be a liar, i’ve proven ms l to be a liar, i’ve proven ms d to be a liar, and i’ve presented evidence after evidence after evidence for many, many years, and it has all been disregarded, and i’ve been told to piss off - in not those exact words, obviously, but insinuation. is there any point in me even being here when all of that has been presented to the court, and it has been disregarded? t 6
mr manuel: answer the question. t 6
mr manuel: answer my question. what’s the point? t 7
mr manuel: yes, details. i know?---yes. who gives a shit? he’s just a – yes. t 8
mr manuel: ms pinner’s statement, which i have put into evidence on god knows how many occasions, was that unless i tell her - “ paraphrasing“ - what time i’m taking a shit on a monday morning, she’s not going to give - - -consent. t 13   manuel], do you understand that your psychological wellbeing may be a factor that would be relevant to his honour in considering what orders to make that are in [x]’s best interests?---do you understand that the family law system – the judge, lawyers like you, [ms pinner], the false allegations and the general destruction of my name and character and position as a dad – has affected me?
i thought it was a question. my apologies. [mr manuel], are you saying to his honour that the part of the orders that the mother seeks for you to spend half of the holidays with [x] and for the mother to spend half of the holidays with [x], just in relation to holidays, is removing [x] from your life?---yes. could you explain why that’s your view?---because it is.
she’s seeking orders that you spend time with him regularly. you understand that, don’t you? do you understand that? she’s seeking orders that you spend time with him every alternate weekend. you understand that, don’t you?---and do you realise that every second weekend, there’s the same playbook that has been played for 47 years, and it destroys people’s lives?
you may refer to me as my preferred pronoun of “god”, then. if you don’t like it – i will be addressing you respectfully as mr neville. that’s your name.
and you describe in your statement that you have adopted as your evidence for the purposes of these proceedings a lot of firsts?---absolutely, and if i’ve – if you look at all those firsts, and you go, “well, what has [ms pinner] done?” if i’m the one doing this, what the hell has she done? [mr manuel], are you having a go at [ms pinner] and her parenting when you say that?---i’ve been had – my parenting has had – been torn to shreds by [ms pinner] for six years. i’m not asking you about that. i’m saying are you being critical of [ms pinner] and her parenting of [x]?---this is ridiculous. in both the cic and the family report, i blew smoke up [ms pinner’s] arse for the entire thing - - - what do you mean by that?--- - - - going – praising her, saying she’s a good mum, [x] loves her – sat there for hours with witnesses, because i don’t go anywhere without witnesses. i praised her, and then you say a couple of things, going, “well, maybe she’s not so good at this, and maybe she’s not so good at that,” and then that turns around to that’s the only thing she concentrated on. that’s exactly what the cic did. there was one thing that i said where she refused to allow [x] to go to football training, and that’s pretty much all the cic was – “[mr manuel] said she’s a bad mum”, blah, blah, blah. it didn’t say anything about the 45 minutes that i spent saying she’s a good mum and blah, blah, blah. but she is a good mum, isn’t she, sir?---yes, she is. she’s an excellent mum?---i keep saying that.
his honour: even people in court get yelled at?---absolutely, if they – yes. people get yelled at all the time. you’re trying to turn this around quite easily to go, “[mr manuel’s] the baddie. [mr manuel’s] the baddie. [mr manuel’s] the baddie.” it’s obvious. this is playbook 101 for family law for 47 years. it’s the same thing. we know the playbook.
ms curran: and so if he told that to the family report writer but not to his mum – i’m quoting from what he said to the family report writer – does that still mean he’s telling someone what they want to hear, or is it possible it’s actually [x]’s view?---it depends, because that family report writer is following a certain model, which is, “dad is a piece of shit. dad is a piece of shit.” his honour: would it be fair to say, [mr manuel], that you have strident views about a very wide range of things?---everyone does. really?---well, if – if you don’t have strong views or views on a lot of things, you’re – that’s called narrow-minded.
is it right that you said:
misunderstanding? fuck off. you were a cunt. don’t try and hide behind your misunderstanding. grow the fuck up and admit your failures and your own actions. you knew exactly what you were doing. that just shows your failings as a counsellor. counsellors are people who fail to attend medical school and get a degree in psychology. if you treat people the way you treat me, then there’s no fucking way i will let you speak to my son, and no referral from you is worth the paper it’s written on. you are the reason 6.85 men take their lives every day in australia, a huge chunk of them due to being treated like second-class humans in the family law system. you have no consent from me to discuss any communication you have with me or anyone else, meet, talk with [x]. do not contact me ever again. this is your one and only cease and desist request. failure to follow this will result in me filing a personal protection order against you in the act magistrates court.
?---correct. and you sent that in february this year?---it could be. i can’t remember the date, but, yes. you understood that [x] was – that [mr u] was [x]’s counsellor at the time?---i didn’t know, because no one had given me information. i was refused access because i was the dad. and what access did you want?---i wanted to know whether he was seeing [x], what was going on, whether there was any concerns – the usual parenting questions for anything – and i was refused access because i am a dad. and you would accept, wouldn’t you, that if [x] was getting some benefit from seeing a psychologist like [mr u], or a counsellor like [mr u], that it would take a bit of time for an 11-year-old boy to develop trust with that sort of person and to engage in that process?---yes. you would call that biology 101, wouldn’t you?---yes.
is it the case that you have difficulty regulating your emotions at times?---no. no. you feel as though you’re perfectly in control of your emotions?---mmm. and so it’s a conscious choice when you escalate or become loud or swear at people, you know what you’re doing fully, and you’re completely in control of your emotions?---i’m not going to answer any more of your questions. sir, it’s true, isn’t it, that you come across to some people as angry and intimidating, do you agree with that?---how people feel is their concern. well, your - - -?---you’re – they’re in control of their emotions. they’re in control of their feelings. if they feel [x], then that’s up to them. your partner, [ms ae], even said to the report writer that you could be viewed as intimidating. that’s at paragraph 50 of the report you haven’t read. so even people close to you form the view that you can across as intimidating. do you accept that?---i think we’re done here. [x], i love you. i’m sorry you were dragged into this destructive system. i tried my best. i fought till the end, but the system was always going to be against me and your dad. i love you. i’m sorry your life has been destroyed. his honour: are you coming back, [mr manuel]? perhaps if i could ask [mr manuel’s] colleagues to support him in whatever way is necessary, and if someone could maybe let mr robinson know whether [mr manuel] is going to come back.
they were – ms curran’s questions were standard questions to parents, regardless of gender, [mr manuel]?---i didn’t mention gender. you brought that up. well, you raise it regularly, and you bellowed from the court door on the last occasion about the (a) the predetermination of the system, (b) your gender, which you helpfully reminded me of in some fairly graphic ways. not sure that i needed to be reminded, but still, you felt it helped. i didn’t see that it did. but if you don’t answer questions, you could end up being deemed to have abandoned your case?---i’ve made my case. where and how?---six years of submissions, repeating myself over and over and over again. right. so – but you understand i’m expressing them as concerns for you, [mr manuel], which i expressed in my last judgment that i assume that you didn’t read, and the concerns that i regularly express to distressed parents, regardless of gender. and the position that you may be placing yourself in if you don’t simply undertake – yes, it is testing. yes, it is frustrating. yes, it can be angst-producing. and clearly, there is a lot of concern or there’s a huge legacy from whatever happened during the situation when you were a child and the separation of your parents. i don’t know – and it’s simply because i do not know – i don’t know whether or not that was in australia or whether or not that was in new zealand. i do not know, but the legacy of that obviously is profound for you. so they are expressions of concern. they’re not accusations. you seem, on your material and also from your comments over the last two occasions when we’ve been together – one time virtually, one time, as i say, from you at the door – you seem to have beefs with a great many things and people, whether it’s the health system, the court system, psychologists – the list seems long. it must be a very frustrating, awkward and draining existence to be so apparently at odds, and seriously, grievously at odds with so many systems and people. would you confirm that you are not going to answer any more questions, you say, from ms curran, correct?---correct. and if any similar questions are asked by mr robinson, you will – you likewise refuse to answer them?---we will see how it goes. well, i don’t know whether or not it’s like a pick-and-choose - - -?---yes. - circumstance?---i’m not going to sit here and be abused and - - - you were not abused?--- - - - have my character assassinated and – i’m not going to sit here and do that. all right? i’m a fucking good person, and i’m a fucking good dad, and i’m sick of being assassinated. all right? simply being asked questions is not an assassination, [mr manuel]. if you have that extreme view, i’m sorry for you. ms curran, in these circumstances, what do you say? you can either, obviously, try and ask a few more questions, and if [mr manuel] again - - - yes, i would prefer that course, your honour. i’m not in any way trying to upset [mr manuel], but i do have - - -
could i read to you her email, and it says - - -?---don’t bother. continuing:
as for the [ad] concert, if you feel it is appropriate to take an eight-year-old to see a man like that, it’s up to you, but i’m agreeing to this as i had previously. a reminder, though – as i said, if you want to take [x] to further concerts, please do so on your weeks only. it is too disruptive to him and his family’s routine to be chopping and changing like this.
so that response, sir, about – it’s disruptive to her routine – do you think that that’s a reasonable approach from the mother?---disruptive to her routine, because that’s the only response we ever get – it disrupts hers.
and you still feel very strongly about that, do you?---if someone – you are fucking stupid. you really are. his honour: excuse me, please?---if you don’t think that destroying – if you think that if a child’s life is destroyed and you should think that that’s a good thing, you’ve got some serious concerns. destruction of children’s lives is child abuse, and that is not good. if you think it’s good, i can’t help you. ms curran: the family report writer refers to [x] having a wonderful and close relationship with his mother and his stepmother and his family. you haven’t read that, but can you accept that – that that was the family report writer’s impression of [x]’s connection with his mum and stepmum and brother?---he loves his mum. i’ve said that time and time again. i get sick of repeating it. and he loves his - - -?---he loves his mum. his mum loves her – him. i love [x]. [x] loves me. and you – by omission, are you saying that he doesn’t love [ms s] and [t]?---i don’t know. and do you ask him about that ever – about his life with - - -?---i’ve got no reason to ask [x] anything about that. you have no reason to ask him. do you think he knows that you don’t think very highly of his stepmum?---i talk to [x] about lots of things. well, do you talk to him about that?---i talk to [x] about lots of things. do you talk to [x] about how you have a poor impression of his stepmum?---i don’t talk to him about that person. “about that person” – you mean [ms s]?---correct. his stepmother. you don’t – do you refer to her name when you - - -?---no.
but if you haven’t read [ms af’s] report, how do you know - - -?---because she will deny it. - what [ms af] said? well - - -?---she will deny everything. okay?---because that’s the way it works. this is – this – you don’t need to be a fucking rocket scientist. this is the way the system works.
continuing:
as a result of the incident, [x] had a counselling session with [mr u] from [ag centre] on friday, 17 december. this has proven beneficial to [x], as it has given him an outlet that is not any of his parents. we will be booking [x] in for his covid vaccination on the week of 10 january - - -
?---
we will be booking –
you’ve said it right there. black and white. continuing:
- - - pending we are able to get the appointment. i will advise if we have been successful or not. [ms pinner].
?---proven. “we will be doing [x].” no consultation, no question, no anything. “we will be doing.” you didn’t respond to that email, did you, sir?---i did. yes. you simply cancelled the appointment, didn’t you?---no. learn your – read the fricking emails. how - - - his honour: mr - - -?---why do i have to do your job? i replied to it. [mr manuel] - - -?---i replied to it with one line, saying we – “i do not consent.” [mr manuel], would you please get a grip on your horses, please, seriously?---these people get paid 500 fucking dollars - - - please, please - - -?--- - - - an hour, and they can’t read emails. would you please dial it down?---no. is it really helping you?---well - - - you know, venting?--- - - - nothing – nothing helps me. it doesn’t matter what i say. venting, venting, venting?---yes. it doesn’t matter what i say - - - you must be - - -?--- - - - because it has already been decided. as i said earlier, you must be exhausted fighting so many people?---i’m sick of our bullshit, mr neville. yes, it’s very tiring. [mr manuel], i would hate to make some punitive orders against you?---well, you don’t – you don’t like people who stand up to bullies.
---that’s correct, because the evidence – the – the submissions are the same thing over and over again – they have been all this time – false accusations, threats, lies – and it’s destroying me.
his honour: we know that your attack on the mother is significant?---i have spent my – the last six years going she’s a good mum, i have been saying it time, and time and time again. telling me - - -?---when she has turned around and attacked me - - - telling me again - - -?---well, you’ve – until you acknowledge it – i can’t get it through your thick skull, apparently, but you need to accept that. i formally warn you of your disrespect, bordering on contempt, to the court. if you carry on like this, i will ask you to be escorted from the court?---what about your disrespect to me, you don’t accept that, though, do you?
his honour: sorry. who is the “they”?---[ms pinner] and her legal team waited for years, 2013 all the way through ’19 – no issues. no issues of anything. no issues. no down to the magistrates court. no – no issues. no family violence. no nothing. then the contraventions. shit, then, we will drag it out for three years until september ’19. shit, 102na, now we’ve got our thing. now we can fuck them up real good. make some false allegations - - - you know that - - -?--- - - - and then you - - - you know that it was designed to help you, mr - - -?---bullshit. it’s designed to help people who make false allegations. dear goodness?---and you have turned around and gone – and you have admitted that you lied because you said you had to make an – an – an order, and you didn’t. you did not have to make an order. this is laid out in judgments. we’re not going to have this range - - -?---you’re a liar, dr neville. please. you - - -?---you’re a liar. - - - will behave, [mr manuel]. behave, otherwise i will ask the security officer to escort you from the courtroom?---i am pointing out the failures of the system - - - be quiet. ms curran: [mr manuel], can you – you’re showing, would you agree, an inability here to regulate your emotions, would you agree with that?---would you say that you are treating me with absolute contempt and abusing me, making - - - can you answer my question, please, [mr manuel]?---are you – would accept that your behaviour would likely make me annoyed? would you say that: yes, or no? am i allowed to be annoyed? maybe i’m not allowed to be annoyed. i said this to family report writer. this is what society does. society says men – why aren’t men speaking up? so men speak up, “i feel [x],” whether it be annoyed, sad, angry, whatever, because why? because people like you doing this. and then society turns around, like you are now, and going you’re not allowed to feel like that. no, i haven’t said that.
ms curran: [mr manuel], can i ask you some questions about that - - - the witness: this is your bullshit. you’ve got – you - - - his honour: be careful, [mr manuel]. the witness: you’re against – you hate men, don’t you?
no, sir, i wasn’t. i’m just asking you is that – that’s what occurred. you were told the night before that [x] had expressed that he did not think he was up to going and doing that, but you - - -?---he was up to it, and i was there and so was [ms ae], and he, for lack of a better term, had a great day because he got to walk his – his dog for the last time. well, he was actually in the mother’s care - - -?---and - - - pursuant to the orders at that time, wasn’t he?---he got to say goodbye to his dog that he has known for all his life - - - yes?--- - - - and he got to cuddle her. he got to say he loved her. and that was very important to you, wasn’t it?---you’re a fucking bitch, you are. his honour: excuse me. [mr manuel] - - - the witness: you fucking child abuser. his honour: why do you find it so essential to abuse people?---you don’t want a child to be able to say bye to a loved one, how fucking disgusting is that? ms curran: it’s the case, sir, isn’t it, that you - - -?---piece of shit. - attended school and - - - his honour: excuse me. last warning, [mr manuel]?---fucking civils. i can’t carry on like this. you keep abusing people. ms curran. ms curran: thank you, sir.
all right. you spoke to them on 17 september 2015, do you remember that?---no. the message that’s in the records from [ah contact centre] on that date says:
he left a phone message asking me to call urgently. so i phoned him, and he wanted to know if his son’s mother had contacted us or attended our programs. he said that he was expecting that we wouldn’t be able to tell him for privacy reasons, and i said that was the case, but i would speak to [ms aj] and call him back. after speaking with [ms aj] i phoned [mr manuel] to let him know that we were unable to give him that information. [mr manuel] became very agitated and started ranting at me about everyone being against dads. he got angrier and more worked up, including swearing at me. i asked him to stop swearing. i attempted to offer help to him, but he continued to swear –
eff word:
...and rant about –
effing:
...lesbians, blacks and how they get looked after, but not men. he said that [mr ak] was a waste of time, but he was insisting that his son’s mother needed to come to the ark program, and he said that she was mentally damaging their son.
do you recall that conversation?---no. would that be the sort of thing that you might have said, ranting about effing lesbians and blacks?---no. you wouldn’t say that?---no. have you got a poor attitude to the mother because she’s in a same-sex relationship?---no. have you got a view that people are treated better than you because you’re a man?---duluth model 101. are you aware of the duluth mode - - - and you’re aware - - -?--- - - - yes, or no?
his honour: would it be fair to say, [mr manuel], that you have a significantly developed sense of the dramatic, or is it just frustration and pure irritation?---it’s frustration because i present evidence – i have mentioned cognitive dissonance, you know .....? cognitive dissonance is when someone – you have got one idea in your head, and someone else presents something to you with irrefutable evidence, and the person still goes, “no, i am not going to believe that because i have got this thing in my head.” so i am sitting here, banging my head against a brick wall, going, evidence, left, right and centre, and you’re all sitting here going, “no, [mr manuel] is crazy. [mr manuel] is wrong. [mr manuel] is getting upset,” blah, blah, blah, blah. i am presenting facts and evidence. as i said, i work in [the technology sector]. i work in [technology]. i work in zeros and ones. it is, or it isn’t. facts and evidence.
okay?---one thing one people – the people i haven’t spoken to are the judges who made decisions, the lawyers who are involved in destroying my childhood, because nobody follows up. nobody came – comes to see children 10, 20, 30 years down the line to say how did what happen – how did we do – how did what do in a courtroom affect you? how did it affect you five, 10, 20, 30 years later? nobody does that. so you sit up here on your high horse, and you make all these decisions, and you don’t follow up. so you have no idea how things affect in the long run.
his honour: i will - - -?---you owe [ms ae] an apology. you owe the entire male gender, including [x] and myself, apology, and you need to address your misandry that you so proudly displayed yesterday. you are disgusting.
well - - -?---you’re raising these questions as pointless. there are plenty of options to do anything with the system. the fact is that things have been discussed in numerous inquiries over the years, and nothing has changed because the system doesn’t want change. the people who run the system, the lawyers and so on, do not want it changed because that’s the cash cow. when i had my childhood destroyed, i then moved on with my life, and i sat for 30 years going, “surely, someone has fixed this. surely, someone has stopped the child abuse. surely, someone has done something.” and then i end up in the same situation as dad, and i go, “no one has done anything in 30 years, 35 years,” because they didn’t want to fix the system because the system creates the cash cow that the people inside it want. so - - -?---and the same thing is you keep having a go at me for claiming – for mentioning the western world. if you’re so stupid that you can’t see the fact that new zealand, australia, uk, us, canada – everywhere in the western world has the same issues. there is no fathers for – mothers for justice in the uk, for example, is there? there’s no lone mothers association in canberra, is there? the fact is that the entire western world and the family law system in the entire western world has been set up to destroy and remove fathers from kids’ lives. that has been the case for 47 years or 46 in the case of new zealand, and it’s the same everywhere. if you’re so blind and/or stupid not to acknowledge that, i can’t help you. i can just point it out.
what do you mean by that?---duluth model 101. feminism 101. playing the victim. she has played the victim thing for the last six years. “poor me. poor me. poor me. [mr manuel] is the baddie.” scoliosis has nothing to do with family law proceedings. it’s purely playing the victim. “look at me. poor me. poor me.” it has got nothing to do with it. give me some evidence of what it has got to do with parenting. nothing. it does not have a single thing to do with it other than playing the victim. nice smirk on your face by the way, ms curran. [mr manuel] - - -?---how is that misandry going for you? nice smirk. i’m not smirking at you, [mr manuel]. i’m waiting for you to finish so i can go on?---you smirked. have you had a look at any - - -?---look at your smirk on your face. - of the orders - - -?---why do you hate men so much? his honour: [mr manuel], could you please dial back the vitriol?---i’m sick of this attitude from ms curran. she’s asking questions, [mr manuel]?---are you looking at the smirk on her face as well as she’s saying it? you can’t get rid of the smirk. dear goodness, [mr manuel]. please, would you - - -?---look at it. would you please - - -?---it’s right there. please answer the questions that ms curran asks you?---i am. i am. ms curran: do you agree with any of the orders that are being sought by the mother? any at all?---any ones that coincide with mine, yes. well, which ones do you agree with, sir?---the ones that agree with mine. that’s my answer. next question. do you accept that there are some behaviours of yours which, if [x] is exposed to, could be a negative experience for [x]?---just the same as any negative behaviours from [ms pinner]. just the same as negative behaviours from a person in the street. just the same as negative behaviours from a school teacher. everyone - - - so you accept that?---i accept that it’s everyone’s ability, yours included. do you consider that you have difficulty regulating your emotions?---no. do you accept that you’re a misandrist who has a problem with - - - his honour: [mr manuel] - - -?--- - - - people like me standing up for themselves? [mr manuel], it’s about you. it’s not about ms curran. ms curran: you attend all of [x’s] sporting commitments, don’t you?---absolutely. i love seeing him play sport, and he loves me seeing him play sport. could you contemplate that it might be better for [x] to have the weekends when he’s with his mum, stepmum and brother [t] just with that family unit?---no. you couldn’t contemplate that at all?---no. i’m his dad. he loves his dad. have you now overnight read the report of [ms af] that you hadn’t read fulsomely yesterday?---no. i’ve skimmed through it. i know what’s in there.
but if it’s contrary to what your wishes are, then you wouldn’t be prepared to contemplate something that lined up with what perhaps [x] might want?---i see the reality of the system, the bias, the misandry, the alienation that twists things around to force dads out of children’s lives. that’s the reality that i see. sir, you understand, don’t you, that [ms pinner] is not seeking to force you out of [x’s] life?---no, i think she is. she has attempted in her application to restrict [x’s] access to his dad to two days a fortnight. as i said in my affidavit in august – i think it was, like, 9 august 2012 – [ms pinner] said to me if there was one thing she could do, she would take away the pain that was inflicted on me by the family court because she knew the pain that was inflicted on me from the family court. she knew the pain that was inflicted on me by seeing my dad two days out of a fortnight. she knew that pain. she wished it would go away. and then within weeks, she was inflicting the same pain on [x] and is now attempting to do the same thing. she is attempting to remove a loving dad from a child’s life and remove a meaningful relationship. that is child abuse.
sir - - -?---you’re making up all sorts of bullshit with no evidence. this is duluth model 101. just make up bullshit, and you’re believed dads don’t – men don’t mean anything. men don’t mean anything. whatever men say is wrong. whatever they say is – as we’ve proven by the 102na, she can just come in here, say anything she likes and it’s believed. thanks to julia gillard for removing perjury from the court because you would be up shit creek if perjury still existed... you put it in your - - -?---you’re going around in circles. i’ve already said that. she tries to make up some bullshit about standing in the middle of the street. fuck off. what an absolute load of shit. you’ve got no fricking evidence. his honour: mr - - -?---it doesn’t exist. - [manuel] - - -?---i’m sick of this bullshit. i have heard you say that. i have picked that up?---yes. but do you think you could keep just some rein on your horses?---no. no?---because i’m sick of - - - it always helps?---i’m sick of this bullshit going on and on and on and on and on. it’s blatant lies, but we’ve already proven that you don’t care about lies in this courtroom. how are we going time wise, ms curran? are we getting close?
ms curran: now, you know, sir, don’t you, that [ms pinner] raised concerns about the impact from the family report of you losing your temper and being volatile and being a poor role model. would you agree that they would be valid concerns for the mother to have?---she has no evidence. you are just making stuff up. no, i’m asking you a question about what she reported to the family report writer as one of her concerns. now, we’ve heard some evidence and we’ve seen some of the documents that you have had some conflict with different agencies and organisations, haven’t you?---and as i’ve pointed out, if you ask an agency 20 times the same question and they refuse to speak to you because you’re just a dad, after the 20th time of getting no response, you’re entitled to get annoyed with them. all right?---if you don’t think that’s acceptable to get annoyed, there’s something wrong with you. all right. and you - - -?---the fact remains that agencies ignore me because i am just a dad. if i had a vagina, there would be no question. you walk in there as a mum, yes, absolutely, get everything you want. so after 20 times of asking the agencies, school or whoever and being ignored, i’ve mentioned that i have been annoyed at them for not answering me 20 times.
did you make any approach to [ms s]?---i’m not talking to that person. i don’t – i had nothing to do with that person, that person is irrelevant to me. the dealings are between me – myself, [x], and [ms pinner]. but that person may be important to [x], is that not relevant?---this person has threatened and intimidated me for nine years. i’m not going to pick up the phone and call that person. in no circumstances?---not in any circumstances.
no?---i get threatened all sorts of places and that’s disrespectful to me, and i point it out and nobody takes any responsibility for it. so there’s no pattern that you’re seeing here?---people disrespecting me?   the father regularly refused to answer questions relating to his (or his partner’s) psychological and mental health, or indeed any health issue, which he considered to be “private” and/or which was allegedly subject (stated almost as a mantra) to the [general] provisions of “the privacy act 1988”, (b) the father was regularly highly disrespectful and insulting, to the point of contempt (he could have, and should have, been charged with, or cited for, contempt, noting however that such a course was unlikely to assist x), to the court, to the mother’s counsel, and to the mother’s instructing lawyer, (c) the documentary evidence confirms that the father was highly offensive and abusive in his language towards a range of health care providers to his son x, notably mr u and at x’s dental practice. he was also abusive to staff at the contact centre, ah contact centre. he regularly sought to justify his appalling language and generally aggressive conduct because of his frustration with whomever he was dealing at the time. his generalised comment that anyone would be frustrated after asking something “20 times” was plainly an exaggeration. there was no evidence that he asked something “20 times” of any of the persons referred to. if anything, the evidence showed the contrary. even if he had done so: (i) his sole and regular response was abuse and vitriol, thereby showing his quite “short fuse” and regular emotional dysregulation, which leads to (or flows from) his frustration, and (ii) his inability to readily “problem solve” about whatever he was attempting to deal with. aggression and abuse were his “go to” responses, (d) the father was equally contemptuous of the mother’s partner, even to the point of refusing to use her name but only to call her “that person”, and he was less than positive about x’s younger brother, t, almost refusing to acknowledge his existence, let alone that he is x’s brother. he was equally contemptuous of anyone who worked in, or with, the family law system, such as family consultants, psychologists and the like, (e) the father refused to answer questions about his employment, other than in the most general terms, and was equally obstructive about providing any information regarding any qualifications he has, (f) the father was, and obviously remains, deeply and adversely affected by whatever legal process his parents were engaged in during their separation in new zealand. however, he refused to provide any details of any treatment he has undertaken, other than in very general terms, to assist him in this regard, (g) the father was, on the one hand, very positive and confirmed that the mother was a “good mother” who was loved by, and who loves, x, but on the other hand, he was also highly contemptuous of her as a result of what he described as her “coercive control” of him especially during the marriage, and no less so in her refusal to compromise or discuss matters regarding x over the past nine years since separation. in his view, there was no discussion, and only “her choice” or her way was acceptable. as with all others with whom he dealt, the father’s view was never taken into account simply because he was “just a dad”. he treated parenthood almost as a contest with the mother because of all the “firsts” he had undertaken with x and the mother, in his view, had done nothing, (h) the father’s complaints and evidence generally was replete with slogans and generalised statements, which he intended to be accepted by the court as absolute truth without reference to any other evidence. as someone, on his evidence, who based his work and/or analysis on “facts”, which are (on his evidence) unemotional, he was remarkably blinkered and unreceptive to any facts that came from any source other than himself or those sources he relied upon, albeit unstated. challenging the father on almost anything was essentially a futile exercise, and one that invariably earned more than a rebuke, and invariably came with a liberal dose of swearing and insult. to state the obvious: the father’s conduct was (and is) a very poor role model for anyone, not least x, and it was quite tedious because it was so one-dimensional – abuse, protest, generalised statements (usually about gender and bias against men), (i) the father’s evidence, unless corroborated by documentary proof, was unreliable, not only because of his refusal to answer basic and important questions, but also because of his clearly stated, usually with great and unnecessary force and ill-tempered, crass language, prejudices against this court and all who work in “the family law system.” his regularly claimed “gender bias” against men, and fathers in particular, was simplistic in the extreme. he countenances no other view than his own, based clearly upon a most unhappy experience when his parents separated many years ago. the legacy of that separation and whatever followed from it, almost seems to haunt him, but it has also left him with not only emotional and psychological scars but also such a distorted view of anything to do with the “justice system” as to make his views untenable. he was regularly histrionic, and had a certitude about his views that was not justified by independent evidence. his abuse (which was often directed to the women in court, as well as to the bench), using regularly, completely intemperate and unacceptable language and emotional displays, certainly indicated a significant inability to see “the wood for the trees” regarding what were the critical issues for x, what were critical issues for the father, or properly or reasonably to control his emotions. he consistently failed to demonstrate insight or foresight, especially regarding his parental capacities, or in relation to the potential, adverse impact on x of his belligerent approach to ordinary, everyday life situations. he was really quite blinded, indeed unswerving, by his deep prejudices towards the court and the family law system. his self-justification for his abusive and disrespectful conduct was regrettably immature. in short, he was a poor and hostile witness who did his case, and x, little good by his antagonistic and bellicose, often vitriolic and puerile displays. as noted earlier, his conduct was his choice. abuse and displays of very poor behaviour, were not, as it were, “forced on him” by anyone, including “the family law system”, (j) all of this said, there is no question that the father and x have a good and close relationship. there is also no question that the parents have an ongoing, highly problematic relationship, with special difficulties in communication, (k) finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.   the father was regularly highly disrespectful and insulting, to the point of contempt (he could have, and should have, been charged with, or cited for, contempt, noting however that such a course was unlikely to assist x), to the court, to the mother’s counsel, and to the mother’s instructing lawyer, (c) the documentary evidence confirms that the father was highly offensive and abusive in his language towards a range of health care providers to his son x, notably mr u and at x’s dental practice. he was also abusive to staff at the contact centre, ah contact centre. he regularly sought to justify his appalling language and generally aggressive conduct because of his frustration with whomever he was dealing at the time. his generalised comment that anyone would be frustrated after asking something “20 times” was plainly an exaggeration. there was no evidence that he asked something “20 times” of any of the persons referred to. if anything, the evidence showed the contrary. even if he had done so: (i) his sole and regular response was abuse and vitriol, thereby showing his quite “short fuse” and regular emotional dysregulation, which leads to (or flows from) his frustration, and (ii) his inability to readily “problem solve” about whatever he was attempting to deal with. aggression and abuse were his “go to” responses, (d) the father was equally contemptuous of the mother’s partner, even to the point of refusing to use her name but only to call her “that person”, and he was less than positive about x’s younger brother, t, almost refusing to acknowledge his existence, let alone that he is x’s brother. he was equally contemptuous of anyone who worked in, or with, the family law system, such as family consultants, psychologists and the like, (e) the father refused to answer questions about his employment, other than in the most general terms, and was equally obstructive about providing any information regarding any qualifications he has, (f) the father was, and obviously remains, deeply and adversely affected by whatever legal process his parents were engaged in during their separation in new zealand. however, he refused to provide any details of any treatment he has undertaken, other than in very general terms, to assist him in this regard, (g) the father was, on the one hand, very positive and confirmed that the mother was a “good mother” who was loved by, and who loves, x, but on the other hand, he was also highly contemptuous of her as a result of what he described as her “coercive control” of him especially during the marriage, and no less so in her refusal to compromise or discuss matters regarding x over the past nine years since separation. in his view, there was no discussion, and only “her choice” or her way was acceptable. as with all others with whom he dealt, the father’s view was never taken into account simply because he was “just a dad”. he treated parenthood almost as a contest with the mother because of all the “firsts” he had undertaken with x and the mother, in his view, had done nothing, (h) the father’s complaints and evidence generally was replete with slogans and generalised statements, which he intended to be accepted by the court as absolute truth without reference to any other evidence. as someone, on his evidence, who based his work and/or analysis on “facts”, which are (on his evidence) unemotional, he was remarkably blinkered and unreceptive to any facts that came from any source other than himself or those sources he relied upon, albeit unstated. challenging the father on almost anything was essentially a futile exercise, and one that invariably earned more than a rebuke, and invariably came with a liberal dose of swearing and insult. to state the obvious: the father’s conduct was (and is) a very poor role model for anyone, not least x, and it was quite tedious because it was so one-dimensional – abuse, protest, generalised statements (usually about gender and bias against men), (i) the father’s evidence, unless corroborated by documentary proof, was unreliable, not only because of his refusal to answer basic and important questions, but also because of his clearly stated, usually with great and unnecessary force and ill-tempered, crass language, prejudices against this court and all who work in “the family law system.” his regularly claimed “gender bias” against men, and fathers in particular, was simplistic in the extreme. he countenances no other view than his own, based clearly upon a most unhappy experience when his parents separated many years ago. the legacy of that separation and whatever followed from it, almost seems to haunt him, but it has also left him with not only emotional and psychological scars but also such a distorted view of anything to do with the “justice system” as to make his views untenable. he was regularly histrionic, and had a certitude about his views that was not justified by independent evidence. his abuse (which was often directed to the women in court, as well as to the bench), using regularly, completely intemperate and unacceptable language and emotional displays, certainly indicated a significant inability to see “the wood for the trees” regarding what were the critical issues for x, what were critical issues for the father, or properly or reasonably to control his emotions. he consistently failed to demonstrate insight or foresight, especially regarding his parental capacities, or in relation to the potential, adverse impact on x of his belligerent approach to ordinary, everyday life situations. he was really quite blinded, indeed unswerving, by his deep prejudices towards the court and the family law system. his self-justification for his abusive and disrespectful conduct was regrettably immature. in short, he was a poor and hostile witness who did his case, and x, little good by his antagonistic and bellicose, often vitriolic and puerile displays. as noted earlier, his conduct was his choice. abuse and displays of very poor behaviour, were not, as it were, “forced on him” by anyone, including “the family law system”, (j) all of this said, there is no question that the father and x have a good and close relationship. there is also no question that the parents have an ongoing, highly problematic relationship, with special difficulties in communication, (k) finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.   the documentary evidence confirms that the father was highly offensive and abusive in his language towards a range of health care providers to his son x, notably mr u and at x’s dental practice. he was also abusive to staff at the contact centre, ah contact centre. he regularly sought to justify his appalling language and generally aggressive conduct because of his frustration with whomever he was dealing at the time. his generalised comment that anyone would be frustrated after asking something “20 times” was plainly an exaggeration. there was no evidence that he asked something “20 times” of any of the persons referred to. if anything, the evidence showed the contrary. even if he had done so: (i) his sole and regular response was abuse and vitriol, thereby showing his quite “short fuse” and regular emotional dysregulation, which leads to (or flows from) his frustration, and (ii) his inability to readily “problem solve” about whatever he was attempting to deal with. aggression and abuse were his “go to” responses, (d) the father was equally contemptuous of the mother’s partner, even to the point of refusing to use her name but only to call her “that person”, and he was less than positive about x’s younger brother, t, almost refusing to acknowledge his existence, let alone that he is x’s brother. he was equally contemptuous of anyone who worked in, or with, the family law system, such as family consultants, psychologists and the like, (e) the father refused to answer questions about his employment, other than in the most general terms, and was equally obstructive about providing any information regarding any qualifications he has, (f) the father was, and obviously remains, deeply and adversely affected by whatever legal process his parents were engaged in during their separation in new zealand. however, he refused to provide any details of any treatment he has undertaken, other than in very general terms, to assist him in this regard, (g) the father was, on the one hand, very positive and confirmed that the mother was a “good mother” who was loved by, and who loves, x, but on the other hand, he was also highly contemptuous of her as a result of what he described as her “coercive control” of him especially during the marriage, and no less so in her refusal to compromise or discuss matters regarding x over the past nine years since separation. in his view, there was no discussion, and only “her choice” or her way was acceptable. as with all others with whom he dealt, the father’s view was never taken into account simply because he was “just a dad”. he treated parenthood almost as a contest with the mother because of all the “firsts” he had undertaken with x and the mother, in his view, had done nothing, (h) the father’s complaints and evidence generally was replete with slogans and generalised statements, which he intended to be accepted by the court as absolute truth without reference to any other evidence. as someone, on his evidence, who based his work and/or analysis on “facts”, which are (on his evidence) unemotional, he was remarkably blinkered and unreceptive to any facts that came from any source other than himself or those sources he relied upon, albeit unstated. challenging the father on almost anything was essentially a futile exercise, and one that invariably earned more than a rebuke, and invariably came with a liberal dose of swearing and insult. to state the obvious: the father’s conduct was (and is) a very poor role model for anyone, not least x, and it was quite tedious because it was so one-dimensional – abuse, protest, generalised statements (usually about gender and bias against men), (i) the father’s evidence, unless corroborated by documentary proof, was unreliable, not only because of his refusal to answer basic and important questions, but also because of his clearly stated, usually with great and unnecessary force and ill-tempered, crass language, prejudices against this court and all who work in “the family law system.” his regularly claimed “gender bias” against men, and fathers in particular, was simplistic in the extreme. he countenances no other view than his own, based clearly upon a most unhappy experience when his parents separated many years ago. the legacy of that separation and whatever followed from it, almost seems to haunt him, but it has also left him with not only emotional and psychological scars but also such a distorted view of anything to do with the “justice system” as to make his views untenable. he was regularly histrionic, and had a certitude about his views that was not justified by independent evidence. his abuse (which was often directed to the women in court, as well as to the bench), using regularly, completely intemperate and unacceptable language and emotional displays, certainly indicated a significant inability to see “the wood for the trees” regarding what were the critical issues for x, what were critical issues for the father, or properly or reasonably to control his emotions. he consistently failed to demonstrate insight or foresight, especially regarding his parental capacities, or in relation to the potential, adverse impact on x of his belligerent approach to ordinary, everyday life situations. he was really quite blinded, indeed unswerving, by his deep prejudices towards the court and the family law system. his self-justification for his abusive and disrespectful conduct was regrettably immature. in short, he was a poor and hostile witness who did his case, and x, little good by his antagonistic and bellicose, often vitriolic and puerile displays. as noted earlier, his conduct was his choice. abuse and displays of very poor behaviour, were not, as it were, “forced on him” by anyone, including “the family law system”, (j) all of this said, there is no question that the father and x have a good and close relationship. there is also no question that the parents have an ongoing, highly problematic relationship, with special difficulties in communication, (k) finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.   the father was equally contemptuous of the mother’s partner, even to the point of refusing to use her name but only to call her “that person”, and he was less than positive about x’s younger brother, t, almost refusing to acknowledge his existence, let alone that he is x’s brother. he was equally contemptuous of anyone who worked in, or with, the family law system, such as family consultants, psychologists and the like, (e) the father refused to answer questions about his employment, other than in the most general terms, and was equally obstructive about providing any information regarding any qualifications he has, (f) the father was, and obviously remains, deeply and adversely affected by whatever legal process his parents were engaged in during their separation in new zealand. however, he refused to provide any details of any treatment he has undertaken, other than in very general terms, to assist him in this regard, (g) the father was, on the one hand, very positive and confirmed that the mother was a “good mother” who was loved by, and who loves, x, but on the other hand, he was also highly contemptuous of her as a result of what he described as her “coercive control” of him especially during the marriage, and no less so in her refusal to compromise or discuss matters regarding x over the past nine years since separation. in his view, there was no discussion, and only “her choice” or her way was acceptable. as with all others with whom he dealt, the father’s view was never taken into account simply because he was “just a dad”. he treated parenthood almost as a contest with the mother because of all the “firsts” he had undertaken with x and the mother, in his view, had done nothing, (h) the father’s complaints and evidence generally was replete with slogans and generalised statements, which he intended to be accepted by the court as absolute truth without reference to any other evidence. as someone, on his evidence, who based his work and/or analysis on “facts”, which are (on his evidence) unemotional, he was remarkably blinkered and unreceptive to any facts that came from any source other than himself or those sources he relied upon, albeit unstated. challenging the father on almost anything was essentially a futile exercise, and one that invariably earned more than a rebuke, and invariably came with a liberal dose of swearing and insult. to state the obvious: the father’s conduct was (and is) a very poor role model for anyone, not least x, and it was quite tedious because it was so one-dimensional – abuse, protest, generalised statements (usually about gender and bias against men), (i) the father’s evidence, unless corroborated by documentary proof, was unreliable, not only because of his refusal to answer basic and important questions, but also because of his clearly stated, usually with great and unnecessary force and ill-tempered, crass language, prejudices against this court and all who work in “the family law system.” his regularly claimed “gender bias” against men, and fathers in particular, was simplistic in the extreme. he countenances no other view than his own, based clearly upon a most unhappy experience when his parents separated many years ago. the legacy of that separation and whatever followed from it, almost seems to haunt him, but it has also left him with not only emotional and psychological scars but also such a distorted view of anything to do with the “justice system” as to make his views untenable. he was regularly histrionic, and had a certitude about his views that was not justified by independent evidence. his abuse (which was often directed to the women in court, as well as to the bench), using regularly, completely intemperate and unacceptable language and emotional displays, certainly indicated a significant inability to see “the wood for the trees” regarding what were the critical issues for x, what were critical issues for the father, or properly or reasonably to control his emotions. he consistently failed to demonstrate insight or foresight, especially regarding his parental capacities, or in relation to the potential, adverse impact on x of his belligerent approach to ordinary, everyday life situations. he was really quite blinded, indeed unswerving, by his deep prejudices towards the court and the family law system. his self-justification for his abusive and disrespectful conduct was regrettably immature. in short, he was a poor and hostile witness who did his case, and x, little good by his antagonistic and bellicose, often vitriolic and puerile displays. as noted earlier, his conduct was his choice. abuse and displays of very poor behaviour, were not, as it were, “forced on him” by anyone, including “the family law system”, (j) all of this said, there is no question that the father and x have a good and close relationship. there is also no question that the parents have an ongoing, highly problematic relationship, with special difficulties in communication, (k) finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.   the father refused to answer questions about his employment, other than in the most general terms, and was equally obstructive about providing any information regarding any qualifications he has, (f) the father was, and obviously remains, deeply and adversely affected by whatever legal process his parents were engaged in during their separation in new zealand. however, he refused to provide any details of any treatment he has undertaken, other than in very general terms, to assist him in this regard, (g) the father was, on the one hand, very positive and confirmed that the mother was a “good mother” who was loved by, and who loves, x, but on the other hand, he was also highly contemptuous of her as a result of what he described as her “coercive control” of him especially during the marriage, and no less so in her refusal to compromise or discuss matters regarding x over the past nine years since separation. in his view, there was no discussion, and only “her choice” or her way was acceptable. as with all others with whom he dealt, the father’s view was never taken into account simply because he was “just a dad”. he treated parenthood almost as a contest with the mother because of all the “firsts” he had undertaken with x and the mother, in his view, had done nothing, (h) the father’s complaints and evidence generally was replete with slogans and generalised statements, which he intended to be accepted by the court as absolute truth without reference to any other evidence. as someone, on his evidence, who based his work and/or analysis on “facts”, which are (on his evidence) unemotional, he was remarkably blinkered and unreceptive to any facts that came from any source other than himself or those sources he relied upon, albeit unstated. challenging the father on almost anything was essentially a futile exercise, and one that invariably earned more than a rebuke, and invariably came with a liberal dose of swearing and insult. to state the obvious: the father’s conduct was (and is) a very poor role model for anyone, not least x, and it was quite tedious because it was so one-dimensional – abuse, protest, generalised statements (usually about gender and bias against men), (i) the father’s evidence, unless corroborated by documentary proof, was unreliable, not only because of his refusal to answer basic and important questions, but also because of his clearly stated, usually with great and unnecessary force and ill-tempered, crass language, prejudices against this court and all who work in “the family law system.” his regularly claimed “gender bias” against men, and fathers in particular, was simplistic in the extreme. he countenances no other view than his own, based clearly upon a most unhappy experience when his parents separated many years ago. the legacy of that separation and whatever followed from it, almost seems to haunt him, but it has also left him with not only emotional and psychological scars but also such a distorted view of anything to do with the “justice system” as to make his views untenable. he was regularly histrionic, and had a certitude about his views that was not justified by independent evidence. his abuse (which was often directed to the women in court, as well as to the bench), using regularly, completely intemperate and unacceptable language and emotional displays, certainly indicated a significant inability to see “the wood for the trees” regarding what were the critical issues for x, what were critical issues for the father, or properly or reasonably to control his emotions. he consistently failed to demonstrate insight or foresight, especially regarding his parental capacities, or in relation to the potential, adverse impact on x of his belligerent approach to ordinary, everyday life situations. he was really quite blinded, indeed unswerving, by his deep prejudices towards the court and the family law system. his self-justification for his abusive and disrespectful conduct was regrettably immature. in short, he was a poor and hostile witness who did his case, and x, little good by his antagonistic and bellicose, often vitriolic and puerile displays. as noted earlier, his conduct was his choice. abuse and displays of very poor behaviour, were not, as it were, “forced on him” by anyone, including “the family law system”, (j) all of this said, there is no question that the father and x have a good and close relationship. there is also no question that the parents have an ongoing, highly problematic relationship, with special difficulties in communication, (k) finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.   the father was, and obviously remains, deeply and adversely affected by whatever legal process his parents were engaged in during their separation in new zealand. however, he refused to provide any details of any treatment he has undertaken, other than in very general terms, to assist him in this regard, (g) the father was, on the one hand, very positive and confirmed that the mother was a “good mother” who was loved by, and who loves, x, but on the other hand, he was also highly contemptuous of her as a result of what he described as her “coercive control” of him especially during the marriage, and no less so in her refusal to compromise or discuss matters regarding x over the past nine years since separation. in his view, there was no discussion, and only “her choice” or her way was acceptable. as with all others with whom he dealt, the father’s view was never taken into account simply because he was “just a dad”. he treated parenthood almost as a contest with the mother because of all the “firsts” he had undertaken with x and the mother, in his view, had done nothing, (h) the father’s complaints and evidence generally was replete with slogans and generalised statements, which he intended to be accepted by the court as absolute truth without reference to any other evidence. as someone, on his evidence, who based his work and/or analysis on “facts”, which are (on his evidence) unemotional, he was remarkably blinkered and unreceptive to any facts that came from any source other than himself or those sources he relied upon, albeit unstated. challenging the father on almost anything was essentially a futile exercise, and one that invariably earned more than a rebuke, and invariably came with a liberal dose of swearing and insult. to state the obvious: the father’s conduct was (and is) a very poor role model for anyone, not least x, and it was quite tedious because it was so one-dimensional – abuse, protest, generalised statements (usually about gender and bias against men), (i) the father’s evidence, unless corroborated by documentary proof, was unreliable, not only because of his refusal to answer basic and important questions, but also because of his clearly stated, usually with great and unnecessary force and ill-tempered, crass language, prejudices against this court and all who work in “the family law system.” his regularly claimed “gender bias” against men, and fathers in particular, was simplistic in the extreme. he countenances no other view than his own, based clearly upon a most unhappy experience when his parents separated many years ago. the legacy of that separation and whatever followed from it, almost seems to haunt him, but it has also left him with not only emotional and psychological scars but also such a distorted view of anything to do with the “justice system” as to make his views untenable. he was regularly histrionic, and had a certitude about his views that was not justified by independent evidence. his abuse (which was often directed to the women in court, as well as to the bench), using regularly, completely intemperate and unacceptable language and emotional displays, certainly indicated a significant inability to see “the wood for the trees” regarding what were the critical issues for x, what were critical issues for the father, or properly or reasonably to control his emotions. he consistently failed to demonstrate insight or foresight, especially regarding his parental capacities, or in relation to the potential, adverse impact on x of his belligerent approach to ordinary, everyday life situations. he was really quite blinded, indeed unswerving, by his deep prejudices towards the court and the family law system. his self-justification for his abusive and disrespectful conduct was regrettably immature. in short, he was a poor and hostile witness who did his case, and x, little good by his antagonistic and bellicose, often vitriolic and puerile displays. as noted earlier, his conduct was his choice. abuse and displays of very poor behaviour, were not, as it were, “forced on him” by anyone, including “the family law system”, (j) all of this said, there is no question that the father and x have a good and close relationship. there is also no question that the parents have an ongoing, highly problematic relationship, with special difficulties in communication, (k) finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.   the father was, on the one hand, very positive and confirmed that the mother was a “good mother” who was loved by, and who loves, x, but on the other hand, he was also highly contemptuous of her as a result of what he described as her “coercive control” of him especially during the marriage, and no less so in her refusal to compromise or discuss matters regarding x over the past nine years since separation. in his view, there was no discussion, and only “her choice” or her way was acceptable. as with all others with whom he dealt, the father’s view was never taken into account simply because he was “just a dad”. he treated parenthood almost as a contest with the mother because of all the “firsts” he had undertaken with x and the mother, in his view, had done nothing, (h) the father’s complaints and evidence generally was replete with slogans and generalised statements, which he intended to be accepted by the court as absolute truth without reference to any other evidence. as someone, on his evidence, who based his work and/or analysis on “facts”, which are (on his evidence) unemotional, he was remarkably blinkered and unreceptive to any facts that came from any source other than himself or those sources he relied upon, albeit unstated. challenging the father on almost anything was essentially a futile exercise, and one that invariably earned more than a rebuke, and invariably came with a liberal dose of swearing and insult. to state the obvious: the father’s conduct was (and is) a very poor role model for anyone, not least x, and it was quite tedious because it was so one-dimensional – abuse, protest, generalised statements (usually about gender and bias against men), (i) the father’s evidence, unless corroborated by documentary proof, was unreliable, not only because of his refusal to answer basic and important questions, but also because of his clearly stated, usually with great and unnecessary force and ill-tempered, crass language, prejudices against this court and all who work in “the family law system.” his regularly claimed “gender bias” against men, and fathers in particular, was simplistic in the extreme. he countenances no other view than his own, based clearly upon a most unhappy experience when his parents separated many years ago. the legacy of that separation and whatever followed from it, almost seems to haunt him, but it has also left him with not only emotional and psychological scars but also such a distorted view of anything to do with the “justice system” as to make his views untenable. he was regularly histrionic, and had a certitude about his views that was not justified by independent evidence. his abuse (which was often directed to the women in court, as well as to the bench), using regularly, completely intemperate and unacceptable language and emotional displays, certainly indicated a significant inability to see “the wood for the trees” regarding what were the critical issues for x, what were critical issues for the father, or properly or reasonably to control his emotions. he consistently failed to demonstrate insight or foresight, especially regarding his parental capacities, or in relation to the potential, adverse impact on x of his belligerent approach to ordinary, everyday life situations. he was really quite blinded, indeed unswerving, by his deep prejudices towards the court and the family law system. his self-justification for his abusive and disrespectful conduct was regrettably immature. in short, he was a poor and hostile witness who did his case, and x, little good by his antagonistic and bellicose, often vitriolic and puerile displays. as noted earlier, his conduct was his choice. abuse and displays of very poor behaviour, were not, as it were, “forced on him” by anyone, including “the family law system”, (j) all of this said, there is no question that the father and x have a good and close relationship. there is also no question that the parents have an ongoing, highly problematic relationship, with special difficulties in communication, (k) finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.   the father’s complaints and evidence generally was replete with slogans and generalised statements, which he intended to be accepted by the court as absolute truth without reference to any other evidence. as someone, on his evidence, who based his work and/or analysis on “facts”, which are (on his evidence) unemotional, he was remarkably blinkered and unreceptive to any facts that came from any source other than himself or those sources he relied upon, albeit unstated. challenging the father on almost anything was essentially a futile exercise, and one that invariably earned more than a rebuke, and invariably came with a liberal dose of swearing and insult. to state the obvious: the father’s conduct was (and is) a very poor role model for anyone, not least x, and it was quite tedious because it was so one-dimensional – abuse, protest, generalised statements (usually about gender and bias against men), (i) the father’s evidence, unless corroborated by documentary proof, was unreliable, not only because of his refusal to answer basic and important questions, but also because of his clearly stated, usually with great and unnecessary force and ill-tempered, crass language, prejudices against this court and all who work in “the family law system.” his regularly claimed “gender bias” against men, and fathers in particular, was simplistic in the extreme. he countenances no other view than his own, based clearly upon a most unhappy experience when his parents separated many years ago. the legacy of that separation and whatever followed from it, almost seems to haunt him, but it has also left him with not only emotional and psychological scars but also such a distorted view of anything to do with the “justice system” as to make his views untenable. he was regularly histrionic, and had a certitude about his views that was not justified by independent evidence. his abuse (which was often directed to the women in court, as well as to the bench), using regularly, completely intemperate and unacceptable language and emotional displays, certainly indicated a significant inability to see “the wood for the trees” regarding what were the critical issues for x, what were critical issues for the father, or properly or reasonably to control his emotions. he consistently failed to demonstrate insight or foresight, especially regarding his parental capacities, or in relation to the potential, adverse impact on x of his belligerent approach to ordinary, everyday life situations. he was really quite blinded, indeed unswerving, by his deep prejudices towards the court and the family law system. his self-justification for his abusive and disrespectful conduct was regrettably immature. in short, he was a poor and hostile witness who did his case, and x, little good by his antagonistic and bellicose, often vitriolic and puerile displays. as noted earlier, his conduct was his choice. abuse and displays of very poor behaviour, were not, as it were, “forced on him” by anyone, including “the family law system”, (j) all of this said, there is no question that the father and x have a good and close relationship. there is also no question that the parents have an ongoing, highly problematic relationship, with special difficulties in communication, (k) finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.   the father’s evidence, unless corroborated by documentary proof, was unreliable, not only because of his refusal to answer basic and important questions, but also because of his clearly stated, usually with great and unnecessary force and ill-tempered, crass language, prejudices against this court and all who work in “the family law system.” his regularly claimed “gender bias” against men, and fathers in particular, was simplistic in the extreme. he countenances no other view than his own, based clearly upon a most unhappy experience when his parents separated many years ago. the legacy of that separation and whatever followed from it, almost seems to haunt him, but it has also left him with not only emotional and psychological scars but also such a distorted view of anything to do with the “justice system” as to make his views untenable. he was regularly histrionic, and had a certitude about his views that was not justified by independent evidence. his abuse (which was often directed to the women in court, as well as to the bench), using regularly, completely intemperate and unacceptable language and emotional displays, certainly indicated a significant inability to see “the wood for the trees” regarding what were the critical issues for x, what were critical issues for the father, or properly or reasonably to control his emotions. he consistently failed to demonstrate insight or foresight, especially regarding his parental capacities, or in relation to the potential, adverse impact on x of his belligerent approach to ordinary, everyday life situations. he was really quite blinded, indeed unswerving, by his deep prejudices towards the court and the family law system. his self-justification for his abusive and disrespectful conduct was regrettably immature. in short, he was a poor and hostile witness who did his case, and x, little good by his antagonistic and bellicose, often vitriolic and puerile displays. as noted earlier, his conduct was his choice. abuse and displays of very poor behaviour, were not, as it were, “forced on him” by anyone, including “the family law system”, (j) all of this said, there is no question that the father and x have a good and close relationship. there is also no question that the parents have an ongoing, highly problematic relationship, with special difficulties in communication, (k) finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.   all of this said, there is no question that the father and x have a good and close relationship. there is also no question that the parents have an ongoing, highly problematic relationship, with special difficulties in communication, (k) finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.   finally, a singular if not an immense flaw in the father’s jaundiced view, based on his experience of the family law system in new zealand when his parents separated, is that, as he reported to the family consultant, he was placed (doubtless pursuant to orders then made) with his psychologically abusive mother and spent each alternate weekend with his father.[73] he contended that this is what the mother was seeking to impose in the current proceeding. the basic flaw, and a major one at that, in the father’s current “world-view” in this regard, is that, contrary to his experience now many years ago, in the current matter neither parent is abusive towards x. indeed, even the father confirmed a number of times that the mother was (and is) a “good mother”, whom x loves, and that she loves him. not to see this fundamental difference in the two cases is most unfortunate if not bordering on disturbing because of the father’s lack of insight.
the mother’s evidence
and why – in what way does it cause you a concern?---i have to be very – what’s the word – careful about the wording of those emails and make sure that i’m very direct and succinct, making sure that the information in them is significant but it’s also incredibly stressful in that there is – whilst it’s not a court-ordered mandate, i feel that, if it’s not delivered by the 8 o’clock timeline, then i’m in fear of a contravention. so i - - - ... so, if [x] is transferring from your care to [mr manuel’s] care, in circumstances where perhaps you’re not talking to each other - - -?---yes. - is it not unreasonable there be some exchange by way of email?---absolutely. and, when you say you’re concerned about whether the information is significant, what – what does that attach to, whether you’re dealing with things that aren’t significant or you’re omitting things that are significant?---no. there’s no reason to omit anything that is significant. that doesn’t benefit [x] for me to omit anything significant. i just – it’s important for me to ensure that all the information that is pertinent to a handover is handed over. so - - - so you’re concerned to not miss anything?---absolutely. and that’s because of your concern regarding the way in which [mr manuel] might respond?---absolutely.
isn’t the more likely situation that you wanted [x] to get the counselling but you were concerned that the father wouldn’t agree?---i knew he wouldn’t agree. so you knew he wouldn’t agree?---yes. well, that would tend to support the contention i just put to you, would it not?---yes. and so – and, of course, you’ve been listening for the last day and a half and you’re aware that [mr manuel] says that that’s a feature of your communication or what he describes as lack of communication. so what do you say in response to that?---my communication with the father is based out of fear. it’s never a calm, communicative back and forth with him. it’s, “i will send this email,” and i anticipate a bomb being dropped on me. that’s what i’m waiting for every single time i send an email to him. sometimes i don’t get it right. sometimes i could word the emails better. sometimes i could be more forthcoming in how i’m presenting the information. that’s on me. his honour: and would you say that – these are my words – that anxiety about bombs being dropped on you, has that been the case, basically ever since you separated from [mr manuel]?---absolutely. absolutely. pardon me. and, sorry, one – there might just simply be a question of degree. and i’m sorry for my voice, i’m – i didn’t think i had been talking that much but still. has the difficulty and your degree of concern and anxiety, has that grown over the years or has it stayed reasonably constant?---no, it has grown.
so when the family consultant indicates, at paragraph 68 of her report, and this is where [x] describes himself as chilled out at mum’s and stressed out at his father’s due to tasks he has to complete and he says that it’s annoying switching between houses but indicated a preference to continue spending equal time with each parent. he – what weight should his honour give to that statement that [x] has apparently made to the family consultant?---because right up until monday when i sent him back to dad’s and, “have a good week,” he said to me, “why is it that i have to keep to doing this?” and - - - by “this”, what did he mean?---week about. “why is it that i can’t spend more time here, because that’s what i want?” unfortunately, he didn’t quite get that over the line for himself. we had spoken to him about being very open and honest with the report writer because she was his voice. so you would have – you were hoping that he would say something to that effect?---i was hoping that he could be honest. when i asked him - - - and so why do you think he would have said something like that - - -?---because he told me - - - - - - to the report-writer?--- - - - that he’s worried that his dad won’t like him if he says he wants to live with us more.
evidence of the family consultant – the report
issues in dispute and issues identified during assessment the issues in dispute are: the living arrangement for [x]. parental responsibility for [x]. issues identified during the assessment: the parenting capacity of each of the parents. the nature of [x’s] relationships with his parents and other family members. the nature of the dynamic between the parents, and their capacity to make decisions and communicate about [x’s] needs. adults [mr manuel] (applicant father, aged 44 years) [mr manuel] presented as somewhat agitated during the interview, and requested that he have two witnesses present for his interview, including his partner, [ms ae]. these two witnesses were granted permission to witness the interview, but were reminded of the confidential nature of family report interviews. [mr manuel] displayed his frustration about the court process throughout the interview process, frequently swearing and insulting individuals involved in the proceedings. this frustration was not directed at the assessor, and he remained cordial throughout the interview and observation process. he engaged with the entirety of the assessment, even after noting that he found some questions offensive. [mr manuel’s] focus throughout the assessment appeared to be on denigrating [ms pinner], and presenting research on the societal inequalities relating to gender, and he required regular guidance to focus on his own parenting and on [x]. he became teary while discussing the loss of his pet, but was able to calm himself and continue the interview. prior to beginning the interview, [mr manuel] stated that the previous family report writers were unsuitable, as they had refused to answer questions about their assessment approach. he requested that, prior to beginning the assessment, he was provided information about the assessor’s qualifications, whether the assessment would follow the “duluth model” of family violence, and whether the assessor identified as a feminist. once the assessor had explained the assessment approach, [mr manuel] appeared comfortable continuing the interview. [mr manuel] spoke at length about his belief that the family law system is corrupt, and believes that [ms pinner’s] lawyer, the judge, and court experts have all lied during the court proceedings. he explained that his own experience of the family law system as a young child was incredibly damaging. he reported that he was placed in the care of a psychologically abusive mother, who actively discouraged him from having a positive relationship with his father. he added that, due to his mother’s abuse, and the care arrangement in which he spent two days each fortnight with his father, he was unable to develop a close relationship with his father. he reflected that this is the care arrangement proposed for [x] by [ms pinner], and indicated that he has a first-hand understanding of how detrimental this would be for [x]. [mr manuel] repeatedly stated that a significant portion of society view “men as scum” and believe that fathers should have no role in children’s lives. he alleged that multiple service providers have refused to engage with him due to these beliefs, and he strongly believes he must protect [x] from these individuals. for example, he noted that [ms pinner] had arranged for [x] to attend counselling, with a counsellor [x] had engaged with in the past. however, [mr manuel] said that the counsellor refused to provide any information to [mr manuel], telling him, “fuck off, you’re just a dad, i don’t have to tell you anything”. [mr manuel] clarified that he was paraphrasing the counsellor’s words, but believes that this was the underlying message. he stated that he had a similar experience with [x’s] orthodontic receptionist, as well as [x’s] general practitioner. [mr manuel] described a settled home life, and a supportive relationship with his partner of seven years, [ms ae]. he indicated that his life revolves significantly around [x], noting that he attends all [x’s] [sports] games, and that he has begun playing video games regularly as a way to engage with [x]. he described many activities that he takes [x] to, such as music concerts, camping, and kayaking. [mr manuel] consistently described situations of unfairness between him and [ms pinner], such as noting that [ms pinner] had complained about him being [x’s] [sports] coach, but that [ms pinner] was now the manager of [x’s] [sports] team. he described his approach to co-parenting as being communicative and flexible, but that [ms pinner] has refused to engage with him, and will reject any proposal made by him. he explained that he was reluctant to begin proceedings, but that, due to [ms pinner’s] refusal to negotiate, he was forced into the court system. similarly, he believes that each application during the proceedings has been necessary, due to [ms pinner’s] refusal to communicate with him. [mr manuel] is concerned that [ms pinner] may be speaking negatively about him to [x], and discouraging [x’s] relationship with him. he stated that he has no way of knowing whether [ms pinner] makes these comments, but that [x] has commented, “mum takes the phone off me”, and “mum says i’m not allowed to talk to you”. [mr manuel] also alleged that [x] said that his mother has told him that [ms ae] does not like her. [mr manuel] strongly rejected allegations that there was family violence in the relationship with [ms pinner]. he said that there had been no allegations of family violence prior to 2019, and that [ms pinner’s] actions, such as attending [x’s] [sports] games while he was present, indicate that she is not “petrified” of him, as she has stated in her affidavit material. he believes that [ms pinner] has made these claims on the advice of her lawyer, due to changes in legislation. he added that the current broad definition of family violence is detrimental, saying “it has gone from beating the shit out of someone, to he looked at me funny”. he said that, if there was “true violence” in the relationship, [ms pinner] would have sought a family violence order or raised her allegations with police. he stated that there had been some minor arguments during the relationship, but no yelling or significant verbal abuse. [mr manuel] stated that, using the current definition of family violence, he is the victim of [ms pinner’s] emotional abuse and control. he alleged that [ms pinner] was highly critical of him during their relationship, and told him to “get over” his paternal post-natal depression following [x’s] birth. he said that he “just put up with it”, and indicated that her criticisms did not cause him to feel scared or concerned for his safety. he said that, since the separation, [ms pinner’s] control in relation to parenting decisions has been abusive to both him and [x]. as an example, he said that, when [x] was aged seven, he telephoned [mr manuel], and that [ms pinner] took the telephone from [x] and said, “no more calls on friday nights” in front of [x]. [mr manuel] stated that he has consistently liaised with [ms pinner] about parenting decisions, offering alternatives and suggestions wherever possible. he denied that he has ever behaved in a hostile or abusive manner towards [ms pinner], and alleged that she has sent him hundreds of emails calling him “every name under the sun”. [mr manuel] raised concerns about [ms pinner’s] wife, [ms s], stating that [ms s] has behaved in an intimidating manner towards him. he also alleged that, when [x] was younger, [ms s] would condone alcohol use, by telling [x] that he could have the bottle caps if he brought her a beer. he stated that he reported this to his psychologist at the time, who said that she was required to make a child protection report, but that he later discovered that it had not been reported. he added that he also raised his concerns with child and youth protection services, but that they had said, “fuck off [mr manuel] [(mr manuel)], you are just a dad”. again, [mr manuel] clarified that he had paraphrased their response. [mr manuel] believes it is likely that [ms s] is abusive towards [ms pinner]. he appeared to base this on his understanding of statistics of family violence in same-sex relationships, stating that one study found that physical abuse was present in “70 percent of lesbian relationships”. he alleged that [ms s] is “known for drinking and destroying relationships”, and he believes that she is responsible for the breakdown of his marriage. [mr manuel] raised some concerns about [ms pinner’s] parenting, such as alleging that he had overheard [ms pinner] shouting at her younger child, [t], and that [ms pinner] had encouraged [x] to burn items given to him by [x’s] girlfriend, following their break up. however, he struggled to articulate his concerns about the impact on [x], focusing on the unfairness of [ms pinner’s] claims about his parenting. [mr manuel] stated that it is important for [x] to have the opportunity to connect to his cultural heritage and paternal family, through holding new zealand citizenship, and having the opportunity to visit new zealand. [mr manuel] reported that, while he is not in contact with his parents, he has maintained a relationship with his brother, and would like [x] to travel to new zealand to meet him, and other friends and family in the region. [mr manuel] believes that [ms pinner’s] lack of flexibility has also affected [x’s] opportunities to attend other enjoyable activities. he gave an example of not being able to take [x] to the [event b], as [ms pinner] refused to swap days, and said that [ms pinner] has not responded to his request to take [x] to see his favourite band, [ad]. he added that he has paid for vip tickets so that [x] can meet the band, but he believes [ms pinner] is likely to refuse to swap days to allow him to take [x]. [mr manuel] reported that, due to his difficult early life experiences, he suffers from depression and anxiety, and noted that the current court proceedings exacerbate these symptoms. however, he said that he has engaged with counsellors and psychologists throughout his life, and that he takes antidepressant medication regularly, and finds that his mental health is “manageable”. [mr manuel] believes [x] is generally happy and healthy, and raised no significant concerns about his health or development. he described [x] as “middle of the range” academically, and believes he has settled into high school. he reported that he has maintained a positive relationship with [x’s] high school, and communicates regularly with [x’s] teachers. he acknowledged that he made complaints to the school, department of education, and the act human rights commission earlier this year, due to [x] being told to wear a mask in class, despite an exemption, but said that this has not interfered with his positive relationship with the school. [mr manuel] reported that he fosters [x’s] mental health through “keeping busy”, and engaging in activities with [x]. he described making significant efforts to support [x’s] grief process following the loss of their family dog, [ao], including collecting [x] from school to allow him to farewell [ao]. [mr manuel] stated that he and [ms pinner] disagree about whether to vaccinate [x] against covid-19, saying that he has conducted in-depth research about the risks, and is confident that the risks outweigh the benefits. when questioned further, he stated that he does not believe [ms pinner] has conducted research on the vaccine, and has just followed government advice. [mr manuel] described his parenting approach as “letting [x] have a bit of rope”. he said he believes that, to teach them responsibility, you need to provide children with some responsibility, and gave the example of providing [x] with a mobile telephone during primary school. he said that [ms pinner] had disagreed with [x] having a telephone, but that he found it was a good way to teach [x] a sense of responsibility. he said that [x] is rewarded with pocket money each week for assisting with chores, and said that he will turn off [x’s] computer if he is not doing as he is asked. he denied that [x] ever argues with him, and said that [x] is never rude or defiant during their time together. [mr manuel] said that [x] is probably more likely to speak to him about practical problems, such as an issue with his computer, than about emotional problems, and he believes this is typical of most parent dynamics, describing it as “biology 101”. [mr manuel] was able to identify a time that [x] had spoken to him about an emotional concern, following [x’s] breakup with his girlfriend earlier this year, and [mr manuel] said that [x] is gradually becoming more open with him, and speaking about his feelings. [mr manuel] indicated that there are strong societal drivers against boys and men speaking about their feelings, but seems to believe there is merit in encouraging [x’s] emotional openness with him. [mr manuel] acknowledged that there have been times where he has raised his voice in frustration when dealing with the court and with professionals involved in [x’s] care. he stated that society tells men that they are not allowed to feel angry, and he appears to believe that this is the driver of allegations that he has behaved in a hostile manner. he said that he has never made threats to harm anyone, has never behaved in a physically violent manner, and stated that he does not “throw the first metaphorical punch”. however, he is adamant about the importance of “standing up to bullies”, and believes his responses have been warranted and necessary. he was adamant that [x] has never seen him raise his voice at others, and he is confident that he is able to maintain relationships with [x’s] health and education providers. [ms pinner] (respondent mother, aged 43 years) [ms pinner] presented as open and polite during the assessment process. she became teary when talking about the history of the relationship with [mr manuel], but was able to regulate her emotions and continue with the interview. during the follow up telephone conversation, she reported that she felt deflated by the processes, and reiterated that she feels let down by the court system. [ms pinner] described a settled family environment, and a mutually supportive relationship with her wife, [ms s]. she reported that she has been diagnosed with anxiety and depression, and takes medication regularly, as well as engaging with a psychologist regularly. she said that 85% of her current mental health struggles relate to the court proceedings and [mr manuel’s] behaviour. she said that neither she nor [ms s] consume alcohol, as they want to be good role models for [x] and [t]. [ms pinner] indicated that her life has become governed by the court orders, due to her fear of further contravention proceedings. she said that there is no flexibility from [mr manuel], unless he requests it. she said that she would like to move the scheduled telephone calls from 6pm to 7pm, due to the time clashing with dinner at both houses, but that [mr manuel] will not agree to any changes. she said that [x] now has two mobile telephones – one belonging to his father, on which [mr manuel] has blocked [ms pinner’s] number, and one belonging to his mother, which [x] uses on the week he stays with [ms pinner]. [ms pinner] raised concerns about [x’s] emotional safety in his father’s care. she alleged that [x] frequently feels uncomfortable in his father’s care, and that [x] has told her that he is scared of his father. she said that earlier this year, [x] called her from his father’s to tell her that he had lost his wallet, containing a significant amount of money, and was too scared to tell his father. she believes [x] does not feel comfortable expressing his wishes to his father, due to fear of disappointing or upsetting him, and gave the example of [x] not wanting to go to an upcoming music concert. she explained that [x] loved the band when he was younger, but is no longer interested in attending the concert, but she is unsure how to address this with [mr manuel], who has tickets for [x] to attend. she said that [x] has told her that he wished he could go to the [event b] without [ms ae], but that he does not feel he can tell his father. [ms pinner] reported that [x] was also unwilling to tell [mr manuel] that he did not want [mr manuel] to coach his [sports] team, and that [x] recently asked her whether he could be vaccinated against covid-19 “and not tell dad”. [ms pinner] alleged that [mr manuel] was highly controlling during their relationship, and said that she quickly learned what to do to maintain “an even keel”. she said that, on a number of occasions, [mr manuel] locked her out of the house, or their room when living in a share house, when he was angry with her, and alleged that he used her as “a verbal punching bag”. she said that [mr manuel] would go for long periods where he refused to speak to her unless she took full responsibility for whatever had happened, and alleged that, on one occasion, he pushed her against a kitchen bench to force her to speak to him. she alleged that, while she was pregnant with [x], they had an argument in the car, and he repeatedly punched the steering wheel while driving. [ms pinner] alleged that, since the end of the relationship, [mr manuel] has attempted to maintain control by interfering in her life. she said that, in 2019, she experienced a cardiac event, which was diagnosed at the time as pericarditis. she said that, while she was in hospital, [mr manuel] contacted her estranged siblings to tell them she had a stroke, and begun legal proceedings for [x] to be removed from her care and for her to provide him with her private medical information. she stated that she requires another surgical procedure, but that, due to the risk of [mr manuel] initiating further proceedings, she plans to postpone the procedure until [x] is 18 years of age, and live with ongoing pain until then. [ms pinner] denied that she has not communicated with [mr manuel] about parenting decisions, and gave numerous examples of attempting to engage in dialogue with him. she said that, when she wanted to change [x’s] general practitioner, she explained her reasons to [mr manuel], who refused to agree. she said that she had indicated her preferences for primary school choice for [x], but received no response, and so enrolled [x] at the school of her choice. [ms pinner] believes [mr manuel] has not addressed his ongoing mental health issues, saying that she thinks he has only attended sporadic sessions with counsellors and psychologists. she alleged that [mr manuel] has displayed aggressive reactions throughout the time she has known him, such as yelling at strangers for queue jumping, and yelling at [x’s] [sports] team when he was coaching them. she said that [mr manuel] has not demonstrated any insight into his behaviour, or willingness to change this behaviour, and she worries about the impact on [x] of living with [mr manuel’s] volatility. she said that her concerns are both about the direct impact of [mr manuel] losing his temper with [x], as well as [mr manuel] role modelling his behaviour to [x]. she gave an example of [x] telling her that he and his father laugh together about [mr manuel] yelling at the macdonald’s staff if the frozen coke machine is broken, which she believes is teaching harmful values to [x]. [ms pinner] reported that [x] is generally healthy and developing well, but she is concerned about his transition to high school. she believes that his start to school was difficult, and that his current high school does not offer sufficient structure for him. she said that the school has contacted her on a number of occasions about [x’s] behaviour in class, which she views as [x] struggling with knowing where he fits in. she said that she would prefer [x] to attend a private school, but that [mr manuel] will not contemplate this option. [ms pinner] believes [x] is forced to be “one person with [his father] and one person [with her]”, and that this is negatively affecting his mental health. she said that, while [x] is unaware that his parents have spent years fighting in court, he picks up on the change in [ms pinner’s] demeanour when she is distressed about court proceedings. [ms pinner] described an emotionally sensitive parenting approach, and said that she ensures she listens to [x’s] perspective before making decisions about behaviour management. she said that she receives ongoing support around parenting strategies from her psychologist, but that generally she and [x] have a close and affectionate relationship. [ms pinner] believes that the current shared care arrangement places significant stress on [x], and believes that reducing [x’s] time with his father would allow [x] to develop his sense of stability and his confidence when speaking with his father. she said that she hoped that a change in the care arrangements may also prompt [mr manuel] to address his mental health issues and behaviour, though also stated that she believes he is unlikely to change. collateral information subpoenaed information from australian federal police indicates that in july 2015, reports were made to police raising concerns about suicidal comments made by [mr manuel]. a further report was made in march 2021, again raising concerns about suicidal comments made by [mr manuel]. police noted that they forced entry into [mr manuel’s] home and took him into custody due to concerns about his mental health. a report from may 2020 notes that [mr manuel] contacted police stating that he was fearful of [ms s] following an interaction about a bag. [mr manuel] told police he was unwilling for [ms s] to hand him the bag due to concerns about covid-19, but that [ms s] told him he was being ridiculous. he said that no threats were made, but that he was scared by her tone of voice. subpoenaed information from act educational directorate indicates that [x] has generally received average results in his academic reports, with his naplan scores in the average range. he was frequently described in school reports as curious, caring, and sometimes easily distracted. emails between [mr manuel] and the school show that [mr manuel] threatened legal action if the school was not able to ensure that [x] was not “subject to any discussion, coercion, discrimination etc about masks and vaccinations”, and that [mr manuel] accused the school of “child abuse” for requesting that students wear masks. orders from 2 may 2022 indicate that, during the interim hearing, [mr manuel] had an altercation with the security guard and with the associate, arguing about whether he could enter the courtroom without providing his vaccination status. his honour noted that [mr manuel] consistently refused to answer the court’s questions, and accused the court of being corrupt and of lying. [x] and his relationships [x] presented as a quietly spoken, thoughtful individual, who appeared comfortable speaking with the assessor. [x] reported that he is “getting through” year 7, and starting to settle in, though indicated that he does not “love” attending school. he reported that his favourite class is history and that his least favourite is japanese, as he finds it “hard and boring”. he described some changes to his friendships since moving to high school, but said that he has maintained some friendships from primary school. he enjoys playing [sports], with games each sunday and training on tuesdays. he said that he also enjoys playing video games, such as minecraft and fortnite. [x] described a close, positive relationship with his mother, describing her as “very nice and caring”, and he easily identified enjoyable activities he shares with her. he reported no significant conflict with his mother, though expressed that he can be “mopey” when she tells him he is not allowed to play video games. he described a comfortable sibling relationship with his brother, [t], with conflict typical of siblings of their developmental stages. he also described a positive relationship with [ms s]. he described no significant concerns about his mother or her home, stating that he never feels scared or unsafe while in his mother’s care, and stated that his mother and [ms s] do not have a high conflict relationship, or expose him to angry or unkind behaviours. [x] appeared ambivalent about his relationship with his father. he identified that he enjoys playing video games with his father, and walking the dogs together. however, he said that his father “gets more of an angry tone”, which makes him feel scared. he explained that, when he was younger, his father was “more yelly”, but now his father tells him that he is disappointed, but that [x] can tell that he is angry. he said that, at those times, he goes to his room to calm down, and that he and his father normally get along once they have had some time to themselves. he added that he is “getting better at having a voice with dad”, and is feeling more confident expressing his wishes to his father. he gave an example of attending the [event b], saying that he does not wish to go, due to the long drive, and because he does not enjoy camping “as much as dad does”. he said that he and [ms ae] “get along”, but stated that they do not do many activities together, and did not describe a particularly close relationship. he raised no concerns about conflict between his father and [ms ae], saying that he has not witnessed arguments or hostility between them. [x] stated that, while he feels he is able to maintain his identity when he is with each parent, his attitude changes between the houses, describing himself as “chilled out” at his mother’s, and “stressed out” at his father’s, due to the number of tasks he needs to complete when with his father. he said that it is “annoying switching between houses”, but indicated a preference to continue to spend equal time with each parent. he said that, when he is cranky with one parent, he often wants to go to the other parent’s home, but that this happens with both parents. he suggested that he would like to be able to move between his parents’ homes when he wishes, but acknowledged that this could also create difficulties. [x] expressed confidence in his parents’ capacity to communicate about his needs, and gave an example of one parent taking a photo of school notes or party invitations to send to the other parent. he stated that he was unsure how his parents feel about one another, as they do not speak to him about it. evaluation the priorities for [x], based on his stage of development, are to have a safe and stable home environment, warm, emotionally sensitive relationships with his caregivers, opportunities to connect with friends and family, and opportunities to engage in his schooling and other interests. as he approaches his adolescent years, [x] is likely to seek greater independence and responsibility, and will need to individuate his identity from his parents. [x’s] parents separated when he was three years of age, so his only memories of his family structure are likely to be the current arrangement, where he spends equal time with each of his parents. [x] appears healthy and well cared for, and no significant concerns have been raised about [x’s] health or development. fortunately, [x] appears to have been protected from the hostility between his parents, and the fact that there have been bitter ongoing legal proceedings since 2016. however, as [x] approaches adolescence, he is likely to increase his understanding of the dynamics between his parents, and this is likely to place significant stress on his emotional wellbeing. [x’s] mother noted that he has recently been displaying some behaviour difficulties at school, which is frequently a sign of emotional distress. ongoing litigation would likely have a negative impact on [x’s] emotional wellbeing and development, and it is therefore critical that this matter is resolved on a final basis. [x] is likely to benefit from engaging with a psychologist, to assess his current mental state, and provide an avenue for him to discuss his family dynamics. [mr manuel’s] primary concern about [ms pinner] is contained to a belief that she is unwilling to co-parent with him, and that she is attempting to remove him from [x’s] life. while he raised some concerns about [ms pinner’s] parenting, his focus appeared to be on the unreasonableness of her allegations about him, rather than any significant concern about [x’s] wellbeing in [ms pinner’s] care. [x] presented a positive picture of his relationship with his mother and stepmother, and described a relaxed and comfortable relationship with each of them. [x], [ms pinner], and [ms s] interacted in a warm and affectionate manner, and [ms pinner] described appropriate positive parenting strategies, appropriate for [x’s] age. [mr manuel] described [ms pinner] has categorically refusing to communicate with him about parenting decisions, making unilateral decisions without [mr manuel’s] involvement, sending him abusive emails, and lacking any flexibility around their care arrangements. he stated that, due to this, he has been forced to rely on the family court system as a way to negotiate with [ms pinner], which he has found frustrating and unsatisfactory. [ms pinner] was adamant that she has attempted to communicate with [mr manuel], and that she has agreed to change care arrangements on numerous occasions. she explained that her lack of flexibility is at times where [x] has told her that he does not want to attend an event, or when it significantly affects [x’s] engagement in activities with her and her family. [ms pinner] described [mr manuel] as controlling and emotionally abusive during their relationship, and believes that [mr manuel’s] behaviour post-separation has been an attempt to maintain control over her, including utilising the court system as a method of abuse. she described a high level of anxiety about complying with court orders, due to fears of further contravention orders, and it seems likely that the ongoing proceedings are negatively affecting her mental health. it also appears that the effort of protecting [x] from the conflict involving his father, such as navigating relationships with [x’s] school and health providers, and relaying messages from [x] when he does not feel confident talking directly to his father, has placed further burden on [ms pinner]. unfortunately, due to this pattern of hostility between [ms pinner] and [mr manuel], it seems likely that [ms pinner] would want to limit her communication with [mr manuel], prompting unilateral decision-making and a decrease in flexibility, which has then further fuelled [mr manuel’s] hostility. it is unclear whether [mr manuel’s] actions have been a deliberate attempt to control and punish [ms pinner], or whether [mr manuel] genuinely believes court action has been the only avenue for engagement. regardless of intention, the ongoing court proceedings are having a profound negative effect on both parents’ emotional wellbeing, which will affect their capacity to provide stable, emotionally sensitive care to [x]. [mr manuel] presents as an involved father, whose role as a parent forms a significant part of his identity. no concerns have been raised about his capacity to provide for [x’s] day-to-day care, and [x] spoke in a mainly positive manner about his relationship with his father. [ms pinner’s] primary concern about [mr manuel] is his capacity to regulate his own emotions, and the impact on [x] of his angry outbursts. in the previous memorandums in 2019 and 2020, [x] stated that he was scared of his father when he yelled. in the current assessment, [x] stated that his father has reduced his yelling, but that he continues to feel fearful of upsetting his father, when his father uses an angry tone of voice. the fact that [x] never argues with his father could indicate that [x] is fearful of conflict with his father, and unwilling to express views or wishes contrary to his father’s. as [x] continues to develop his sense of self and differentiate himself from his parents, it will be important that he feels safe to express his views to both of his parents. [x] and his father may benefit from family therapy to encourage [x’s] sense of emotional safety with his father. another difficulty relating to [mr manuel’s] emotional regulation relates to potential interference with [x’s] health and education providers. [ms pinner] has reported that [mr manuel] has consistently harassed [x’s] gp, contacted act health to cancel [x’s] covid-19 vaccination, refused to allow [x] to engage with his counsellor, and threatened [x’s] school with legal action. [mr manuel] believes that he has behaved in a protective and reasonable manner, and that the societal discrimination against men displaying their emotions is the issue. [mr manuel] appears to underestimate the potential for his expression of anger to interfere with his communication with others. while he is adamant that his intention is not to be intimidating, violent or threatening, the involvement of security guards in court proceedings indicates a perceived safety threat. similarly, while [mr manuel] expressed confidence in his relationship with [x’s] school and health providers, it appears likely that professionals will be hesitant to communicate freely with [mr manuel] if there is a pattern of complaints and/or hostility. [mr manuel’s] persistent pattern of behaviour may suggest he is unwilling to scrutinise his behaviour and change his views. he appears prone to take matters personally and to react defensively at times. he may benefit from engaging with a psychologist, with access to this report, to explore his attitudes and behaviours relating to emotional regulation. [mr manuel] expressed strong beliefs relating to societal gender inequality, which underpin his frustration in the court process, as well as his sense of being sidelined by professionals due to his role as a father. he gave a number of examples of this occurring, and expressed hatred of the feminist movement, which he believes is responsible. it appears likely that [mr manuel] will have difficulty working collaboratively with professionals involved with [x] if they place restrictions on his access to information, or express views contrary to his own. as [x] enters adolescence, it will be important that [mr manuel] is able to be tolerant of other perspectives, including [x’s] own views, in order to maintain his relationships with [x] and [x’s] supports. [mr manuel] proposes that the current equal shared care arrangement continues. this is in line with [x’s] experience throughout his life, provides opportunities for [x] to connect meaningfully with both parents, and is in line with [x’s] stated wishes during his interview. however, [x] noted that he feels more stressed when in his father’s care, and his mother and [ms s] have observed that [x] returns “highly strung”, and takes some time to settle back into their home. if [x] does not feel confident expressing his needs and wishes while with his father, he is likely to find an ongoing equal time arrangement highly stressful, particularly as he faces the emotional challenges of adolescence. however, [x] expressed that he is finding it easier to express his wishes when with his father, and it may be that [x] and his father are able to improve their emotional communication. equal shared care arrangements require significant communication between parents. [mr manuel] and [ms pinner] appear to maintain some effective communication, to a point that [x] has expressed confidence in his parents’ capacity to troubleshoot day-to-day issues with one another. however, their communication about decision-making for [x], and around flexibility in care arrangements, has consistently led to hostility and distress for both parents. [ms pinner] believes that [x] would benefit from living with her and spending alternate weekends with [mr manuel]. she believes this would provide more stability for [x], and limit [x’s] exposure to [mr manuel’s] volatility. many children prefer to live primarily with one parent once they attend high school, due to the increase in homework and belongings to move between houses. [x] indicated that he finds moving between houses “annoying”, and expressed that he feels more relaxed at his mother’s care. however, it is also important that he has the opportunity to have a meaningful relationship with his father. [mr manuel] believes that reducing his time with [x] would significantly affect their relationship with one another. an arrangement which provides some weekday time with [mr manuel] may assist in maintaining [mr manuel’s] involvement in [x’s] school life. if the court finds that it is in [x’s] best interests to reduce his time with [mr manuel], a practical arrangement could be that [x] spends alternate weekends with his father, from after school on friday to monday morning, as well as every thursday evening from after school until friday morning. it is likely to be beneficial for the court to make clear orders about timings for telephone calls for [x] with each parent, to avoid ongoing confusion and risk of further conflict between the parents. based on [x’s] age and stage of development, a practical arrangement could be for [x] to telephone the parent he is not with at 7pm, on two or three scheduled days each week. the most significant issue in this matter is the parents’ difficulty in making decisions for [x]. they have disagreed about school options, medical providers, counsellors, vaccinations, attending special events. importantly, they do not appear to have managed to negotiate on any issue successfully, and each issue has led to further resentment, hostility and court involvement. despite the equal involvement of both parents throughout [x’s] lives, both parents believe that they are unable to successfully share parental responsibility, and are seeking sole parental responsibility. based on the impact on the parents’ emotional wellbeing, as well as on [x], it appears that this may be necessary. on balance, it appears that [ms pinner] has maintained more amicable relationships with [x’s] education and health providers, and [x] feels more comfortable expressing his needs and wishes to his mother. as [x] is approaching an age where his views will play a significant role in any decisions made about him, the court may wish to consider whether [ms pinner] should hold sole parental responsibility for [x], particularly in relation to health and educational decisions, providing she is able to commit to providing updates to [mr manuel]. while this would likely be a distressing outcome for [mr manuel], who places importance on his decision-making role in [x’s] life, it is critical that [x] is not subjected to the ongoing disputes between the parents and further involvement with the court. recommendations in light of the above discussion, and unless evidentiary material should indicate otherwise, it is respectfully recommended that: the court considers whether [ms pinner] should hold sole parental responsibility for [x]. [x] lives with his mother, and spends time with his father on alternate weekends from thursday afternoon until monday morning, as well as the alternate thursday afternoon until friday morning. [x] telephones his father, at 7pm each tuesday evening, and alternate saturday evenings. 86. [x] telephones his mother, at 7pm on alternate saturday evenings. [x] is connected with a psychologist who is willing to speak with both parents about [x’s] emotional needs, and provide strategies for supporting [x] in each household. if this is not possible, due to difficulties between [mr manuel] and [x’s] psychologist, it is recommended that [x] continue psychological intervention without [mr manuel’s] involvement. [mr manuel] engages with a psychologist with access to this report, to explore his patterns of emotional regulation and conflict management. [x] and [mr manuel] engage in family counselling (with [x’s] psychologist or another provider) to improve [x’s] confidence in sharing his emotions, opinions and wishes with his father. both parents engage in a parenting adolescents program, such as the tuning in to teens program.
oral evidence of the family consultant  manuel]: [ms af], what was the first question i asked you when you sat down in the interview – well, almost the first question – the first real question, other than what’s your name and things like that?---whether i followed the duluth model - - - correct?--- - - - of family violence. yes. well, i didn’t mention family violence at the time?---no, you did not. no?---that’s correct. and what was your answer to that?---that, no – that was not my framework. what did you do immediately before answering?---i’m unsure. i am sorry. witnesses, when you look down – looking down when you’re asked a question is a sign of you’re about to lie. his honour: sorry. be very careful, [mr manuel], because you looked down multiple times in the witness box. be very careful and respectful to [ms af]. [mr manuel]: respect is a funny thing in this courtroom. what was the second question i asked you?---whether or not i identify as a feminist. correct. and what was your answer?---that i believe in equality between the sexes, and if that’s your definition - - - incorrect. you said you were a feminist. i ask you if you were a feminist, you said yes, and then you proceeded to say you believe in equality. so your first answer was yes, and you didn’t immediately go into that. i then pointed out, after you had clearly stated that you were for equality – i said, “so you’re an egalitarian, then, not a feminist”, correct?---correct. from where i was sitting your brain looked like it was about to explode because you had idea what the word – i said – so – and it was a question, “so you’re an egalitarian, not a feminist,” and you didn’t answer, did you?---i did not. no. do you have any idea what the difference between egalitarianism and feminism is? his honour: sorry. the main purpose of this time is to ask [ms af] questions about her report because the focus is [x]. so i confess i am struggling to see how or why the difference between egalitarianism and feminism – not least because feminism can range from “lipstick feminism”, to “stiletto feminism” to any number of marxist feminism in-between. so, please - - - [mr manuel]: this points to bias. his honour: sorry? [mr manuel]: this points to bias. egalitarianism is actual equality. feminism, even in the name, means females – women. it’s – feminism in its very name suggests one gender over the other. egalitarianism is equal, regardless. his honour: so - - - [mr manuel]: you identify as a feminist, ie, feminism – women, females – over everything else, including, ie, males. you had no idea was egalitarianism is. his honour: [mr manuel] - - - [mr manuel]: that points towards extreme bias - - - his honour: well - - - [mr manuel]: - - - against the male gender.
... of or pertaining to ... the advocacy of women’s equality or rights (shorter oxford dictionary)
don’t forget i’ve got two witnesses to what was questioned behind me?---yes. his honour: yes, but they’re not on affidavit, [mr manuel], or on a statement. [mr manuel]: this goes back to morals. his honour: probably ethics, too. [mr manuel]: could be. pretty lucky in this courtroom. his honour: again, another caution. [mr manuel]: if you don’t like hearing the truth, i can’t help you. his honour: the same with you, [mr manuel].   manuel]: do you think a child seeing a parent two days out of a fortnight is a meaningful relationship?---i think it can. i think there are lots of family structures where children can have meaningful relationships with a parent in a variety of different ways. you think - - -?---yes. - - - but you have no evidence to back that up, and you haven’t questioned these children after the fact. so it’s purely on what you think. how about you ask men, because i have been there. his honour: well, no – sorry. but am i right in assuming, though, not only because of your areas of study, but also of your years of interviewing parents and children, yes?---yes. right. [mr manuel]: how many years - - -?---in this - - - - have you been working in this field – family court issues?---eight. so no time to interview people after the fact because you’ve only been working in it eight years. right. i think that’s probably all i have to ask at this point in time.
ms curran: now, one of the concerns that has been raised by the mother in this case is the, can i call it, lack of regulation or the engagement between [mr manuel] and particular services, you’re aware of that, aren’t you?---yes. and you observed that [mr manuel] was – i think you said:
...displayed his frustration –
and:
...swearing and insulting individuals involved in the proceedings –
although you said it wasn’t directed at you?---that’s correct. you said that he focused through the assessment on denigrating the mother:   manuel’s] focus throughout the assessment appeared to be on denigrating [ms pinner].
?---yes. and in relation to that – and what did you observe in relation to [mr manuel’s] presentation or self-regulation?---he was clearly very, very stressed by the process. he – he did show some, you know, emotion during our discussions, but he was very clear that that wasn’t directed and me, and there were one or two occasions where i clarified, and he said, “no, i’m not – i’m not directing this frustration at you.” so he did demonstrate some capacity to regulate his emotion during our discussions. i don’t think i have got anything else to add.
...now, the mother raised concern about the impact on [x] of [mr manuel] losing his temper and the impact of his volatility and poor role modelling, would you agree that that would be something that would be of concern for [x]?---yes. and is it the case that if [x] was spending more time with his mother and less time with [mr manuel], as sought by the mother, that that would be one means of assisting to reduce his exposure to any volatility and any poor role modelling by those behaviours?---yes. though, just to be clear, [mr manuel] denied that he has exposed [x] to any of that volatility.
... yes. i think it’s – this isn’t a situation where it’s – [x] has a clear, sort of, polarised view where he feels comfortable with mum and not comfortable with dad or happy with mum and not happy with dad. he presented a very positive picture of his time with his mum and was somewhat ambivalent about his time with his dad. there are obviously lots of things he loves about that time and experiences it as generally positive but there are also things that concern him like feeling scared of – that his dad will use an angry tone, of not – of just beginning to be able to share his views and opinions, maybe not feeling as comfortable as sharing them as he is at his mother’s house and that he – his sense is that he can relax more at his mother’s and that the – his time with his dad is sometimes a bit stressed out because there are so many things to do, like, you know, chores and things like that. his honour: can i ask you this, given [x’s] age and if there’s no improvement or no amelioration of the discord between the parents, it’s more likely than not, based upon your experience, is it not, that [x] is eventually really going to get tired of the conflict and he’s going to vote with his feet one way or the other?---that is frequently the case. i’m unsure in this situation in that i think – i think there probably is most likely going to be a period where [x] becomes aware of the level of conflict. i think most adolescents do eventually get a sense of how things are between their parents. i think that’s going to be a difficult time for him. i’m not sure what the outcome will be.
okay. so as far as comms go, that goes back right to kindergarten. i was not given communication from the school because i’m a dad. it’s mum, mum, mum, mum, mum. so when you’re told like that with actions, “you’re just a dad, you’re nothing, mum, mum, mum, mum, mum”, that’s the communications from the school and i’ve raised that, do you think it’s acceptable to raise that as an issue?---yes. i think it’s acceptable to raise it as an issue. in my report, i’ve commented on the potential risks if there’s ongoing conflict with [x’s] schools, health providers, etcetera. [mr manuel]: because i’m being – these are all the issues going, “you shouldn’t be communicating with the school and you shouldn’t be yelling at them”, blah blah blah. do your job and i won’t have to get annoyed. the first 10 times i’m quite nice about it, please sort this out, “yes, we will sort that out” and then you don’t. same with the chromebook. i asked all throughout his year 6, i asked probably half a dozen times, “what’s happening with the chromebooks? how does it work with insurance”, blah blah blah, “give me some information”. no response. i ask again, “give me some information. how does this work?”, no response. then come first day of school and he leaves it on the bus and i go, “right. well, i’ve asked you 20 times. i’m not going to pay for this because i’ve asked you 20 times”. all right? you think that’s – so do you see a problem with the school not responding to 20 questions? is that a bad thing? should they have answered me the first time, the second time or the 10th time?---yes. i can understand that frustration. right. same thing with the uniform. i asked several times before year 7 started how – what’s the uniform? there’s a formal shirt, there’s a pe shirt, blah blah – what is the requirement and i got told, and i’ve got it in writing, children – “every child must wear the formal uniform” so w went out and spent $200 on the uniform. come day 1, [ms pinner] puts him in pe polo shirt and he comes home. and i go, “well, have you been told something different to me or” – i don’t know. so i asked them again, “no. no. everyone has got to wear the formal shirt”. and [x] comes home and he goes, “no. nobody gives a shit”. and i raised it with the principal going “your school told me this. i went out and spent $200 and now you’re saying you don’t’ have to do it? well, give me my $200 back”. “no.” do you think that’s a wrong if they tell me one thing and then don’t tell me – and i’ve spent a substantial amount of money. do you think that’s a bad thing for them to do and i had a right to raise it as an issue?---again, i can understand the frustration.
but this – this whole thing has been going – “[mr manuel’s] telling at the school and yelling at the orthodontist and yelling at them”. because there’s good reason. i don’t just pick up the phone, call the school and say, “hey, you’re a – blah blah”. there’s a good reason. i ask them 20 times, i don’t get any answers. if i rang them up on day one and with absolutely no reason to and started yelling at them, fine, yes, i’m in the wrong. but i’ve got good reason to raise – but this whole thing has been going, “[mr manuel] just yells at the school for no reason” or “yells at these people for no reason”. correct? that’s what has been insinuated?---i – i think the – and certainly in my report i’ve tried to articulate that, you know, i don’t think it has been for no reason. but my concern is that if there are high levels of conflict and you raising your voice or swearing at different people that that may lead to a breakdown in communication about [x’s] needs. and as i’ve just stated after 20 times of asking someone, whether it’s in this situation or out there or where – or someone going like this on your forehead, eventually you’re going to get pissed off. i ask about the chromebook or the uniform or whatever - - -
correct. so taking dads out of kids’ lives, especially boys, is not a good thing, is it? his honour: so – difference again between the absolute removal - - - [mr manuel]: no. his honour: - - - as opposed to limited time. [mr manuel]: you have no ability – you have no quantification of one day, two day, five days. you have no – the facts remain that removal, whether it be one day – because there’s no quantification of it, the removal is not a good thing and it’s detrimental to kids, especially boys, yes or no?---yes. kids do better when they’ve got both parents in their lives. right?---in general. yes. in general, yes. absolutely. i’ve said that for nine years. are you aware of the suicide statistics for boys, mainly young – young adults aged 18 to 24-ish? rough statistics?---generally speaking, i couldn’t quote you.
but i can tell you that i’ve been that kid going – i remember a cricket bat, for example. i had a cricket bat at dad’s and my friends would say “let’s go play cricket”. “no, i can’t do that because it’s at dad’s house and i’m at mum’s house and i can’t do that”. it’s the same thing. he’s going “what am i supposed to tell my friends? ‘give me a call tonight.’ which number am i supposed to tell them”. that’s confusing for a child, isn’t it?---it is. and i think ideally there would be a resolution where x could - - - there was absolutely no reason for [ms pinner] to go and get a second phone, was there, when there was a perfectly good one that he has had for five years. doing so confused everyone, not least of all [x]?---[ms pinner] did provide a reason, if you would like me to expand on that.
tendered documents
exhibit
description
pages
1
miscellaneous correspondence bundle
1-48
letter from ap to aq law firm [x’s primary school] dated 3 october 2014
1-2
letter from aq law firm to ap [x’s primary school] dated 17 october 2014
3
letter from ap to ar law firm [christmas] dated 19 january 2015
4-5
ah contact centre certificate of attendance for ms s dated 8 april 2015
6
ah contact centre certificate of attendance for ms pinner dated 8 april 2015
7
letter from ap to the father [travel to nz] dated 17 november 2016
8-9
email from ap to the father [travel to nz] dated 13 december 2016
10
email from the father to ap [travel to nz] dated 14 december 2016
11
emails between parties [christmas] dated 24 december 2017
12-13
emails between the parties [dental check-ups, ad concert] dated january to july 2018
14-16
emails between parties [x’s phone] dated march 2018
17
email from the father to the mother [x, asthma] dated 5 november 2018
18-19
emails from ap and the father to his honour’s associate [mother in hospital] dated 3 april 2019
20-22
email from the mother to the father [discharged from hospital] dated 6 april 2019
23
email from ap to the father [mother’s hospital admission, enclosing letter from gp] dated 8 april 2019
24-25
email from the mother to the father [x] dated 15 april 2019
26
email from the mother to the father [x’s week] dated 30 march 2020
27
letter from ap to the father [phone calls] dated 22 june 2021
28-29
letter from the father to ap [phone calls] dated 6 august 2021
30-33
email from the mother to the father [x’s week] dated 8 november 2021
34
emails between the parties [covid vaccination] dated december 2021 to january 2022
35
emails between the parties [music lessons] dated january 2022
36
email from the father to ap [phone calls] dated 16 march 2022
37
email from the father to ap [ppo and trespass] dated 18 march 2022
38
text messages between parties [x in isolation] dated march 2022
39-40
email from the father to his honour’s associate dated 10 may 2022
41
google classroom “daily summary for x” email dated 25 may 2022
42-44
act government press release “bookings open for 5 to 11 year-olds at asct government covid-19 vaccination clinics” dated 20 december 2021
45-47
email from mother to father “x’s week” dated 23 may 2022
48
2
the following pages extracted from the material produced by way of subpoena to ah contact centre: 14, 38-39, 47, 56, 60-62, 92, 95
14, 38-39, 47, 56, 60-62, 92, 95
49-58
ac1
pages 3 of 17 to 6 of 17 (inclusive) extracted from the material produced by way of subpoena to mr u
59-62
act education directorate
pages extracted from the material produced by way of subpoena to the act education directorate (with index)
63-156
afp1
material produced by way of subpoena to the australian federal police
157-171
cad1
tender bundle relevant to the mother’s costs applications, including index and list of relevant orders
172-208
oa1
material produced by way of subpoena to the al counselling service (with index/aide memoire)
209-299
written submissions on behalf of the applicant
society: men should speak up and not hold things inside men: i feel x because y society: don’t be so stupid. you’re wrong. you’re not allowed to feel that way. men: *go quiet* society: why don’t men speak up? and this was clearly displayed in the hearing. it was repeatedly mentioned that [ms pinner] had mental health issues because of the matter and that was played as a victim status. but when my mental health struggles due to “the system” were brought up it was played as my failure. guess what? i’m allowed to feel frustrated, annoyed, and, dare i say it, angry when i, and thousands upon thousands of dads are treated like this and the children are being abused by “the system”. don’t tell me how i am and am not allowed to feel. this continues the feminist, duluth model narrative that women are the victims and men are always at fault. the self-proclaimed 3rd-wave radical feminist, and former prime minister, julia gillard removed perjury from the family court in 2010. this enabled anyone, especially [ms pinner], to front the court, say anything she wanted that wasn’t true and get away with it. no evidence was required and her word has been treated as gospel. as i’ve mentioned many times before, things ticked along without issue for many years (2013-2019) but when the planned s102na was about to take effect, [ms pinner] made false allegations about me. you have to be either stupid or corrupt to see that that wasn’t planned. [ms pinner] was represented for all those years and nothing was ever raised which conclusively proved that there was no issue. it was only when s102na, in combination with the feminist #metoo movement, and the duluth model which all combine to say “it’s all the man’s fault” that they made false allegations to help ms [pinner’s] case. as i’ve mentioned before, several former judges – [aw] and [ax] - have noted the abuse of the system by such false allegations. of course they only raise this once they have retired as they would be shut down by “the system” had they dared to say so whilst working. there is a reason there is no ‘mothers 4 justice’ in the uk and no ‘lone mother’s association’ or ‘australian sisterhood of mothers’ here in australia. it’s because there is no need for such organisations because “the system” is so biased against fathers, by design, that only dads need such support. ms curran, under instruction from [ms pinner], breached the privacy of my partner, [ms ae], by obtaining private medical information from organisations and attempted to use it against me. what ms curran didn’t know was that her information was not accurate and her use of it was misleading to the court. ms curran, in taking this action, abused a military veteran and caused severe mental stress to someone suffering from post traumatic stress disorder due to service in the military. of course ms curran, who was under instruction from [ms pinner], cared little about the effects on others. the problem: for a child, few crises are bigger than the loss of a loving parent, this is a major childhood trauma - especially when linked to family separation and years’-long court proceedings - that causes immense personal suffering, increased lifetime risks of physical & mental illness, and even suicide. yet, today, tens of thousands of australian children are being allowed, or wrongly forced, to experience such major trauma - and to grow up without one of their parents and other loving family members, often in a psychologically abusive environment - as a direct result of the actions (or inaction) of australia’s adversarial, family court system. our family courts are not fit-for-purpose. the fundamental characteristics of these courts - being adversarial, divisive, unaffordable, slow, and even intimidating - are each profoundly incompatible with “the best interests” of children, family courts and lawyers are neither qualified to assess children, nor to assess the competence of outside professionals, and insufficient professionals have the highly specialised skills necessary for assessing children and families involved in separation, dispute or litigation, where the occurrence of abusive parental behaviour, including extreme & abusive parental influence on children, is extremely high, by exposing children to unqualified “professionals”, by taking years to make decisions, and by greatly exacerbating parental conflict & stress, our courts contribute directly to the occurrence of psychological child abuse and family violence, our courts restrict public scrutiny and fail to obtain feedback on the outcomes of the life-changing decisions they make, theirs is not an evidence-based approach, through the actions of our family courts, which typically result in a dramatic reduction, or loss, of loving important relationships between children and parents (or a failure to restore such relationships), australia is failing in its obligations as a signatory to the un convention on the rights of the child & the universal declaration of human rights: we are denying some of the most fundamental rights, and needs, to tens of thousands of australian children and to their families, the annual cost of our family court system in federal funding and lost income: billions of dollars. the cost in human loss and suffering: incalculable. but “the system” is so corrupt it cares little about those who are dragged into it. it, and has done since its inception 47 years ago, destroys lives and does nothing more than fatten the wallets of those who use its design to keep them in a job at the expense of those who are parties to it. i personally know two dads who have had their four and two kids murdered due to the destructive family court system. and, as dads, they have been ignored by the media and “the system” simply because they’re dads. in the final hearing ms curran proved [ms pinner’s] lack of communication. my affidavit had said that i had opened [x’s] first bank account and taught him how to use it. [x] knows that it is i who teaches him how to save and look after money. ms curran attempted to make me look bad by asking if i knew if [x] had a key card already to which i answered no. this is because [ms pinner] has failed to communicate this to me. she proved my point. i have repeatedly shown, especially during the contravention matter, that [ms pinner] fails to communicate. in late 2018 she had only sent simple weekly emails 18% of the time where i was at, and am always at, 100%. mr robinson refuted my statement that getting a vaccination stops you from getting a disease. this is just utter stupidity. if [ms pinner] has a vaccination for measles it doesn’t matter if she comes into contact with someone who has measles, she simply can’t get it. if [ms pinner] has the covid “vaccination” it is irrelevant if anyone, including [x], also gets the “vaccination” because she is protected. unfortunately as has been proven by government data the covid “vaccination” doesn’t protect anyone from infection, transmission, illness or death. what has been shown by numerous studies is that the “vaccine” causes huge amounts of adverse reactions (132,000 in australia in just 12mths) including heart attacks in young children. and it specifically causes adverse reactions in young males. the evidence shows that as “vaccination” has gone up so have infection and death. if you can’t see that the “vaccination” is not working then you’re utterly stupid. dr neville mentioned in the final hearing that 6m people had died. yes that’s right but he failed to also mention that the survival rate is approx 99.88%, that 83.53% of deaths are >70, and that the death count is those who died “with covid” not “from covid”. ignoring the fact that the “vaccination” that is supposed to save people can kill them (currently 887 in australia) is beyond stupid. statistics also show that the vast majority of those who died “with covid” had multiple comorbidities. if [ms pinner] forces [x] to have this “vaccination” and he has an adverse reaction, or dies, i will hold her, and those who have enabled it ie dr neville and “the system”, personally accountable. mr robinson’s suggested orders are nothing short of stupid. he is supposedly acting “in [x’s] best interest” but has completely failed. he has shown how lawyers, and judges, have no comprehension of how things work in the real world. it has been shown that orders need to be very specific otherwise breaches occur because of ambiguity. he has removed the order that specified when phone calls should occur and, as was shown with dr neville’s stupid orders in 2017 this caused problems and [ms pinner] breaching the orders. without specific times for calls this will enable [ms pinner] to continue her parental alienation and refuse to let [x] speak to his dad. mr robinson has also failed to ensure [x] can have half of his identity upheld by getting his new zealand citizenship. mr robinson has also failed to suggest an order that will enable [x] to attend the [ad] concert, that he has been waiting 3 years for and is his first, last and only chance to see them. as i said in the final hearing [x] has been wanting to go to this for many years and i have held off telling him of the surprise that he will get to meet them. on 9 june i told him and he nearly jumped out of his skin he was that excited. he even called his mum, on a night he wouldn’t normally talk to her, so that he could tell her. but [ms pinner] claims that he doesn’t want to go. this is just another case where [ms pinner] stops [x] from enjoying things with his dad because she doesn’t do anything with him. it is me who takes him to sporting events, to music events, travels around the country for different holidays and it makes her look bad because she does nothing. the suggestions by both [ms af] and mr robinson exemplify “the system”. they have applied the standard cookie-cutter approach that has existed for 47 years -take a loving dad out of a child’s life. there are no reasons for doing so other than “that’s what they’ve always done”. the suggested change from 7/7 to 9/5 has no benefit to [x]. the requested change by [ms pinner] from 7/7 to 12/2 has no benefit to [x]. "the system" supposedly works in “the best interests of the child” but 47 years of history, and specifically this matter, has shown that is furthest from reality. there is no evidence that changing from [x] having both of his parents in his life for an equal amount of time would change or improve anything. there is, however, ample evidence to show that it damages children. [ms pinner] is clearly living a life of perpetual fear, perpetual hatred, and perpetual victimhood. her refusal to allow [x] to have new zealand citizenship and have a holiday in new zealand with his dad under the fear of “they’ll go and not come back” has no basis. remember that it was [ms pinner] who had an affair and destroyed my and [x’s] lives. it is i who should be living in fear that she’ll run away and take [x]. living a life under such perpetual fear is not good for anyone. i could just as easily take [x] to western australia and her recourse would be the same - go to court. [ms pinner] continues to harbour perpetual hatred towards me. in stark contrast to me, in no affidavit or hearing has she ever uttered the words “[mr manuel] is a good dad”. she has mentioned in one of her affidavits that she “has scoliosis” which has absolutely nothing to with anything. it is purely a statement to play the victim. it would be the same as me saying i have bad headaches. it means nothing. but feminism, the duluth model and “the system” has not only allowed but encouraged mothers to play the victim and have “the system” take pity on them. you only need to look at the recent case with johnny depp where amber heard played the feminist victim card and was found out. dr neville said in the final hearing, after i mentioned a lack of morals by “the system”, that there’s a lack of ethics and i strongly agreed and said that was the case in this courtroom. those who are part of “the system” - the lawyers, the judges, the so-called “experts” - have no morals and no ethics. they are there with one thing on their mind -fattening their wallets. they have no regard to those who are being abused by the system, especially the children. i have repeatedly supplied evidence but have been ignored. a letter from [ms pinner’s] own sister showed that she had also made false allegations against her sister’s husband. letters from [ms pinner’s] sister and [x’s] guardians showed that her allegations against me were false and that i am nothing short of a great dad to [x]. it is beyond sad that [ms pinner] is so full of hatred that she must act in this way to try and remove [x’s] dad from his life. despite all the damage and pain that [ms pinner] has caused, not just to me and [x] but to her family and friends, i have repeatedly said that i would never want to take her out of [x’s] life. dr neville has the choice to: give sole parental responsibility to someone who: communicates regularly involves the other parent in all decision making encourages a meaningful relationship with the other parent or someone who: fails to communicate makes unilateral decisions without involving the other parent wants to remove aa loving parent from [x’s] life have [x]: live in the same 50/50 scenario that he has known for over 9 years live with a parent who enables him seeing his extended family travel around australia and new zealand to see & experience different things get to a variety of sporting/musical events able to have a long holiday with each parent during summer or have a loving dad removed from his life primarily live with a parent who wants the other parent removed from his life live with a parent who doesn’t have anything to do with his extended family stay in a house in canberra or stay in a house at the coast, goes nowhere unable to have a long holiday with either parent rice & asplund is irrelevant as there hasn’t been a significant change in circumstances. my application is to only slightly modify the orders in very minor ways to allow for [x’s] growth. but my application largely keeps the status quo. costs my application to have dr neville recuse himself proved that he had lied. in making the s102na order he said he “had to” make the order when, in fact, he didn’t. i pointed this out to him before he made the order but he still made it anyway. he even admitted lying when i applied to have him recuse himself. he admitted that he didn’t “have to” make the order but that he chose to as per s102na.1(c)(iv). dr neville repeatedly claimed that he did this to help me despite me repeatedly saying that it hindered rather than helped me. i had several lawyers forced on me against my will. i had left lawyers behind many years ago because it was abundantly clear that they were not there to work for me. they proudly informed me that they were there to serve the court as their first priority. this continued with several other lawyers when they repeatedly told me that they were not there to work for me and refused to act in my best interest. despite me proving, and dr neville admitting, that he lied he still refused to recuse himself. this showed the absolute corruption within “the system”. because of the mental stress caused to me by “the system”, i was unable to read any emails for several weeks in april/may 2022 including any that mentioned when dr neville would hand down his judgement. because i failed to attend this, dr neville used my non-appearance as a reason to hit me with costs for the failed application. that is despite the fact that his judgement had already been made. whether i turned up or not was irrelevant. nothing i did or said had i turned up would’ve made any difference. dr neville’s corruption in not recusing himself is the only reason needed to have this decision reversed. my application to have [ms k] found in contempt also showed the corruption of “the system”. i had conclusively proven that she had lied in court with regards to not knowing that i had contacted the so-called “expert” [ms d]. the emails i provided were conclusive proof that she knew but then proceeded to lie in court in saying she didn’t. dr neville’s refusal to condemn her and continue to allow lawyers, whose first responsibility is to serve the court, to lie shows how deep the corruption runs. the repeated vexatious costs applications by [ms pinner] are laughable. i have conclusively proven numerous times that i have attempted to keep the matter out of court but those offers have been repeatedly been refused. dr neville acknowledged this several times during hearings. he also said that we “should go to mediation” but he repeatedly refused to make an order to do so, contributing to the matter staying in the expensive courtroom. dr neville also contributed to the long running matter and, as a result, expenses to [ms pinner]. after 4 years of agreement where phone calls were on specific days at specific times dr neville made stupid interim orders on 12 july 2017 for phone calls to be at non-specific times. this caused confusion and resulted in [ms pinner] breaching the orders. it was up to me to fix this at great expense to myself and [ms pinner]. will dr neville acknowledge his mistake and reimburse the costs to us? of course not. what about my costs? i spent many, many, many tens of thousands of dollars because.... that’s the way “the system” was designed. when [ms k], under instruction from [ms pinner], threatened [x] in 2016 and didn’t allow him to have a holiday in new zealand, i had no option but to file in court. that is the only recourse in “the system”. [ms pinner] repeatedly refused any option outside of court leaving me with only the court option. as i’ve mentioned before, in february 2019 i said to [ms pinner] that we’d both spent stupid amounts of money that could’ve better been spent on [x] and asked to keep it out of court for his sake. [ms pinner] forwarded it straight to [ms k] then refused to get it out of court. [ms pinner] is scared i’ll file further applications. the solution - don’t breach orders. and don’t refuse any option outside of court. it’s that simple. but [ms k] won’t allow her client to do that because she makes no money out of that. “the system” is designed to keep participants in court so they fatten the bottom-feeding scum lawyers wallets. dr neville will do whatever he pleases despite irrefutable evidence to the contrary. for 47 years “the system” has been biased against dads and it continues to this day. i have attempted to keep matters out of court but have been refused at every step by [ms pinner], on the advice of her lawyer. "the system" is designed in a way that allows only one option - litigation. when asking nicely to use any option other than court got me nowhere i was forced into filing an application. "the system", and specifically dr neville, caused confusion with stupid orders, caused [ms pinner] to breach orders then refuse to keep the matter out of court, had all contraventions found to be prima facie, have [ms k] drag the matter out with various actions for years until it was posible to make false allegations, and continue to use the destructive system that is designed to cause more conflict. but “the system” will never take any responsibility for its failings. and the bottom-feeding scum lawyers will never take any responsibility for their actions which cause conflict and expense to their clients. because that’s the way “the system” was designed. it doesn’t matter what i say. dr neville is going to do what he likes anyway. the evidence is there to show that i tried everything to keep things out of court but [ms pinner], or rather [ms k], did everything to keep it in. the evidence is there to show that dr neville lied and ignored my application to have him recuse himself. but, as i’ve clearly demonstrated, evidence doesn’t matter when it comes to family law. and “the system” certainly won’t take any responsibility for its failings. whatever the mother says is treated as gospel and whatever the father says, and proves, is disregarded completely. if dr neville makes costs orders against me then what will that really achieve? it will further destroy a loving dad, and further hurt a child. and it will continue to tell vindictive, hateful mothers that they can continue with this behaviour to the detriment of children. the cycle will continue. the same cycle that has been present for 47 years. that’s all it will do. conclusion [x] - i love you more than you’ll ever know. i’m sorry i failed you as a dad. my job as a dad is to protect you from harm and i failed in protecting you from the destructive family court system and those that run it. here’s some photos of [x] “doing things he hates” according to [ms pinner] - saying goodbye to his dog, being a member of the [ad fan club], going to gigs with his dad, going to sporting events with his dad, going to his dad’s work, going on holidays with his dad.
written submissions on behalf of the respondent
introduction these proceeding relate to the parties’ only child, [x], born [in] 2010. the mother seeks the orders set out in the outline of case document filed on 18 may 2022. the mother relies on the case outline (and documents referred to therein), and the tender bundles and subpoena material tendered in evidence during the trial. the ambit of the dispute is whether [x] should spend alternate weeks or alternate weekends (or something other than the parents’ competing applications) with his father during school terms, which of [x’s] parents should have sole parental responsibility, and what specific orders regarding the agreed half school holidays and attendance at specific events should be made. in light of the evidence adduced at the final hearing, the mother also seeks an order restraining the father from bringing [x] into contact with [ms ae] (born [in] 1972). the mother supports the order sought by the father to enable [x] to obtain his new zealand citizenship. it is not in dispute that [x] has a meaningful relationship with both his parents. the evidence before the court, though, indicates that a significant level of conflict exists between the parents and increasing levels of mistrust pervade the parenting relationship. this raises the question of the parties’ capacity to jointly make decisions for [x] and co-operatively maintain an effective shared residence living arrangement for him. it is the submission of the mother that the evidence supports a finding that they cannot. parental responsibility the mother submits the presumption in s61da(1) does not apply because the father has engaged in family violence (s61da(2)). in any event, it is respectfully submitted that a finding in respect of this matter is not required as the presumption is rebutted by the evidence, which supports a finding that it would not be in [x’s] best interests for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility (s61da(4)). both parents seek an order in their favour for sole parental responsibility. the evidence supports a finding that the parents have an increasingly dysfunctional co-parenting relationship and are unable to effectively communicate or reach decisions, including in relation to long term issues of education and health. a finding of an inability to communicate is well supported by the evidence filed by both parents, and is supported by the family consultant who identifies the significant difficulties in this regard. she recommends the court consider sole parental responsibility be granted to the mother. the evidence supports a finding that the father has demonstrated limited capacity to make proper, responsible decisions about major long term issues in [x’s] best interests and that he has increasingly behaved in ways detrimental to [x’s] wellbeing. the specific factors in relation to parental responsibility that support the court making the order sought by the mother for sole parental responsibility include: a) despite health recommendations and [x’s] express wish to be vaccinated, the father maintains strong opposition to a covid-19 vaccine. the father was content on 21 june 2021 for [x] to get a flu vaccination, but does not agree to him getting a covid-19 vaccine, and was critical of the mother for “unilaterally” booking an appointment for same. the mother advised the father on 21 december 2022 that she intended to make an appointment for [x] in the new year, and the father cancelled the appointment on 22 january (2 days prior to the appointment), without advising the mother. his approach is illustrative of his lack of insight and approach to matters where the parties disagree, where he imposes his will. another example was when the father collected [x] to farewell [ao] (the dog) during the mother’s time without consent, contrary to [x’s] wishes and without notice. the father reported this as a positive example of his support of [x’s] grief processes and states in his written submissions “i taught [x] about death of loved ones when our dog died”. b) the father had conflict with, and made complaints to, the education directorate and human rights commission about [x’s] wearing of a mask during the pandemic, and accused the school of “child abuse”. he showed no appreciation of the impact this may have on [x]. c) the benefit to [x] of receiving psychological support is disregarded by the father. it is illustrated in his communication to [x’s] counsellor, [mr u]. he showed no insight, even in cross-examination, of the impact on [x] of the established relationship with [mr u] ceasing, despite the mother having advised the father of the benefit to [x]. the father had been invited by [mr u] to communicate with him, contrary to the father’s evidence on this matter. d) other issues, such as the father’s refusal to administer asthma medication, conflict with treatment providers, and unwillingness to give consideration to [x’s] wishes, such as in seeing [ao] and going to the [event b], indicate against an order for the father to have sole parental responsibility. e) the allegations the father makes of the mother making unilateral decisions, such as primary school enrolment and cancelling swimming lessons and [music] lessons, are not supported by the evidence. it is submitted that the court would comfortably make the order sought by the mother and the independent children’s lawyer, and as recommended by the family consultant, for the mother to have sole parental responsibility. it is submitted that order 3 of the icl’s proposed orders is ambiguous and unenforceable and, in this case, would likely lead to the institution of further proceedings given the long history of litigation and allegations of contraventions made by the father against the mother. the parenting orders in dispute the parenting orders that are in the best interests of [x], in the submission of the mother, are those sought by her. the key areas of contention are set out below. the time that [x] spends with each parent – school holidays both parents seek equal time during the school holidays. the mother’s proposal is for [x] to spend one week with each parent during the mid-year holiday periods, and three weeks with each parent (in two blocks) during the long christmas holidays. the mother’s proposed orders enable each parent to travel overseas with [x] for up to 14 days. such travel, particularly to new zealand, has been articulated by the father as important to him. it is submitted that the mother’s proposed wording for holiday orders is preferable to the father’s and icl’s as it removes any ambiguity or need for negotiation between the parents. there should be no finding that the mother unreasonably refused to allow [x] to travel to new zealand with the father. the evidence supports that the mother sought reasonable notice and detail of the intended travel itinerary and the father ultimately advised he no longer intended to take [x] to new zealand at the time of his overseas travel application. the time that [x] spends with each parent – school terms the mother seeks that [x] spend alternate weekends (friday to monday) with his father. the father seeks that week about time continue. the icl seeks orders for [x] to spend 5 nights per fortnight with his father (4 nights in one week and 1 night in the other). there is no doubt that [x] enjoys benefit from his relationship with his father and the decision to reduce term time is one that can be made if it is in [x’s] best interests. the exercise of discretion in this matter must be made after careful analysis of the relevant factors. the case is one that is finely balanced. her honour judge ryan (as she then was) in h & h identified factors the court should particularly examine in cases where a party seeks to share time equally and, while not exhaustive as a list, these factors have been useful in deciding “the suitability of a particular set of circumstances for a shared parenting arrangement”. in john & jasapas, tree j endorsed the list of relevant considerations. an analysis of the evidence supports a reduction in [x’s] time with his father, as sought by the mother, as it preserves the important relationship between [x] and his father while giving proper weight to [x’s] best interests given the practicalities of this case. the decision is one that is finely balanced. the family consultant set out the quality of [x's] relationships and identified that, over [x’s] lifetime, he has generally received competent parenting that has ensured that his physical and emotional needs have been met. the father, however, is unable to accept views that differ from his own and reflect on matters including his own emotional regulation. the father in his written evidence and during cross examination, referenced the mother’s decision to leave the relationship as “the ultimate act of family violence”. the family consultant noted that he appeared to “wholly blame [ms pinner] for the breakdown of their marriage, and stated that “she ruined his life”.” it is notably now almost a decade since the parties’ separation, yet the father’s views in this regard increasingly pervades his attitude to the mother, her wife, [ms s], and their child, [t], [x’s] only sibling. in oral evidence, the father referred to having been to a court the week prior to the final hearing in respect of his ongoing complaint about interactions between he and [ms s]. his evidence was opaque about this issue. your honour can find on the evidence that the tension between the parties and households is possibly escalating, but in any event, not decreasing. as the mother stated in cross examination, [x] has an increasing awareness of the tension, and this observation is supported by the comments of the family consultant that, “as [x] approaches adolescence, he is likely to increase his understanding of the dynamics between his parents, and this is likely to place significant stress on his emotional wellbeing”. the attitude of the father toward the mother is poor. this was evident in his cross-examination and is illuminated in his written submissions where he says “what has [ms pinner], [x’s] mum, done? the answer is not a lot.” there are a number of factors militating against an equal time regime continuing in this case. the mother’s orders sought are in [x’s] best interests for the following reasons: a) [x’s] observed ambivalence in respect of his relationship with his father. b) [x’s] close, secure relationship with his mother, who has an emotionally sensitive parenting approach, who listens, and with whom he has a close and affectionate relationship. c) [x] reported that his father “gets more of an angry tone”, which makes him feel scared, and described himself as “chilled out” at his mother’s and “stressed out” at his father’s. d) role modelling for [x] was raised by the mother to the consultant and in cross examnation. the father refused to answer any questions about a number of matters including his capacity to regulate his emotions, accordingly this was unable to be explored in cross examination. e) the family consultant recommended [x] be connected with a psychologist (without the father’s involvement if necessary), that the father engage a psychologist to explore his patterns of emotional regulation and conflict management, and that [x] and the father engage in family counselling “to improve [x’s] confidence in sharing his emotions, opinions and wishes with his father”. this supports a finding that the father’s emotional regulation is of concern in his parenting. f) [x’s] wishes should be given weight. however, it is submitted limited weight should be given to his comment about continuing with shared care when read in context of the balance of the comments and observations about ambivalence, developing a voice and feeling scared. the father stated many times he will “not be bullied”. his conduct recorded in the subpoenaed third-party material shows a long history of lack of regulation of emotion and aggression. this was also observed at court. if adult professionals such as [mr u], [ah contact centre] staff, and court staff find communication with the father challenging, the question must be asked how [x] can be expected to navigate an unregulated, often volatile, single minded and at times aggressive adult. it is submitted that the aggression recorded by multiple external agencies over many years supports a finding the father lacks insight about the impact of his responses and that he is unable or unwilling to regulate his behaviour. this is supported by the recommendations of the family consultant. how then could [x] manage potential conflict or even differences with his father? g) these difficulties are illustrated throughout the evidence, but one pertinent example is that of the [mr u] psychologist support. [x] became a patient of [mr u’s] during the [ah contact centre] kayaks program. on 8 november 2021, the mother said to the father, “on wednesday he had an appointment with his counsellor [mr u] from [ag] counselling. [x] had spoken to me about having independent person to talk to him and he really liked [mr u]. he is having these appointments as and when he wants them.” on 21 december 2021, the mother emailed the father regarding [x] engaging with [mr u], advising “this has proven beneficial to [x] as it has given him an outlet that is not any of his parents.” despite knowing of the relationship and its benefit to [x], the father sent a text message to [mr u] on 21 february 2022 that said, “misunderstanding? fuck off. you were a cunt. don't try and hide behind a "misunderstanding". grow the fuck up and admit your failures and own your actions. you knew exactly what you were doing. that just shows your failings as a "counsellor". counsellors are people who failed to attend medical school and get a degree in psychology.” [mr u] ceased treating [x]. h) the father’s claim that he “never yells in front of [x]” is implausible. his unregulated behaviour is reported in multiple third party agency records. [x] reports to the family consultant that he is scared but that his father is now “less yelly”. the father’s presentation in court was consistent with that recorded. the [ah contact centre] notes from 17 september 2015 record him when seeking information complaining about “f-ing lesbains and blacks...and how they get looked after but not dads” and “everyone being against dads. similarly, the afp records, [al counselling] records, education directorate records and his own report of conflict with the orthodontic receptionist and gp,3support a finding that the father has difficulty regulating his emotions. the orders sought by the mother reduce the impact of this conduct on [x] by less exposure. it reduces the likelihood of normalisation of the father’s behaviour for [x]. [x] has a close, loving, positive relationship with mother and step- mother. his sibling relationship with [t], born [in] 2015, is an important one. [t] is [x’s] only sibling. [x] described a “comfortable sibling relationship with [t]” yet, in cross examination, the father could not acknowledge that [x] even had a sibling. j) the father refused to answer questions arising from subpoenaed material, quoting the “privacy act 1988”. he was obstructive and at best opaque about the recorded drug use by [ms ae] and her recorded suicide attempts and about ambulance, police and hospital attendances of both he and [ms ae]. the father reported to the consultant that he “takes antidepressant medication regularly” but no evidence was provided. the fact of the afp and tch involvement was not disclosed by him. it was discovered only upon the issuing of subpoena. the possible risk to [x] of the father’s health is a relevant matter for the court the father presented no evidence. the subpoenaed material supports findings of mental health issues having existed, including possible suicidal ideation, from 2015 until 2021. k) there has been diminution of trust due to the father’s lack of candour during the proceedings. he failed to comply with his obligation to provide all relevant material. the consultant was aware of the afp records, it was only after the [al counselling] material was obtained that records of serious mental health matters including suicidal ideation, drug use and suicide attempts have become known. the court, the family consultant and the mother only became aware of many of the potentially significant events due to the subpoena, not due to the father providing disclosure about matters relevant to issues that may impact [x]. the lack of candour and frankness with the family consultant and the court read with his report of “a settled home life” and the report by [ms ae] of normal “ups and downs” supports a finding of lack of candour. the fact of the failure to disclose such serious material diminishes even further the trust between the parties about communication. the mother by contrast provided full and detailed disclosure about her physical and psychological health to the family consultant and in her evidence, including evidence from her treating psychologist, [ms an]. the father has a hostile attitude to the mother’s partner, which has persisted since at least 2014. the evidence includes his response when [x] made two mother’s day cards, when [x] asked to speak to [ms s] the father hung up the phone, his refusal to speak [ms s’s] name in his house or in court, his refusal to acknowledge [x’s] brother, [t], his application for a ppo against [ms s], and his ongoing pursuit of complaint against [ms s] that he referred to in cross examination. [x] may have been somewhat shielded from this as a younger child, however, the mother’s evidence is that he is aware and this is consistent with the family consultant’s concern that he will become more aware as he matures. the following factors also raise question as to the suitability of a shared care arrangement continuing and also militate against an equal time regime being in [x’s] best interests. the father included in his affidavit reference to [ms s] being referred to as a “fulb”. this one line in his evidence illuminates starkly his continued poor attitude and approach to the mother, to her relationship, marriage and second son. when asked in cross-examination what “fulb” meant, the father refused to answer, despite having included it in his filed material. he reported to the family consultant that he believes it is “likely” [ms s] is abusive toward [ms pinner], quoting a study that “physical abuse is present in 70% of lesbian relationships” and that [ms s] was “responsible for the breakdown of his marriage”. the father is highly critical of the mother. the evidence does not support the father’s narrative. some examples include: a) allegations of unilateral decision making, including enrolment at primary school, covid-19 vaccine, psychologist appointments, and cancellation of swimming lessons and [sports] lessons. b) allegations of family violence against him by the mother. the father steadfastly refused to accept any family violence was perpetrated against the mother by himself, for example the punching of the steering wheel incident. c) allegations that the mother refused to communicate with him about important matters, for example, her hospital admission following her pericarditis. the evidence, however, supports a finding that the mother was in communication with him within a day of her hospitalisation. the evidence also supports a finding that the father failed to advise the mother, the court or the family consultant of significant matters pertaining to his own and [ms ae’s] mental health challenges, as referred to above. d) allegations that the mother is attempting to prevent the father playing a meaningful role in [x’s] life, and that she is attempting to remove [x] from his life. e) allegations that the mother is exposing [x] to harmful alcohol messages, where the mother’s evidence is that the parties do not drink and the subpoenaed evidence records the father highly intoxicated when the afp attended for a welfare check. f) allegations that the mother sends emails “calling him every name under the sun” and “disparaging and slandering” him. no evidence of such emails was produced. g) allegations that the mother unreasonably refused new zealand overseas travel, refused to take [x] to football training, refused to share in the cost of a phone for [x], and refused counselling, [ah contact centre] and mediation. the icl’s off-week overnight time proposal the mother does not agree to the icl’s proposal that an additional night in the off-week is practical or in [x’s] best interests. it ignores [x’s] expressed view that he finds moving between houses “annoying”. such an arrangement will increase the burden on [x] in his early high school years to manage moving between two households and potentially create more opportunity for conflict between the parties (particularly when in cross examination the father advised he was still pursuing action against [ms s]). such an order is also not sought by either parent. the mother’s application is for one block of time with each parent to minimise disruption for [x] and reduce opportunity for conflict or unnecessary communication. specific events – [event b/ad concert] the express wishes of [x] were that he did not wish to attend [event b] as he did not enjoy the travel and camping. despite this being expressed to the family consultant by [x], it was entirely dismissed by the father in cross-examination. [x] expressed to his mother that he does not want to attend the [ad] concert. his father also does not accept this as his genuine wish. the mother’s oral evidence on this point showed not only an ability of [x] to communicate well with her, but also her ability to support [x’s] relationship with his father. communication between [x] and the parent with whom he is not living the mother seeks that [x] speak to each parent once per week and that the time for communication be at the set time of 7pm so it does not interfere with dinner time. the recommendation of the family consultant is tuesday and saturday at 7pm and all other times as requested by [x]. the mother does not agree to proposed order 23 of the father’s application given the existing difficulties between the parties and with [x’s] current phone. it is submitted that such an order would also likely give rise to further allegations of contraventions being made. restraints the mother seeks the restraints sought in her case outline document as well as the restraint outlined above in relation to [ms ae]. costs/vexatious litigant the costs application and reserved costs orders are pressed and the mother relies on the application and affidavit filed 26 july 2021 as well as the costs bundle tendered at trial. the vexatious litigant order is pressed. the father believes each application he has filed has been “necessary” and reported this to the family consultant, who said “ongoing litigation would likely have a significant detrimental impact on [x's] well-being and development therefore critical that this matter is resolved on a final basis”. the father’s submissions state “[ms pinner] is scared i’ll file further applications. the solution – don’t breach orders.” the test is as set out in rilak. the mother accepts it is a high bar. if the court is not minded to make such an order, it is even more imperative that the orders require minimal communication, are unambiguous and have prescriptive and clear obligations. for those reasons, the mother presses for the orders sought in her application. the credit of the parties it is submitted that your honour would find the mother was frank, direct and a compelling witness. she readily made appropriate concessions and provided all relevant evidence to the court. the mother relies upon evidence from her psychologist identifying the ongoing negative impact on her and likely, [x]. she has sought assistance from [ms an] since march 2015 of over 48 appointments. [ms an’s] evidence was of the chronic nature of the stress of the proceedings and the fact of its potential impact on both the mother and [x]. an illustration of the very real impact of the father’s conduct is that the mother has put off future medical treatment due to fear of the father taking further legal action in the event she is incapacitated due to medical complications. she is, in effect, walking on eggshells, and has been for a long time. [ms an] identified the impact of the “chronic pain” the mother suffers from (her physical issues) as well as “worry, self-doubt, difficulty relaxing and sleeping” against a background of a very difficult co-parenting relationship in her report of november 2020. she opined that the “chronic hostility to [ms pinner] (and her family) is causing harm to [ms pinner] and is likely to be causing harm to [x]”. this is consistent with the report of the family consultant who stated that “[mr manuel’s] focus throughout the assessment appeared to be on denigrating [ms pinner”]. this risk to [x] can be avoided by the making of the orders the mother seeks. her role as a parent should be protected by the reduction of the stress created by the ongoing fraught interpersonal relationship between the parents by a reduction of the time. the father in court was aggressive, argumentative, and refused to answer questions relevant to determination of the [x’s] best interests. in the court setting, where it is reasonable to infer that was his best behaviour, he swore, raised his voice, refused to answer questions, was offensive and was selective in whether he would respond to any question posed. his evidence could not be properly tested due to his refusals to answer questions, look at documents or consider propositions. the father refused to engage in a proper way with the process and would answer questions if and when he wanted to, but not otherwise. his evidence about his own psychological diagnosis and treatment was vague and evasive, inconsistent with the subpoenaed records and served only to heighten the concern about his mental health as there was no clarity about what if any supports are or ever were in place. there remains no evidence as to any treatments he requires or has sought. a more fulsome exploration of the parties’ mental health was unable to occur as the father interfered with expert being appointed. there is no evidence before the court that the father or his partner have received psychological treatment and support or of prognosis and need for future treatment. conclusion the notion that equal time can continue with no communication and co-operation is impractical. the mother submits that [x] has a meaningful relationship with both of his parents and that this would continue to be the case if the orders she seeks are made. the proposed reduction in time with his father will not impact the fact of the ongoing meaningful relationship with each parent. determination of best interests and orders to be made is a prospective analysis.
a) despite health recommendations and [x’s] express wish to be vaccinated, the father maintains strong opposition to a covid-19 vaccine. the father was content on 21 june 2021 for [x] to get a flu vaccination, but does not agree to him getting a covid-19 vaccine, and was critical of the mother for “unilaterally” booking an appointment for same. the mother advised the father on 21 december 2022 that she intended to make an appointment for [x] in the new year, and the father cancelled the appointment on 22 january (2 days prior to the appointment), without advising the mother. his approach is illustrative of his lack of insight and approach to matters where the parties disagree, where he imposes his will. another example was when the father collected [x] to farewell [ao] (the dog) during the mother’s time without consent, contrary to [x’s] wishes and without notice. the father reported this as a positive example of his support of [x’s] grief processes and states in his written submissions “i taught [x] about death of loved ones when our dog died”. b) the father had conflict with, and made complaints to, the education directorate and human rights commission about [x’s] wearing of a mask during the pandemic, and accused the school of “child abuse”. he showed no appreciation of the impact this may have on [x]. c) the benefit to [x] of receiving psychological support is disregarded by the father. it is illustrated in his communication to [x’s] counsellor, [mr u]. he showed no insight, even in cross-examination, of the impact on [x] of the established relationship with [mr u] ceasing, despite the mother having advised the father of the benefit to [x]. the father had been invited by [mr u] to communicate with him, contrary to the father’s evidence on this matter. d) other issues, such as the father’s refusal to administer asthma medication, conflict with treatment providers, and unwillingness to give consideration to [x’s] wishes, such as in seeing [ao] and going to the [event b], indicate against an order for the father to have sole parental responsibility. e) the allegations the father makes of the mother making unilateral decisions, such as primary school enrolment and cancelling swimming lessons and [music] lessons, are not supported by the evidence.
b) the father had conflict with, and made complaints to, the education directorate and human rights commission about [x’s] wearing of a mask during the pandemic, and accused the school of “child abuse”. he showed no appreciation of the impact this may have on [x]. c) the benefit to [x] of receiving psychological support is disregarded by the father. it is illustrated in his communication to [x’s] counsellor, [mr u]. he showed no insight, even in cross-examination, of the impact on [x] of the established relationship with [mr u] ceasing, despite the mother having advised the father of the benefit to [x]. the father had been invited by [mr u] to communicate with him, contrary to the father’s evidence on this matter. d) other issues, such as the father’s refusal to administer asthma medication, conflict with treatment providers, and unwillingness to give consideration to [x’s] wishes, such as in seeing [ao] and going to the [event b], indicate against an order for the father to have sole parental responsibility. e) the allegations the father makes of the mother making unilateral decisions, such as primary school enrolment and cancelling swimming lessons and [music] lessons, are not supported by the evidence.
c) the benefit to [x] of receiving psychological support is disregarded by the father. it is illustrated in his communication to [x’s] counsellor, [mr u]. he showed no insight, even in cross-examination, of the impact on [x] of the established relationship with [mr u] ceasing, despite the mother having advised the father of the benefit to [x]. the father had been invited by [mr u] to communicate with him, contrary to the father’s evidence on this matter. d) other issues, such as the father’s refusal to administer asthma medication, conflict with treatment providers, and unwillingness to give consideration to [x’s] wishes, such as in seeing [ao] and going to the [event b], indicate against an order for the father to have sole parental responsibility. e) the allegations the father makes of the mother making unilateral decisions, such as primary school enrolment and cancelling swimming lessons and [music] lessons, are not supported by the evidence.
d) other issues, such as the father’s refusal to administer asthma medication, conflict with treatment providers, and unwillingness to give consideration to [x’s] wishes, such as in seeing [ao] and going to the [event b], indicate against an order for the father to have sole parental responsibility. e) the allegations the father makes of the mother making unilateral decisions, such as primary school enrolment and cancelling swimming lessons and [music] lessons, are not supported by the evidence.
e) the allegations the father makes of the mother making unilateral decisions, such as primary school enrolment and cancelling swimming lessons and [music] lessons, are not supported by the evidence.
a) [x’s] observed ambivalence in respect of his relationship with his father. b) [x’s] close, secure relationship with his mother, who has an emotionally sensitive parenting approach, who listens, and with whom he has a close and affectionate relationship. c) [x] reported that his father “gets more of an angry tone”, which makes him feel scared, and described himself as “chilled out” at his mother’s and “stressed out” at his father’s. d) role modelling for [x] was raised by the mother to the consultant and in cross examnation. the father refused to answer any questions about a number of matters including his capacity to regulate his emotions, accordingly this was unable to be explored in cross examination. e) the family consultant recommended [x] be connected with a psychologist (without the father’s involvement if necessary), that the father engage a psychologist to explore his patterns of emotional regulation and conflict management, and that [x] and the father engage in family counselling “to improve [x’s] confidence in sharing his emotions, opinions and wishes with his father”. this supports a finding that the father’s emotional regulation is of concern in his parenting. f) [x’s] wishes should be given weight. however, it is submitted limited weight should be given to his comment about continuing with shared care when read in context of the balance of the comments and observations about ambivalence, developing a voice and feeling scared. the father stated many times he will “not be bullied”. his conduct recorded in the subpoenaed third-party material shows a long history of lack of regulation of emotion and aggression. this was also observed at court. if adult professionals such as [mr u], [ah contact centre] staff, and court staff find communication with the father challenging, the question must be asked how [x] can be expected to navigate an unregulated, often volatile, single minded and at times aggressive adult. it is submitted that the aggression recorded by multiple external agencies over many years supports a finding the father lacks insight about the impact of his responses and that he is unable or unwilling to regulate his behaviour. this is supported by the recommendations of the family consultant. how then could [x] manage potential conflict or even differences with his father? g) these difficulties are illustrated throughout the evidence, but one pertinent example is that of the [mr u] psychologist support. [x] became a patient of [mr u’s] during the [ah contact centre] kayaks program. on 8 november 2021, the mother said to the father, “on wednesday he had an appointment with his counsellor [mr u] from [ag] counselling. [x] had spoken to me about having independent person to talk to him and he really liked [mr u]. he is having these appointments as and when he wants them.” on 21 december 2021, the mother emailed the father regarding [x] engaging with [mr u], advising “this has proven beneficial to [x] as it has given him an outlet that is not any of his parents.” despite knowing of the relationship and its benefit to [x], the father sent a text message to [mr u] on 21 february 2022 that said, “misunderstanding? fuck off. you were a cunt. don't try and hide behind a "misunderstanding". grow the fuck up and admit your failures and own your actions. you knew exactly what you were doing. that just shows your failings as a "counsellor". counsellors are people who failed to attend medical school and get a degree in psychology.” [mr u] ceased treating [x]. h) the father’s claim that he “never yells in front of [x]” is implausible. his unregulated behaviour is reported in multiple third party agency records. [x] reports to the family consultant that he is scared but that his father is now “less yelly”. the father’s presentation in court was consistent with that recorded. the [ah contact centre] notes from 17 september 2015 record him when seeking information complaining about “f-ing lesbains and blacks...and how they get looked after but not dads” and “everyone being against dads. similarly, the afp records, [al counselling] records, education directorate records and his own report of conflict with the orthodontic receptionist and gp,3support a finding that the father has difficulty regulating his emotions. the orders sought by the mother reduce the impact of this conduct on [x] by less exposure. it reduces the likelihood of normalisation of the father’s behaviour for [x].
b) [x’s] close, secure relationship with his mother, who has an emotionally sensitive parenting approach, who listens, and with whom he has a close and affectionate relationship. c) [x] reported that his father “gets more of an angry tone”, which makes him feel scared, and described himself as “chilled out” at his mother’s and “stressed out” at his father’s. d) role modelling for [x] was raised by the mother to the consultant and in cross examnation. the father refused to answer any questions about a number of matters including his capacity to regulate his emotions, accordingly this was unable to be explored in cross examination. e) the family consultant recommended [x] be connected with a psychologist (without the father’s involvement if necessary), that the father engage a psychologist to explore his patterns of emotional regulation and conflict management, and that [x] and the father engage in family counselling “to improve [x’s] confidence in sharing his emotions, opinions and wishes with his father”. this supports a finding that the father’s emotional regulation is of concern in his parenting. f) [x’s] wishes should be given weight. however, it is submitted limited weight should be given to his comment about continuing with shared care when read in context of the balance of the comments and observations about ambivalence, developing a voice and feeling scared. the father stated many times he will “not be bullied”. his conduct recorded in the subpoenaed third-party material shows a long history of lack of regulation of emotion and aggression. this was also observed at court. if adult professionals such as [mr u], [ah contact centre] staff, and court staff find communication with the father challenging, the question must be asked how [x] can be expected to navigate an unregulated, often volatile, single minded and at times aggressive adult. it is submitted that the aggression recorded by multiple external agencies over many years supports a finding the father lacks insight about the impact of his responses and that he is unable or unwilling to regulate his behaviour. this is supported by the recommendations of the family consultant. how then could [x] manage potential conflict or even differences with his father? g) these difficulties are illustrated throughout the evidence, but one pertinent example is that of the [mr u] psychologist support. [x] became a patient of [mr u’s] during the [ah contact centre] kayaks program. on 8 november 2021, the mother said to the father, “on wednesday he had an appointment with his counsellor [mr u] from [ag] counselling. [x] had spoken to me about having independent person to talk to him and he really liked [mr u]. he is having these appointments as and when he wants them.” on 21 december 2021, the mother emailed the father regarding [x] engaging with [mr u], advising “this has proven beneficial to [x] as it has given him an outlet that is not any of his parents.” despite knowing of the relationship and its benefit to [x], the father sent a text message to [mr u] on 21 february 2022 that said, “misunderstanding? fuck off. you were a cunt. don't try and hide behind a "misunderstanding". grow the fuck up and admit your failures and own your actions. you knew exactly what you were doing. that just shows your failings as a "counsellor". counsellors are people who failed to attend medical school and get a degree in psychology.” [mr u] ceased treating [x]. h) the father’s claim that he “never yells in front of [x]” is implausible. his unregulated behaviour is reported in multiple third party agency records. [x] reports to the family consultant that he is scared but that his father is now “less yelly”. the father’s presentation in court was consistent with that recorded. the [ah contact centre] notes from 17 september 2015 record him when seeking information complaining about “f-ing lesbains and blacks...and how they get looked after but not dads” and “everyone being against dads. similarly, the afp records, [al counselling] records, education directorate records and his own report of conflict with the orthodontic receptionist and gp,3support a finding that the father has difficulty regulating his emotions. the orders sought by the mother reduce the impact of this conduct on [x] by less exposure. it reduces the likelihood of normalisation of the father’s behaviour for [x].
c) [x] reported that his father “gets more of an angry tone”, which makes him feel scared, and described himself as “chilled out” at his mother’s and “stressed out” at his father’s. d) role modelling for [x] was raised by the mother to the consultant and in cross examnation. the father refused to answer any questions about a number of matters including his capacity to regulate his emotions, accordingly this was unable to be explored in cross examination. e) the family consultant recommended [x] be connected with a psychologist (without the father’s involvement if necessary), that the father engage a psychologist to explore his patterns of emotional regulation and conflict management, and that [x] and the father engage in family counselling “to improve [x’s] confidence in sharing his emotions, opinions and wishes with his father”. this supports a finding that the father’s emotional regulation is of concern in his parenting. f) [x’s] wishes should be given weight. however, it is submitted limited weight should be given to his comment about continuing with shared care when read in context of the balance of the comments and observations about ambivalence, developing a voice and feeling scared. the father stated many times he will “not be bullied”. his conduct recorded in the subpoenaed third-party material shows a long history of lack of regulation of emotion and aggression. this was also observed at court. if adult professionals such as [mr u], [ah contact centre] staff, and court staff find communication with the father challenging, the question must be asked how [x] can be expected to navigate an unregulated, often volatile, single minded and at times aggressive adult. it is submitted that the aggression recorded by multiple external agencies over many years supports a finding the father lacks insight about the impact of his responses and that he is unable or unwilling to regulate his behaviour. this is supported by the recommendations of the family consultant. how then could [x] manage potential conflict or even differences with his father? g) these difficulties are illustrated throughout the evidence, but one pertinent example is that of the [mr u] psychologist support. [x] became a patient of [mr u’s] during the [ah contact centre] kayaks program. on 8 november 2021, the mother said to the father, “on wednesday he had an appointment with his counsellor [mr u] from [ag] counselling. [x] had spoken to me about having independent person to talk to him and he really liked [mr u]. he is having these appointments as and when he wants them.” on 21 december 2021, the mother emailed the father regarding [x] engaging with [mr u], advising “this has proven beneficial to [x] as it has given him an outlet that is not any of his parents.” despite knowing of the relationship and its benefit to [x], the father sent a text message to [mr u] on 21 february 2022 that said, “misunderstanding? fuck off. you were a cunt. don't try and hide behind a "misunderstanding". grow the fuck up and admit your failures and own your actions. you knew exactly what you were doing. that just shows your failings as a "counsellor". counsellors are people who failed to attend medical school and get a degree in psychology.” [mr u] ceased treating [x]. h) the father’s claim that he “never yells in front of [x]” is implausible. his unregulated behaviour is reported in multiple third party agency records. [x] reports to the family consultant that he is scared but that his father is now “less yelly”. the father’s presentation in court was consistent with that recorded. the [ah contact centre] notes from 17 september 2015 record him when seeking information complaining about “f-ing lesbains and blacks...and how they get looked after but not dads” and “everyone being against dads. similarly, the afp records, [al counselling] records, education directorate records and his own report of conflict with the orthodontic receptionist and gp,3support a finding that the father has difficulty regulating his emotions. the orders sought by the mother reduce the impact of this conduct on [x] by less exposure. it reduces the likelihood of normalisation of the father’s behaviour for [x].
d) role modelling for [x] was raised by the mother to the consultant and in cross examnation. the father refused to answer any questions about a number of matters including his capacity to regulate his emotions, accordingly this was unable to be explored in cross examination. e) the family consultant recommended [x] be connected with a psychologist (without the father’s involvement if necessary), that the father engage a psychologist to explore his patterns of emotional regulation and conflict management, and that [x] and the father engage in family counselling “to improve [x’s] confidence in sharing his emotions, opinions and wishes with his father”. this supports a finding that the father’s emotional regulation is of concern in his parenting. f) [x’s] wishes should be given weight. however, it is submitted limited weight should be given to his comment about continuing with shared care when read in context of the balance of the comments and observations about ambivalence, developing a voice and feeling scared. the father stated many times he will “not be bullied”. his conduct recorded in the subpoenaed third-party material shows a long history of lack of regulation of emotion and aggression. this was also observed at court. if adult professionals such as [mr u], [ah contact centre] staff, and court staff find communication with the father challenging, the question must be asked how [x] can be expected to navigate an unregulated, often volatile, single minded and at times aggressive adult. it is submitted that the aggression recorded by multiple external agencies over many years supports a finding the father lacks insight about the impact of his responses and that he is unable or unwilling to regulate his behaviour. this is supported by the recommendations of the family consultant. how then could [x] manage potential conflict or even differences with his father? g) these difficulties are illustrated throughout the evidence, but one pertinent example is that of the [mr u] psychologist support. [x] became a patient of [mr u’s] during the [ah contact centre] kayaks program. on 8 november 2021, the mother said to the father, “on wednesday he had an appointment with his counsellor [mr u] from [ag] counselling. [x] had spoken to me about having independent person to talk to him and he really liked [mr u]. he is having these appointments as and when he wants them.” on 21 december 2021, the mother emailed the father regarding [x] engaging with [mr u], advising “this has proven beneficial to [x] as it has given him an outlet that is not any of his parents.” despite knowing of the relationship and its benefit to [x], the father sent a text message to [mr u] on 21 february 2022 that said, “misunderstanding? fuck off. you were a cunt. don't try and hide behind a "misunderstanding". grow the fuck up and admit your failures and own your actions. you knew exactly what you were doing. that just shows your failings as a "counsellor". counsellors are people who failed to attend medical school and get a degree in psychology.” [mr u] ceased treating [x]. h) the father’s claim that he “never yells in front of [x]” is implausible. his unregulated behaviour is reported in multiple third party agency records. [x] reports to the family consultant that he is scared but that his father is now “less yelly”. the father’s presentation in court was consistent with that recorded. the [ah contact centre] notes from 17 september 2015 record him when seeking information complaining about “f-ing lesbains and blacks...and how they get looked after but not dads” and “everyone being against dads. similarly, the afp records, [al counselling] records, education directorate records and his own report of conflict with the orthodontic receptionist and gp,3support a finding that the father has difficulty regulating his emotions. the orders sought by the mother reduce the impact of this conduct on [x] by less exposure. it reduces the likelihood of normalisation of the father’s behaviour for [x].
e) the family consultant recommended [x] be connected with a psychologist (without the father’s involvement if necessary), that the father engage a psychologist to explore his patterns of emotional regulation and conflict management, and that [x] and the father engage in family counselling “to improve [x’s] confidence in sharing his emotions, opinions and wishes with his father”. this supports a finding that the father’s emotional regulation is of concern in his parenting. f) [x’s] wishes should be given weight. however, it is submitted limited weight should be given to his comment about continuing with shared care when read in context of the balance of the comments and observations about ambivalence, developing a voice and feeling scared. the father stated many times he will “not be bullied”. his conduct recorded in the subpoenaed third-party material shows a long history of lack of regulation of emotion and aggression. this was also observed at court. if adult professionals such as [mr u], [ah contact centre] staff, and court staff find communication with the father challenging, the question must be asked how [x] can be expected to navigate an unregulated, often volatile, single minded and at times aggressive adult. it is submitted that the aggression recorded by multiple external agencies over many years supports a finding the father lacks insight about the impact of his responses and that he is unable or unwilling to regulate his behaviour. this is supported by the recommendations of the family consultant. how then could [x] manage potential conflict or even differences with his father? g) these difficulties are illustrated throughout the evidence, but one pertinent example is that of the [mr u] psychologist support. [x] became a patient of [mr u’s] during the [ah contact centre] kayaks program. on 8 november 2021, the mother said to the father, “on wednesday he had an appointment with his counsellor [mr u] from [ag] counselling. [x] had spoken to me about having independent person to talk to him and he really liked [mr u]. he is having these appointments as and when he wants them.” on 21 december 2021, the mother emailed the father regarding [x] engaging with [mr u], advising “this has proven beneficial to [x] as it has given him an outlet that is not any of his parents.” despite knowing of the relationship and its benefit to [x], the father sent a text message to [mr u] on 21 february 2022 that said, “misunderstanding? fuck off. you were a cunt. don't try and hide behind a "misunderstanding". grow the fuck up and admit your failures and own your actions. you knew exactly what you were doing. that just shows your failings as a "counsellor". counsellors are people who failed to attend medical school and get a degree in psychology.” [mr u] ceased treating [x]. h) the father’s claim that he “never yells in front of [x]” is implausible. his unregulated behaviour is reported in multiple third party agency records. [x] reports to the family consultant that he is scared but that his father is now “less yelly”. the father’s presentation in court was consistent with that recorded. the [ah contact centre] notes from 17 september 2015 record him when seeking information complaining about “f-ing lesbains and blacks...and how they get looked after but not dads” and “everyone being against dads. similarly, the afp records, [al counselling] records, education directorate records and his own report of conflict with the orthodontic receptionist and gp,3support a finding that the father has difficulty regulating his emotions. the orders sought by the mother reduce the impact of this conduct on [x] by less exposure. it reduces the likelihood of normalisation of the father’s behaviour for [x].
f) [x’s] wishes should be given weight. however, it is submitted limited weight should be given to his comment about continuing with shared care when read in context of the balance of the comments and observations about ambivalence, developing a voice and feeling scared. the father stated many times he will “not be bullied”. his conduct recorded in the subpoenaed third-party material shows a long history of lack of regulation of emotion and aggression. this was also observed at court. if adult professionals such as [mr u], [ah contact centre] staff, and court staff find communication with the father challenging, the question must be asked how [x] can be expected to navigate an unregulated, often volatile, single minded and at times aggressive adult. it is submitted that the aggression recorded by multiple external agencies over many years supports a finding the father lacks insight about the impact of his responses and that he is unable or unwilling to regulate his behaviour. this is supported by the recommendations of the family consultant. how then could [x] manage potential conflict or even differences with his father? g) these difficulties are illustrated throughout the evidence, but one pertinent example is that of the [mr u] psychologist support. [x] became a patient of [mr u’s] during the [ah contact centre] kayaks program. on 8 november 2021, the mother said to the father, “on wednesday he had an appointment with his counsellor [mr u] from [ag] counselling. [x] had spoken to me about having independent person to talk to him and he really liked [mr u]. he is having these appointments as and when he wants them.” on 21 december 2021, the mother emailed the father regarding [x] engaging with [mr u], advising “this has proven beneficial to [x] as it has given him an outlet that is not any of his parents.” despite knowing of the relationship and its benefit to [x], the father sent a text message to [mr u] on 21 february 2022 that said, “misunderstanding? fuck off. you were a cunt. don't try and hide behind a "misunderstanding". grow the fuck up and admit your failures and own your actions. you knew exactly what you were doing. that just shows your failings as a "counsellor". counsellors are people who failed to attend medical school and get a degree in psychology.” [mr u] ceased treating [x]. h) the father’s claim that he “never yells in front of [x]” is implausible. his unregulated behaviour is reported in multiple third party agency records. [x] reports to the family consultant that he is scared but that his father is now “less yelly”. the father’s presentation in court was consistent with that recorded. the [ah contact centre] notes from 17 september 2015 record him when seeking information complaining about “f-ing lesbains and blacks...and how they get looked after but not dads” and “everyone being against dads. similarly, the afp records, [al counselling] records, education directorate records and his own report of conflict with the orthodontic receptionist and gp,3support a finding that the father has difficulty regulating his emotions. the orders sought by the mother reduce the impact of this conduct on [x] by less exposure. it reduces the likelihood of normalisation of the father’s behaviour for [x].
g) these difficulties are illustrated throughout the evidence, but one pertinent example is that of the [mr u] psychologist support. [x] became a patient of [mr u’s] during the [ah contact centre] kayaks program. on 8 november 2021, the mother said to the father, “on wednesday he had an appointment with his counsellor [mr u] from [ag] counselling. [x] had spoken to me about having independent person to talk to him and he really liked [mr u]. he is having these appointments as and when he wants them.” on 21 december 2021, the mother emailed the father regarding [x] engaging with [mr u], advising “this has proven beneficial to [x] as it has given him an outlet that is not any of his parents.” despite knowing of the relationship and its benefit to [x], the father sent a text message to [mr u] on 21 february 2022 that said, “misunderstanding? fuck off. you were a cunt. don't try and hide behind a "misunderstanding". grow the fuck up and admit your failures and own your actions. you knew exactly what you were doing. that just shows your failings as a "counsellor". counsellors are people who failed to attend medical school and get a degree in psychology.” [mr u] ceased treating [x]. h) the father’s claim that he “never yells in front of [x]” is implausible. his unregulated behaviour is reported in multiple third party agency records. [x] reports to the family consultant that he is scared but that his father is now “less yelly”. the father’s presentation in court was consistent with that recorded. the [ah contact centre] notes from 17 september 2015 record him when seeking information complaining about “f-ing lesbains and blacks...and how they get looked after but not dads” and “everyone being against dads. similarly, the afp records, [al counselling] records, education directorate records and his own report of conflict with the orthodontic receptionist and gp,3support a finding that the father has difficulty regulating his emotions. the orders sought by the mother reduce the impact of this conduct on [x] by less exposure. it reduces the likelihood of normalisation of the father’s behaviour for [x].
h) the father’s claim that he “never yells in front of [x]” is implausible. his unregulated behaviour is reported in multiple third party agency records. [x] reports to the family consultant that he is scared but that his father is now “less yelly”. the father’s presentation in court was consistent with that recorded. the [ah contact centre] notes from 17 september 2015 record him when seeking information complaining about “f-ing lesbains and blacks...and how they get looked after but not dads” and “everyone being against dads. similarly, the afp records, [al counselling] records, education directorate records and his own report of conflict with the orthodontic receptionist and gp,3support a finding that the father has difficulty regulating his emotions. the orders sought by the mother reduce the impact of this conduct on [x] by less exposure. it reduces the likelihood of normalisation of the father’s behaviour for [x].
j) the father refused to answer questions arising from subpoenaed material, quoting the “privacy act 1988”. he was obstructive and at best opaque about the recorded drug use by [ms ae] and her recorded suicide attempts and about ambulance, police and hospital attendances of both he and [ms ae]. the father reported to the consultant that he “takes antidepressant medication regularly” but no evidence was provided. the fact of the afp and tch involvement was not disclosed by him. it was discovered only upon the issuing of subpoena. the possible risk to [x] of the father’s health is a relevant matter for the court the father presented no evidence. the subpoenaed material supports findings of mental health issues having existed, including possible suicidal ideation, from 2015 until 2021. k) there has been diminution of trust due to the father’s lack of candour during the proceedings. he failed to comply with his obligation to provide all relevant material. the consultant was aware of the afp records, it was only after the [al counselling] material was obtained that records of serious mental health matters including suicidal ideation, drug use and suicide attempts have become known. the court, the family consultant and the mother only became aware of many of the potentially significant events due to the subpoena, not due to the father providing disclosure about matters relevant to issues that may impact [x]. the lack of candour and frankness with the family consultant and the court read with his report of “a settled home life” and the report by [ms ae] of normal “ups and downs” supports a finding of lack of candour. the fact of the failure to disclose such serious material diminishes even further the trust between the parties about communication. the mother by contrast provided full and detailed disclosure about her physical and psychological health to the family consultant and in her evidence, including evidence from her treating psychologist, [ms an].
k) there has been diminution of trust due to the father’s lack of candour during the proceedings. he failed to comply with his obligation to provide all relevant material. the consultant was aware of the afp records, it was only after the [al counselling] material was obtained that records of serious mental health matters including suicidal ideation, drug use and suicide attempts have become known. the court, the family consultant and the mother only became aware of many of the potentially significant events due to the subpoena, not due to the father providing disclosure about matters relevant to issues that may impact [x]. the lack of candour and frankness with the family consultant and the court read with his report of “a settled home life” and the report by [ms ae] of normal “ups and downs” supports a finding of lack of candour. the fact of the failure to disclose such serious material diminishes even further the trust between the parties about communication. the mother by contrast provided full and detailed disclosure about her physical and psychological health to the family consultant and in her evidence, including evidence from her treating psychologist, [ms an].
a) allegations of unilateral decision making, including enrolment at primary school, covid-19 vaccine, psychologist appointments, and cancellation of swimming lessons and [sports] lessons. b) allegations of family violence against him by the mother. the father steadfastly refused to accept any family violence was perpetrated against the mother by himself, for example the punching of the steering wheel incident. c) allegations that the mother refused to communicate with him about important matters, for example, her hospital admission following her pericarditis. the evidence, however, supports a finding that the mother was in communication with him within a day of her hospitalisation. the evidence also supports a finding that the father failed to advise the mother, the court or the family consultant of significant matters pertaining to his own and [ms ae’s] mental health challenges, as referred to above. d) allegations that the mother is attempting to prevent the father playing a meaningful role in [x’s] life, and that she is attempting to remove [x] from his life. e) allegations that the mother is exposing [x] to harmful alcohol messages, where the mother’s evidence is that the parties do not drink and the subpoenaed evidence records the father highly intoxicated when the afp attended for a welfare check. f) allegations that the mother sends emails “calling him every name under the sun” and “disparaging and slandering” him. no evidence of such emails was produced. g) allegations that the mother unreasonably refused new zealand overseas travel, refused to take [x] to football training, refused to share in the cost of a phone for [x], and refused counselling, [ah contact centre] and mediation.
b) allegations of family violence against him by the mother. the father steadfastly refused to accept any family violence was perpetrated against the mother by himself, for example the punching of the steering wheel incident. c) allegations that the mother refused to communicate with him about important matters, for example, her hospital admission following her pericarditis. the evidence, however, supports a finding that the mother was in communication with him within a day of her hospitalisation. the evidence also supports a finding that the father failed to advise the mother, the court or the family consultant of significant matters pertaining to his own and [ms ae’s] mental health challenges, as referred to above. d) allegations that the mother is attempting to prevent the father playing a meaningful role in [x’s] life, and that she is attempting to remove [x] from his life. e) allegations that the mother is exposing [x] to harmful alcohol messages, where the mother’s evidence is that the parties do not drink and the subpoenaed evidence records the father highly intoxicated when the afp attended for a welfare check. f) allegations that the mother sends emails “calling him every name under the sun” and “disparaging and slandering” him. no evidence of such emails was produced. g) allegations that the mother unreasonably refused new zealand overseas travel, refused to take [x] to football training, refused to share in the cost of a phone for [x], and refused counselling, [ah contact centre] and mediation.
c) allegations that the mother refused to communicate with him about important matters, for example, her hospital admission following her pericarditis. the evidence, however, supports a finding that the mother was in communication with him within a day of her hospitalisation. the evidence also supports a finding that the father failed to advise the mother, the court or the family consultant of significant matters pertaining to his own and [ms ae’s] mental health challenges, as referred to above. d) allegations that the mother is attempting to prevent the father playing a meaningful role in [x’s] life, and that she is attempting to remove [x] from his life. e) allegations that the mother is exposing [x] to harmful alcohol messages, where the mother’s evidence is that the parties do not drink and the subpoenaed evidence records the father highly intoxicated when the afp attended for a welfare check. f) allegations that the mother sends emails “calling him every name under the sun” and “disparaging and slandering” him. no evidence of such emails was produced. g) allegations that the mother unreasonably refused new zealand overseas travel, refused to take [x] to football training, refused to share in the cost of a phone for [x], and refused counselling, [ah contact centre] and mediation.
d) allegations that the mother is attempting to prevent the father playing a meaningful role in [x’s] life, and that she is attempting to remove [x] from his life. e) allegations that the mother is exposing [x] to harmful alcohol messages, where the mother’s evidence is that the parties do not drink and the subpoenaed evidence records the father highly intoxicated when the afp attended for a welfare check. f) allegations that the mother sends emails “calling him every name under the sun” and “disparaging and slandering” him. no evidence of such emails was produced. g) allegations that the mother unreasonably refused new zealand overseas travel, refused to take [x] to football training, refused to share in the cost of a phone for [x], and refused counselling, [ah contact centre] and mediation.
e) allegations that the mother is exposing [x] to harmful alcohol messages, where the mother’s evidence is that the parties do not drink and the subpoenaed evidence records the father highly intoxicated when the afp attended for a welfare check. f) allegations that the mother sends emails “calling him every name under the sun” and “disparaging and slandering” him. no evidence of such emails was produced. g) allegations that the mother unreasonably refused new zealand overseas travel, refused to take [x] to football training, refused to share in the cost of a phone for [x], and refused counselling, [ah contact centre] and mediation.
f) allegations that the mother sends emails “calling him every name under the sun” and “disparaging and slandering” him. no evidence of such emails was produced. g) allegations that the mother unreasonably refused new zealand overseas travel, refused to take [x] to football training, refused to share in the cost of a phone for [x], and refused counselling, [ah contact centre] and mediation.
g) allegations that the mother unreasonably refused new zealand overseas travel, refused to take [x] to football training, refused to share in the cost of a phone for [x], and refused counselling, [ah contact centre] and mediation.
written submissions of the independent children’s lawyer  is the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility rebutted? (2) is the conduct of either party relevant to the determination of whether the presumption is rebutted? (3) have the parties been able to demonstrate a capacity to work together to make decisions in [x’s] best interests? (4) is there evidence capable of satisfying section 61da(2) that the presumption does not apply as one party has engaged in abuse or family violence? (5) is there evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of [x] to have equal shared parental responsibility pursuant to section 61da(4)? (6) having regard to the determination of parental responsibility, is it in the best interests of [x] that he live with each parent in an equal shared time arrangement? if not, what time arrangement operates in [x’s] best interests? [x] has been in a shared care arrangement for several years pursuant to consent orders the parties entered on 24 march 2017. these provided for shared parental responsibility.   is the conduct of either party relevant to the determination of whether the presumption is rebutted? (3) have the parties been able to demonstrate a capacity to work together to make decisions in [x’s] best interests? (4) is there evidence capable of satisfying section 61da(2) that the presumption does not apply as one party has engaged in abuse or family violence? (5) is there evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of [x] to have equal shared parental responsibility pursuant to section 61da(4)? (6) having regard to the determination of parental responsibility, is it in the best interests of [x] that he live with each parent in an equal shared time arrangement? if not, what time arrangement operates in [x’s] best interests? [x] has been in a shared care arrangement for several years pursuant to consent orders the parties entered on 24 march 2017. these provided for shared parental responsibility.   have the parties been able to demonstrate a capacity to work together to make decisions in [x’s] best interests? (4) is there evidence capable of satisfying section 61da(2) that the presumption does not apply as one party has engaged in abuse or family violence? (5) is there evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of [x] to have equal shared parental responsibility pursuant to section 61da(4)? (6) having regard to the determination of parental responsibility, is it in the best interests of [x] that he live with each parent in an equal shared time arrangement? if not, what time arrangement operates in [x’s] best interests? [x] has been in a shared care arrangement for several years pursuant to consent orders the parties entered on 24 march 2017. these provided for shared parental responsibility.   is there evidence capable of satisfying section 61da(2) that the presumption does not apply as one party has engaged in abuse or family violence? (5) is there evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of [x] to have equal shared parental responsibility pursuant to section 61da(4)? (6) having regard to the determination of parental responsibility, is it in the best interests of [x] that he live with each parent in an equal shared time arrangement? if not, what time arrangement operates in [x’s] best interests? [x] has been in a shared care arrangement for several years pursuant to consent orders the parties entered on 24 march 2017. these provided for shared parental responsibility.   is there evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of [x] to have equal shared parental responsibility pursuant to section 61da(4)? (6) having regard to the determination of parental responsibility, is it in the best interests of [x] that he live with each parent in an equal shared time arrangement? if not, what time arrangement operates in [x’s] best interests? [x] has been in a shared care arrangement for several years pursuant to consent orders the parties entered on 24 march 2017. these provided for shared parental responsibility.   having regard to the determination of parental responsibility, is it in the best interests of [x] that he live with each parent in an equal shared time arrangement? if not, what time arrangement operates in [x’s] best interests? [x] has been in a shared care arrangement for several years pursuant to consent orders the parties entered on 24 march 2017. these provided for shared parental responsibility.
rice v asplund consideration in light of the consent orders made on 24 march 2017, it is submitted the court must formally consider whether or not it is in the best interests of [x] for there to be any change to the orders. notwithstanding both parents seek changes to those orders, and, inter alia, seek orders in their favour for sole parental responsibility, it nonetheless remains open to the court to make orders other than those proposed by the parties. per marsden & winch [2009]famcafc152 the court must be satisfied both that a prima facie case has been established that circumstances have changed, and that this change is sufficient to embark on a further hearing and consideration. in determining this issue, the court may have regard to the applications of the parties and evidence presented at the substantive hearing. the 2017 orders were made by consent and without the benefit of a hearing. it is apparent from the number of applications, both contravention and substantive, since the making of the 2017 orders, that not only are both parties seeking to depart from those orders, but that there is a real likelihood that those orders will be varied in a significant way and that such variation is in the best interests of [x]. it is submitted the court would be comfortably satisfied that the circumstances of this matter warrant the making of orders different to those reflected in the consent orders of 24 march 2017. evidence presented at trial [mr manuel] – father [mr manuel] was cross-examined by ms curran for the mother and the writer as icl. [mr manuel’s] cross-examination by ms curran was notable for the antipathy directed by him towards ms curran. [mr manuel] was often evasive or he refused to answer questions put to him by ms curran. he frequently swore and made offensive remarks to both ms curran and his honour. [mr manuel] also refused to respond to a series of questions from the icl on the basis of “the privacy act 1988”, on matters that were relevant to the issues for determination by the court. [mr manuel’s] attitude to the proceedings before the court did little to assist him in advancing his case. notwithstanding his demeanour in the courtroom and his fixation the outcome had in some way been predetermined, he was clearly able to articulate his commitment to [x]. [mr manuel] is a strong advocate of what he considers to be in the best interests of [x]. in his evidence he has difficulty accepting that there may be a reasonable and contrary view. [mr manuel] was unable to accept that [ms pinner’s] new partner, [ms s] and their child together, [t], may be important people in [x’s] life. [mr manuel] refused to use [ms s’s] name, referring to her as “that person”. [mr manuel] refused to answer any questions regarding the circumstances of his partner, [ms ae], albeit he asserts in his written submissions (page. 5) that the information before the court and that had been produced under subpoena was incorrect. it is unfortunate that [mr manuel] did not use the opportunity that had been provided to him during the hearing to provide relevant information. other witnesses for the father the father did not call any other witnesses in his case, including his current partner [ms ae]. no evidence was filed on the father’s behalf by any other lay or expert witness. [ms pinner] – mother the mother was cross-examined by the writer as independent children’s lawyer. [mr manuel] was not permitted to cross-examine the mother due to an order having been made pursuant to section 102na of the family law act. [ms pinner] gave evidence broadly consistent with her affidavit material. [ms pinner] somewhat reluctantly acknowledged that [mr manuel] had introduced [x] to many of the “firsts” that he detailed in his affidavit material. [ms pinner] struggled to identify other specific contributions she provided to [x] despite being given such opportunity. [ms pinner] gave evidence regarding the concerns she had about undertaking a medical procedure in view of prior applications brought by [mr manuel]. she was not reassured by [mr manuel’s] evidence that he would not consider [ms pinner] undertaking that surgery as requiring [x] to be in his full-time care. other witnesses for the mother the mother did not file any supporting affidavits from her current spouse, [ms s], nor did she give oral evidence. an affidavit was filed in the mother’s case from her treating psychologist, [ms an]. [ms an] was not required for cross-examination. [ms an’s] report details [ms pinner’s] distress from the court proceedings and the hostility she says is directed to her by [mr manuel]. [ms af] – family report writer [ms af] gave evidence on day one of the trial and was cross-examined by [mr manuel], ms curran and the independent children’s lawyer. [mr manuel] cross-examined [ms af] in relation to her alleged biases and in particular regarding the duluth model. he describes [ms af] as the “so called “expert”” (page. 3) in his written submissions. [mr manuel] does not appear to accept any of [ms af’s] recommendations. in answer to a series of questions from the writer, [ms af] appeared to concede that notwithstanding the degree of conflict between the parents: [x] is a well-adjusted young man, [x] has good relationships with both parents, that many of the issues of conflict between the parents related to aspects of parental responsibility, and that if an order were made for sole parental responsibility in favour of one or the other of the parents this had the potential to reduce the conflict between them. [ms af] was not able to point to other factors outside those areas of conflict relating to aspects of parental responsibility, that demonstrably favoured the proposal for time contained in her report. [ms af] did, however, confirm the conclusions in her report that there be an order for sole parental responsibility in favour of [ms pinner] and for [x] to spend five nights (four plus one) per fortnight with his father. legislative pathway the objects and principles underlying part vii of the family law act are reflected in section 60b, including ensuring that the best interests of children are being met by both parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of that child, protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subject to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, ensuring children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and ensuring parents fulfil their duties and meet their responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles underlying these objects include children having the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, having the right to spend time with on a regular basis and communicate with both their parents and other people of significant, parents sharing duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, parents being able to agree about future parenting, and children having a right to enjoy their culture. the court must have regard to the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration per section 60ca. best interests are determined by reference to the considerations in section 60cc. allocation of parental responsibility it is submitted the court would be satisfied that the presumption in favour of an order for equal shared parental responsibility is rebutted on the basis that it would not be in the best interests of [x] for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility. neither parent seeks an order for equal shared parental responsibility. both parents seek orders for sole parental responsibility in their favour. the evidence clearly establishes that they have been unable to make significant decisions on behalf of [x] without significant conflict and, on occasions, involvement of the court. the family report and evidence of [ms af] support an order for sole parental responsibility in favour of the mother. it is submitted that the nature of the interactions of the parents with each other, and with education and health providers, supports the making of an order for sole parental responsibility in favour of the mother. 60cc(2)(a): the proposals of each party and the icl provide for [x] to have a meaningful relationship with both parents. 60cc(2)(b): notwithstanding the significant conflict that has and continues to exist between the parents, the evidence of the family consultant was that the parents appeared to have been able to shield [x] from that conflict (fr #73). [ms af] also identifies that “as [x] approaches adolescence, he is likely to increase his understanding of the dynamics between his parents, and this is likely to place significant stress on his emotional wellbeing.” (fr #73). 60cc(3)(a): the family report records [x] describing “a close, positive relationship with his mother”, “comfortable sibling relationship with his brother, [t], with conflict typical of siblings of their developmental stages”, “positive relationship with [ms s]”, “no significant concerns about his mother or her home” (all fr #66). [ms af] goes on to say that “[x] appeared ambivalent about his relationship with his father”, “his father ‘gets more of an angry tone’, which makes him feel scared”, “he [[x]] is ‘getting better at having a voice with dad’, and is feeling more confident expressing his wishes to his father” (all fr #67). whilst stating it is “annoying switching between houses” [x] “indicated a preference to continue to spend equal time with each parent” (fr #68). the evidence before the court establishes that the parents have had, at times, fraught communication between themselves. in addition, the evidence establishes that the father’s communication with schools and health professionals has not always been conducive to maintaining supportive and positive relationships with third party providers engaged to assist [x]. this is exemplified by the communications between the father and [mr u], a psychologist who was at one time retained to provide assistance to [x]. 60cc(3)(b): [x] appears to have positive relationships with both his parents. [x] did not raise any concerns regarding the partners of either parent in his comments with the family consultant. 60cc(3)(c): this is an area of major contention between the parties. it is [mr manuel’s] case that the mother has not engaged in a co-parenting relationship. [ms pinner], by contrast, contends that the father does not seek to co-parent but to impose his own views. there are several instances where the parents have not been able to jointly participate in decision making regarding [x]. the father contends that [x] wishes to travel to [city b]. the mother contends that [x] does not wish to travel to [city b]. the family report (fr #67) records [x] as indicating he does not wish to go. the father does not accept the evidence from the mother or as reflected in the family report and insisted in evidence that this was not the case. in his written submissions he similarly presses that orders should be made for [x] to attend the [event b]. the father wishes for [x] to take dual australia/new zealand citizenship. there was limited if any evidence that he had made such request of the mother. the mother in evidence indicated she did not oppose such an order. such order should be made in the absence of the parties having already undertaken those steps. the mother sought that [x] have a covid vaccination. the father delayed in providing a response stating he was “busy” before declining to agree to [x] being vaccinated. his evidence of the reasons for his delay, it is submitted, was unsatisfactory and did not indicate a willingness to engage in a co-parenting relationship. [x] has maintained two telephones in recent times and is barred from accepting a call from his mother on the phone provided to him by his father. there was no satisfactory explanation provided by either parent for why [x] should continue to need two phones. 60cc(ca): the father asserts that he has more adequately fulfilled the parents obligation to maintain [x], however overall the evidence does not establish that either parent has failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain [x]. 60cc(3)(d): the changes proposed to the orders enable [x] to maintain a substantial and significant relationship with both parents. the arrangements proposed by the icl support [x’s] relationship with his half sibling [t]. 60cc(3)(e): both parents reside in canberra and there are no practical difficulties arising out of the orders sought by either party or the icl. 60cc(3)(f): the orders proposed by both parties and the icl do not impact on the capacity of either parents to provide for [x]. 60cc(3)(g): [ms af] describes [x] as having “presented as a quietly spoken, thoughtful individual, who appeared comfortable speaking with the assessor” (fr #64). [x] is now aged 12 and a half and has commenced in high school. the nature of his relationships with his parents will change in the coming years as he matures. there is nothing in [x’s] presentation or otherwise that would suggest that he cannot and will not maintain a relationship with both his parents. the nature of that relationship in future will likely be informed by the attitude of each parent to him and each other as he matures. 60cc(3)(h): not applicable. 60cc(3)(i): both parents exhibit very different parenting styles. [mr manuel] contends that [ms pinner] has not engaged in a co-parenting relationship. the evidence as detailed above [60cc(3)(c)] details some of the instances where the parties have not been able to agree regarding their responsibilities of parenthood. further examples emerged in the course of evidence. [mr manuel’s] unwillingness to speak the name of [ms s] as [ms pinner’s] long-term partner, reflected poorly on his attitude to somebody who forms part of the household within which [x] lives at least half the time. this evidence, and his attitude to that line of questioning, demonstrated an inflexibility that does not allow him, despite his protestations to the contrary, to place [x’s] interests ahead of his own. [mr manuel’s] refusal to provide information regarding his partner, [ms ae], and the circumstances of some events which had occurred in his household, again demonstrated an unwillingness to provide relevant information to the court. his response to counsel for the mother, ms curran, was rude, offensive, and inappropriate. his refusal to answer questions on issues of relevance to the court does not assist his case. in response to questions from the writer, [mr manuel] cited the ”privacy act 1988” and insisted, ultimately to his detriment, that this precluded him from answering the questions posed to him. this was a course open to [mr manuel], however it must lead the court to draw inferences from such failure to provide relevant evidence to facts in issue. it is not sufficient for [mr manuel] to assert in his written submissions that the material produced under subpoena is in some way incorrect when he had the opportunity during the hearing to place before the court evidence that may have be capable of persuading the court to a different conclusion. the nature of [mr manuel’s] communication with education and health professionals, as reflected in the evidence and exhibits placed before the court, is a further demonstration of his inability to distinguish between appropriate advocacy on behalf or to the benefit of [x], and a belligerent and, at times rude, insistence that the only outcome must be as he has asserted. 60cc(3)(j) and (k): both parties have asserted family violence against the other. at the time of the hearing the writer is not aware of any extant family violence orders. 60cc(3)(l): the current proceedings have been on foot for a significant period. most issues in dispute relate to aspects of parental responsibility. the position of both parties is that an order for sole parental responsibility should be made in favour of that party. the “time-with orders” that are proposed flow from the conduct and evidence of each of the parties and are directed to supporting [x’s] relationship with both his parents over the longer term. 60cc(3)(m): notwithstanding the significant conflict between the parents they have, for the most part, and to their credit, apparently been able to shield [x] from the worst aspects of their conflict. the orders proposed by the icl are directed to maintaining regular contact for [x] with each of his parents and to remove the main points of contention between the parents. other matters australian/new zealand dual citizenship: it is understood this may now be agreed. the icl supports an order being made requiring the parties to execute all documents necessary to give effect to [x] becoming a dual new zealand/australian citizen. [event b]: the icl does not support a specific order in relation to [city b]. this is a matter for the party in whose favour parental responsibility is ordered. the views of [x] are reflected in the family report and should be respected by the parties. [ad] concert: the evidence in relation to this is equivocal. the father in his written submissions (page. 6/7) asserts [x] ”nearly jumped out of his skin he was that excited”. this decision is an aspect of parental responsibility that should be made by the parent in whose favour such order has been made. that parent should have regard to [x’s] views and the uniqueness of the particular event. vexatious litigant application the mother seeks an order pursuant to section 102q(1)(b) of the family law act that the father is a vexatious litigant. there is scant, if any, evidence advanced by the mother in support of this order. the history of the proceedings involves a number of contravention applications that were then, in effect, dealt with by the father bringing a fresh initiating application. the mother responded to that application and a hearing has now been conducted from which substantive orders will be made. it is submitted this procedural history must axiomatically result in this part of the mother’s application being dismissed. conclusion it is submitted the evidence supports an order for sole parental responsibility in favour of the mother, that [x] live with the mother and spend significant and substantial time with his father. an arrangement that provides for five nights per fortnight during term and half school holidays is supported. ultimately whether this is five nights in one block or four nights in one week and one night in the other week is a question of degree. the split arrangement arguably reduces the need for there to be any formal arrangements regarding telephone contact. telephone contact could then be at any reasonable time in accordance with [x’s] wishes. an order requiring the parties to sign all documents necessary to apply for dual australia/new zealand citizenship is supported.
father’s submissions in reply
outline of principle
... maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents, obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement having been incurred.
... it must not be assumed that one parent (the father) cannot move and that the mother must, in every case, subordinate her ambitions and wishes, not to the needs of the child, but to the wishes of the father to pursue his life in a place of his choosing. it is the interests of the child which are paramount, not the interests or needs of the parents, let alone the interests of one of them.  4] the problems that family law legislation deals with are human problems: with all their attendant variety and complexity. and at the end of a court proceeding under such legislation, a judge must make an order - usually an order that says yes or no to some application. "[a] complicated mass of human experience has to be reduced to the simplest possible terms." because the problems are human problems, because they are as varied and complicated as they are, the legislature speaks in terms more often found in statements of aspiration than legal prescription. it is, then, hardly surprising that the guiding principles prescribed by the legislation for application in cases concerning the guardianship or custody of children or related issues, are principles that seldom, if ever, permit syllogistic reasoning. [205] further, when considering the reasons given by a judge who has made an order in an application about the guardianship or custody of children, it is necessary to bear steadily in mind that the judge must grapple with the chaotic complexity of real life, make predictions not only of what he or she concludes may happen in future but also of what will be "best" for the child, and do so having regard to what the parties have chosen to contest or emphasise in the course of the hearing.
... on the one hand, the appellate court is obliged to “give the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first instance.” on the other, it must, of necessity, observe the “natural limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on the record. these limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the “feeling” of a case which an appellate court, reading the transcript, cannot always fully share. furthermore, the appellate court does not typically get taken to, or read, all of the evidence taken at the trial. commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the obligation at trial to receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence and to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.   the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))  ] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s 60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.  ] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.  ] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):  6] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.  ] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
even if the move [or the parenting orders more generally] results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
i am conscious that a long-distance relationship, with longer but less frequent times spent together, is inevitably different from a relationship where people live closer together with regular face-to-face contact. but it does not itself mean it cannot be meaningful.
we also observe that in champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 the full court (thackray, o’ryan & benjamin jj) observed at [103]:
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994.) (emphasis in original)
the full court also observed at [191]: “the first and very important observation we would make about this complaint is that the expression ‘meaningful relationship’ is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’ ”.
consideration and disposition
other matters: vexatious litigant  ] a vexatious proceedings order under s 102qb(1) of the act may be made if the court is satisfied that:   a person has frequently instituted or conducted vexatious proceedings in australian courts or tribunals, or (b) a person, acting in concert with another person who is subject to a vexatious proceedings order or who is covered by paragraph (a), has instituted or conducted vexatious proceedings in an australian court or tribunal.  ] section 102q(1) defines “vexatious proceedings” to include:   proceedings that are an abuse of the process of a court or tribunal, and (b) proceedings instituted in a court or tribunal to harass or annoy, to cause delay or detriment, or for another wrongful purpose, and (c) proceedings instituted or pursued in a court or tribunal without reasonable ground, and (d) proceedings conducted in a court or tribunal in a way so as to harass or annoy, cause delay or detriment, or achieve another wrongful purpose.  ] it is useful at this stage to refer to some general principles that have emerged from considerations of the sections in other jurisdictions analogous to s 102qb. [73] in potier v attorney general (nsw) [2015] nswca 129, (2015) 89 nswlr 284 leeming ja, with the concurrence of basten and meagher jja, discussed what is meant by “frequently” in the context of vexatious proceedings:  4] the power to make an order under the vexatious proceedings act is conditioned upon a court being satisfied that the person has “frequently” instituted or conducted vexatious proceedings in australia. the meaning of a word like “frequently” turns very much on its context, that is no different from many other protean words (such as “adversely affect” and “mistake”: cf independent commission against corruption v cunneen (2015) 256 clr 1 at [2] and [57] and ctm v the queen (2008) 236 clr 440 at [7]). it is not possible to articulate a precise test. however, the following two matters relevant to its construction for the purposes of this appeal may be noted. each supports the conclusion that “frequently” is a relatively low threshold. [115] first, the change in language from the predecessor provision (s 84 of the supreme court act) of “habitually and persistently” was deliberate, and plainly lowered the threshold condition. [116] secondly, there are vexatious proceedings and vexatious proceedings. it is one thing to file urgent appeals or applications for judicial review which cause substantial disruption to courts and other litigants and participants in the legal system (for example, the adjournment of a trial), or to make serious allegations of fraud unfounded in the evidence. it is quite different to encounter some poorly known legal doctrine which denies reasonable grounds to the proceedings or renders them technically an abuse of process, or to file a series of applications for the annulment of decisions of magistrates (i have in mind the nine applications for annulment made by mr viavattene all listed and determined on the same day: see viavattene v attorney general (nsw) [2015] nswca 44 at [70]). that is to say, both the quality of the vexatiousness of a proceeding, and the nature of the proceeding itself, inform the assessment of frequency. [117] i can readily envisage circumstances where a litigant commences only a handful of large proceedings, making serious allegations without any proper basis, but which occupy a significant amount of time and resources of parties and the courts, which could satisfy the statutory test of “frequently”. this illustrates the fact that “[t]he issue posed by the statutory term “frequently” is not to be assessed merely by an arithmetic calculation”: viavattene at [49]. [118] each of those considerations favour “frequently” being a relatively low threshold. [119] the parties exchanged submissions on whether the proportion of proceedings instituted by a person being found to be vexatious was relevant to whether the threshold condition is satisfied. i do not think that it is. the statute requires the court to be satisfied that a person has instituted or conducted vexatious proceedings frequently, whether the proportion of all proceedings instituted or conducted by the person which are vexatious is high or low does not bear upon that question. by the same token, suppose the question is whether a traveller will frequently encounter rabid dogs in a particular area. the answer does not turn on how many non-rabid dogs the traveller is likely to encounter in the area. [120] that said, the proportion of proceedings which are vexatious is highly relevant to the exercise of discretion to make an order, if the threshold condition is satisfied. for an order may bear upon all proceedings instituted or conducted by a person, and it will be essential for the court to bear in mind its operation on existing and likely future proceedings, particularly those which are not vexatious. ...  ] we agree with those propositions. [75] in an often quoted passage in official trustee in bankruptcy v gargan (no 2) [2009] fca 398 perram j spoke of the general principles that apply to applications for vexatious proceedings orders. his honour said:   a comprehensive explanation of what makes a proceeding vexatious is difficult to proffer for the boundary between the persistent and over-zealous on the one hand, and the vexatious on the other, may at times be indistinct. however, the following principles are, at least, well-established. first, the making of such an order is an extreme remedy depriving its object of recourse to the enforcement of the law which is every citizen’s ordinary right. it is, therefore, not lightly to be made. [3] secondly, the purpose of the order is not to impose condign punishment for past litigious misdeeds, it serves instead to shield both the public, whose individual members might be molested by vexatious proceedings, and the court itself, whose limited resources and needs must be carefully managed and protected from the expense, burden and inconvenience of baseless and repetitious suits. [4] thirdly, as might naturally be expected, such a severe power is not enlivened by the mere single occurrence of a vexatious claim. to err is human and transient lapses of judgment, even serious ones, may be found in the most reasonable of places. instead, the power to make the order is conditional upon the litigant having commenced not only a single vexatious proceeding but also upon having commenced similar such proceedings in this court or in other australian courts. [5] fourthly, the qualities of vexation to which o 21 is addressed are to be found, as the terms of r 1(1) show, in the commencement by the litigant of proceedings which lack reasonable grounds and where the litigant’s institution of such proceedings may fairly be said to be both habitual and persistent. [6] fifthly, whether a proceeding is instituted without reasonable grounds is a different question to, although not wholly disconnected from, the inquiry into a proceeding’s legal merits. the wheat, no doubt, must be separated from the chaff but in this area the question is whether what is before the court contains any wheat at all. although, often enough, no great guidance is obtained by exchanging one formula of words with another, it will be usually of some assistance, limited perhaps, to ask whether the issues brought to the court for determination are manifestly hopeless or devoid of merit. it is, in that context, important to distinguish the difficult from the ridiculous and the unlikely from the hopeless. [7] sixthly, although the ways in which unreasonable grounds may manifest themselves are myriad, one form often to be found in the baggage of the vexatious is a failure, often a refusal, to understand the principles of finality of litigation which rescue court and litigant alike from a samsara of past forensic encounters. [8] seventhly, it is the related quality of repetition which underpins, in part, a need for the institution of the proceedings to deserve the appellations habitual and persistent. the litigant’s conduct will be habitual where the commencement of proceedings occurs as a matter of course when appropriate conditions for their commencement are present as was explained by roden j in attorney-general v wentworth (1988) 14 nswlr 481 at 492. that formulation may not wholly explain the litigant who commences proceedings on any occasion and without the presence of any conditions, whether appropriate or otherwise. in such cases, the idea of constant repetition driven by habit and symptomatic of an inability not to engage in the behaviour may be more useful. persistence, on the other hand, generally suggests stubborn determination but, in the context of the vexatious, carries with it the capacity to endure failure beyond the point at which a rational person would abandon the field. [9] eighthly, each of these notions – the want of reasonable grounds, habitual institution and persistent institution – are to be gauged objectively. but this does not mean that a litigant’s own protestation as to his or her own mental state is irrelevant, frequently enough, the vexatious are betrayed out of their own mouths. rather, the need for objective determination protects courts from the vexatious litigant who is genuinely, but misguidedly, persuaded as to the correctness of his or her own conduct. [10] ninthly, the power to make the order arises when proceedings commenced in the way described are found to exist. but the notion of a proceeding is a broad one including a substantive proceeding directed at the attainment of final relief and collateral applications within such a proceeding, further, it extends outside the proceeding itself and embraces appeals therefrom and applications which, whilst not made in the proceeding, are properly to be seen as collateral thereto – so much flows from the definition of proceeding in s.4 of the federal court of australia act 1976 (cth). [11] tenthly, other proceedings commenced before bodies which are not courts, such as the administrative appeals tribunal, are not directly pertinent to the existence of the power but may nevertheless throw light on the vexatious nature of proceedings before the court, so too, the existence of a body of such administrative litigation may have relevance to the question of whether the court’s power to make the order, once enlivened, should be exercised. [12] finally, once it is concluded that the court’s power to prevent a litigant from commencing or pursuing proceedings has been enlivened, the considerations germane to the exercise of that power are unconfined. however, the factors which will be relevant are informed by the protective purpose which the order serves. where a litigant displays insight into their previous litigious history this will, no doubt, be relevant for it will suggest – although not determine – a diminution in the risk posed to the public. on the other hand, the manner in which a litigant conducts herself in her affairs generally is also capable of throwing light on whether the commencement of further vexatious proceedings is likely. those general affairs include the litigant’s defence to the proceedings by which the order restraining him is sought. because of the protective nature of the jurisdiction it is also relevant to know the extent of the damage and inconvenience the litigant’s forays into the courts have caused, pecuniary or otherwise.
other matters – costs ] section 117(1) of the act provides: “[s]ubject to subsection (2), subsection 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa, 117ab, 117ac and 118, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs.” [63] section 117(2) of the act provides that if, in proceedings under the act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, it may, subject to sub-ss (2a), (4) and (5), and the applicable rules, make such order as to costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as it considers just. [64] section 117(2a) of the act provides that in considering what order (if any) should be made under s 117(2), the court shall have regard to the matters set out in paragraphs (a) to (g). in fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania)) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 the full court (kay, warnick and boland jj), referring to s 117(2a), said at 130 [41]:
a number of factors are then listed in the subparagraphs. the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings is the first mentioned factor. nowhere in subs (2a) or elsewhere in s 117, is there any prescription that more than one factor must be present before an order for costs is made nor of comparative weight of the factors set out in subs (2a). as a consequence, there is nothing to prevent any factor being the sole foundation for an order for costs.  ] as to the relationship between s 117(1) and s 117(2) of the act in penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311, in joint reasons, stephen, mason, aickin and wilson jj said at 315:
it is an accurate description of s. 117 (1) to say that it expresses a general rule, provided that it is firmly understood that the sub-section is not paramount to s. 117 (2). as sub-s. (1) is expressed to be subject to sub-s. (2) the former must yield whenever a judge finds in a particular case that there are circumstances justifying the making of an order for costs. sub-section (2) requires a finding of justifying circumstances as an essential preliminary to the making of an order. beyond this there is nothing in the subject matter or in the interrelationship of the two provisions which imposes any additional or special onus on an applicant for an order for costs. consequently, with respect to their honours in the family court, we do not agree with the suggestion made in the judgment under appeal that an order can only be made under s. 117 (2) in “a clear case”. (emphasis added)  ] as to the nature of the hearing of an application pursuant to s 117 of the act in penfold their honours said at 315-16:
sub-section (2) does not in our view as a matter of law require the judge to specify the circumstances which justify the making of an order. it does not expressly say so, and in the context of the making of an order for costs there is no sufficient basis for making an implication. judges very frequently make orders for costs without giving reasons or making findings, even when costs are in issue. the absence of reasons or findings does not in itself indicate that a judge has erroneously exercised his discretion to award costs, though it will place an appellate court in the position of examining the circumstances and of determining for itself whether the circumstances show that the discretion was erroneously exercised (kent v. kent [(1970) 92 w.n. (nsw) 503, at p. 505]). accordingly, in the absence of some positive legislative indication we should not attribute to parliament the requirement that a judge must make particular findings in relation to an order for costs.  ] we also observe that in re jjt, ex parte victoria legal aid (1998) 195 clr 184 the majority of the high court (gaudron, gummow, hayne and callinan jj, kirby j dissenting) held that s 117(2) of the act referred to costs in the conventional sense and thus to the payment by one party to litigation of money by way of a partial indemnity for professional legal fees and expenses actually incurred by another party in the course of the litigation: see hayne j at 219. an order for costs is made to compensate a party against expense incurred in litigation and is not punitive in nature. costs are not a penalty or damages: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534 per mason cj at 543 and mchugh j at 567, ruddock and ors v vadarlis and ors (2001) 188 alr 143 per full court of the federal court at [12] and brott and joachim [2006] famca 256, (2006) flc 93-259 per full court (holden, warnick and boland jj) at 80,403-404.
an order for costs may be made on an indemnity basis, subject to a judicial determination capable of being made that there ought to be a departure from the usual basis that costs be payable on the party and party basis. for a discussion of the jurisdiction to order indemnity costs and its exercise see colgate palmolive co and another v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536, (1993) 118 alr 248 per sheppard j at 256-257 and nmfm property pty ltd and others v citibank ltd (no 2) (court’s “nmfm” judgment no 11) [2011] fca 480, (2001) 109 fcr 77 per lindgren j at [53] to [90].
it seems to me that the following principles or guidelines can be distilled out of the authorities to which i have referred:-
1. the problem arises in adversary litigation, i.e. litigation as between parties at arm's length. different considerations apply where parties may be found to be entitled to the payment of their costs out of a fund or assets being administered by or under the control of a trustee, liquidator, receiver or person in a like position, eg. a government agency or statutory authority. 2. the ordinary rule is that, where the court orders the costs of one party to litigation to be paid by another party, the order is for payment of those costs on the party and party basis. in this court the provisions of order 62, rules 12 and 19, and the second schedule to the rules will apply to the taxation. in many cases the result will be that the amount recovered by the successful party under the order will fall short of (in many cases well short of) a complete indemnity. 3. this has been the settled practice for centuries in england. it is a practice which is entrenched in australia. either legislation (perhaps in the form of an amendment to rules of court) or a decision of an intermediate court of appeal or of the high court would be required to alter it. no doubt any consideration of whether there should be any change in the practice would require the resolution of the competing considerations mentioned by devlin lj in berry v. british transport commission and handley ja in cachia v. hanes on the one hand and by rogers j in qantas on the other. the relevant passages from the respective judgments have been earlier referred to. 4. in consequence of the settled practice which exists, the court ought not usually make an order for the payment of costs on some basis other than the party and party basis. the circumstances of the case must be such as to warrant the court in departing from the usual course. that has been the view of all judges dealing with applications for payment of costs on the indemnity or some other basis whether here or in england. the tests have been variously put. the court of appeal in andrews v. barnes (39 ch d at 141) said the court had a general and discretionary power to award costs as between solicitor and client "as and when the justice of the case might so require." woodward j in fountain selected meats appears to have adopted what was said by brandon lj (as he was) in preston v. preston ((1982) 1 all er at 58) namely, there should be some special or unusual feature in the case to justify the court in departing from the ordinary practice. most judges dealing with the problem have resolved the particular case before them by dealing with the circumstances of that case and finding in it the presence or absence of factors which would be capable, if they existed, of warranting a departure from the usual rule. but as french j said (at 8) in tetijo, "the categories in which the discretion may be exercised are not closed". davies j expressed (at 6) similar views in ragata. 5. notwithstanding the fact that that is so, it is useful to note some of the circumstances which have been thought to warrant the exercise of the discretion. i instance the making of allegations of fraud knowing them to be false and the making of irrelevant allegations of fraud (both referred to by woodward j in fountain and also by gummow j in thors v. weekes (1989) 92 alr 131 at 152, evidence of particular misconduct that causes loss of time to the court and to other parties (french j in tetijo), the fact that the proceedings were commenced or continued for some ulterior motive (davies j in ragata) or in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established law (woodward j in fountain and french j in j-corp), the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (davies j in ragata), an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise (eg messiter v. hutchinson (1987) 10 nswlr 525, maitland hospital v. fisher (no. 2) (1992) 27 nswlr 721at 724 (court of appeal), crisp v. keng (supreme court of new south wales, 27 september 1993, unreported, court of appeal)and an award of costs on an indemnity basis against a contemnor (eg megarry v-c in emi records). other categories of cases are to be found in the reports. yet others to arise in the future will have different features about them which may justify an order for costs on the indemnity basis. the question must always be whether the particular facts and circumstances of the case in question warrant the making of an order for payment of costs other than on a party and party basis. 6. it remains to say that the existence of particular facts and circumstances capable of warranting the making of an order for payment of costs, for instance, on the indemnity basis, does not mean that judges are necessarily obliged to exercise their discretion to make such an order. the costs are always in the discretion of the trial judge. provided that discretion is exercised having regard to the applicable principles and the particular circumstances of the instant case its exercise will not be found to have miscarried unless it appears that the order which has been made involves a manifest error or injustice.
conclusion
given the overriding consideration of the welfare of the child, the court must consider the conduct of the parents, not with a view to rewarding one or punishing the other, but to ascertain from such conduct whether the welfare of the child will be better served in the [primary] custody of one or the other.
associate: dated: 13 september 2022
dated: 13 september 2022
[1] i should note that the court earlier made an order in the father’s favour under s.102na of the family law act 1975 (cth). counsel appeared on the father’s behalf at the outset of the trial. counsel confirmed that he was unable to get instructions from the father and therefore he sought leave to withdraw. leave was granted. in an inauspicious start to the final hearing, counsel also indicated that if the court wished the lawyers (counsel and instructor) to remain in the matter, “it would be under duress.” see transcript (25th may 2022) p.2. this was but the last occasion when the father had dismissed lawyers under s.102na. hereafter, references to the transcript will be simply “t” followed by the page number.[2] beckert v beckert (2022) 64 fam lr 218 at [26], [46] and [77].[3] it might be noted here that at the outset of the final hearing, the independent children’s lawyer (“the icl”) confirmed that the father had not read the family report. t 3. although not having read it, the father stated a number of times that he knew what was in the report. t 7. it was also confirmed that the father’s most recent documents, because they were not in proper form and not sworn or affirmed, were “unsworn statements.”[4] t 12.[5] t 9, 12, 13, 15, 17, 82, 115, 124 and 136.[6] t 10.[7] t 11.[8] t 12.[9] t 12.[10] other cautions were found at t39 – 42 which included his regular allegations about various people lying and also that the system itself is also “the bully” that he was standing up to. [11] t 17.[12] t 18.[13] t 19.[14] t 19. [15] t 19. [16] t 21.[17] t 22. see also t 34 and 35.[18] see t 43.[19] t 25.[20] t 26 – 27.[21] t 28.[22] t 30. [23] t 31. [24] t 32.[25] t 33. [26] manuel & pinner [2021] fedcfamc2f 468.[27] t 33.[28] t 37 – 38.[29] t 41. [30] t 42.[31] t 43 – 45. [32] t 46. [33] t 48.[34] t 49. [35] among many places, see t 53. [36] t 51.[37] t 51 – 52. [38] t 54.[39] t 56 – 57.[40] t 58 – 61. [41] t 61 – 66. [42] t 68 – 69. [43] t 69.[44] t 70.[45] t 71.[46] t 73.[47] t 74.[48] t 121.[49] t 122.[50] t 124.[51] t 125. [52] see t 127 – 129. [53] see t 129 – 130. [54] t 134 – 135.[55] t 136.[56] t 138.[57] t 139. see also t 142 for similar, banal comments in relation to matters of physiology which he says prejudice men always. [58] t 140 – 141. [59] t 142. [60] t 145.[61] t 148.[62] t 150 – 151.[63] t 155 – 156.[64] t 158 - 159.[65] t 160 – 162. [66] t 162 – 163. [67] t 164.[68] t 167.[69] t 168 – 169; and from the mother’s evidence at t 207. [70] t 176.[71] t 177 – 178.[72] jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298 at 308, 312 and 320-321.[73] see par.23 of the family report of ms af, noted in more detail below.[74] t 103. [75] t 185 – 186.[76] t 186.[77] t 187.[78] t 188.[79] t 189.[80] t 190. [81] t 191.[82] t 191.[83] t 193. [84] t 194. [85] t 194 - 195. [86] t 196.[87] t 200. [88] t 201. [89] t 202. [90] details of the mother’s anxiety, and ongoing treatment for it arising from her constant dealings with the father were set out in the report from her treating psychologist, ms an [ms an], which was attached to her affidavit, filed 16th may 2022. this psychologist was not required for cross examination.[91] t 204.[92] t 200. [93] t 206.[94] t 207.[95] t 78 – 79.[96] t 80 – 81.[97] t 83.[98] t 84.[99] t 87, 89 – 91. [100] t 92.[101] t 93.[102] generally see t 93.[103] t 94 – 95. [104] t 97. [105] t 99.[106] t 101.[107] t 102.[108] t 107 – 108. [109] t 109 -110. [110] t 110 – 111. [111] t 114[112] t 114.[113] t 116.[114] the icl’s submissions were noted by him to be one day late. in addition to apologising to the court and to the parties, in accordance with proper practice, the icl sought leave from the court regarding the late filing. given the lack of prejudice suffered by anyone, it may be taken that such leave be granted, especially since the particular focus of the icl, by virtue of his office under the act, was/is to inform the court of the icl’s views regarding orders that are in [x’s] best interests. [115] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238.[116] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.211 [150].[117] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.228 [204] & [205]. of course, the comments by both kirby & hayne jj were in a legislative context different to that which operates today. accepting that qualification, respectfully, their honour’s comments remain important.[118] fox v percy [2003] hca 22; (2003) 214 clr 118 at pp.125-126 [23]. see also the extensive discussion by mchugh j in the same case at [65] – [93].[119] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[120] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. more recently still, a further full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[121] godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102; (2007) 208 flr 287.[122] m v s [2006] famca 1408; (2008) 37 fam lr 32.[123] mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483.[124] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[125] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[126] see, for example, pars.70 & 71 in the family report, headed “observations of interactions” which record much warmer interactions between x and his mother and ms s but somewhat more coolly with ms ae and the father. [127] pencious & searle [2017] famcafc 210; (2017) flc 93-805 (“pencious”).[128] stephens v stephens [2010] famcafc 172; (2011) 44 fam lr 117.[129] colgate-palmolive co v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536; (1993) 46 fcr 225.[130] in the marriage of kress (1976) 13 alr 309 at 319. accepting the rather different statutory regime that now applies, this decision of goldstein j was referred to with approval by altobelli j in fielding and mason (no.2) [2021] famca 350 at [145].