last updated: 13 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
tyrell & tyrell [2022] fedcfamc2f 1214
orders
until further order, the court orders that:
parenting  for a period of 4 months, the father and paternal grandmother be restrained from making any contact with z, whether at the mother’s residence, the child’s school, any sporting venue or extra-curricular activity, (b) thereafter z shall spend time with the father supervised at c contact centre for such times as are able to be facilitated by that organisation for a minimum of 6 months, desirably every second weekend. x and y are to be invited to spend time with z at c contact centre as well, (c) thereafter for a further period of 2 months, z shall spend time with the father unsupervised each second saturday from 10am to 5pm with changeovers to occur at c contact centre, (d) thereafter z shall spend time with the father from 3pm friday until 9am monday (extending to 9am tuesday if monday is a public holiday) each second weekend and for the first half of each school holiday period.   thereafter z shall spend time with the father supervised at c contact centre for such times as are able to be facilitated by that organisation for a minimum of 6 months, desirably every second weekend. x and y are to be invited to spend time with z at c contact centre as well, (c) thereafter for a further period of 2 months, z shall spend time with the father unsupervised each second saturday from 10am to 5pm with changeovers to occur at c contact centre, (d) thereafter z shall spend time with the father from 3pm friday until 9am monday (extending to 9am tuesday if monday is a public holiday) each second weekend and for the first half of each school holiday period.   thereafter for a further period of 2 months, z shall spend time with the father unsupervised each second saturday from 10am to 5pm with changeovers to occur at c contact centre, (d) thereafter z shall spend time with the father from 3pm friday until 9am monday (extending to 9am tuesday if monday is a public holiday) each second weekend and for the first half of each school holiday period.   thereafter z shall spend time with the father from 3pm friday until 9am monday (extending to 9am tuesday if monday is a public holiday) each second weekend and for the first half of each school holiday period.
property  the husband shall vacate the property at d street, suburb e, (the ‘d street, suburb e property’), (b) the wife be appointed trustee for sale for the d street, suburb e property, (c) the wife shall, pursuant to such trusteeship, cause the d street, suburb e property to be sold, and (d) the wife shall cause the net proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property to be applied to pay to her the amount she is entitled to pursuant to order 23, and the balance to the husband.   the wife be appointed trustee for sale for the d street, suburb e property, (c) the wife shall, pursuant to such trusteeship, cause the d street, suburb e property to be sold, and (d) the wife shall cause the net proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property to be applied to pay to her the amount she is entitled to pursuant to order 23, and the balance to the husband.   the wife shall, pursuant to such trusteeship, cause the d street, suburb e property to be sold, and (d) the wife shall cause the net proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property to be applied to pay to her the amount she is entitled to pursuant to order 23, and the balance to the husband.   the wife shall cause the net proceeds of sale of the d street, suburb e property to be applied to pay to her the amount she is entitled to pursuant to order 23, and the balance to the husband.
costs
procedural
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
this is a really challenging situation with two stories that are so opposed in regards to who the perpetrator is that it is hard to make sense of. it is difficult to believe that things have been as bad as both paint the relationship for so long and that they sustained over 25 years together. they both speak of their faith with the jehovah’s witness fellowship, but there are many inconsistencies with both reporting being removed from their community and the children not having a great deal of knowledge of the faith. i know that traditionally, witnesses do not celebrate birthdays or christmas and yet there was talk of [ms tyrell] not sending cards or presents as a sign of parental love. [mr tyrell] appears to be close with the elders of that community so i am unsure of why he has been removed. the family does appear to have lost some of the community around them. it appears that after over two years of isolation, the children have been completely alienated from their mother and there are enormous feelings of fear in each of the children to open themselves up to any possibility of any contact, even when they were offered any type of writing, phone or digital means of contact but it is a little uncertain what is actually causing this fearful reaction. i am concerned about [mr tyrell’s] overly positive and grandiose descriptions of how amazing his children are and how helpful he is as a parent. he appears to have little ability to reflect on any negatives in his own behaviour and how his relationship came to such a conflictual end.
... however if, as here, one party fails to fulfil that obligation, is it open to that party then to rely on the absence of satisfactory evidence to prevent the making of an order against him or her which otherwise justice and equity would require? it would be simple, if that were the case, to evade the jurisdiction of this court, not by outright refusal which would attract sanctions but by obfuscation and evasion.’ it seems to us that once it has been established that there has been a deliberate non-disclosure, which follows from his honour's findings in this case, then the court should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the innocent party. to do otherwise might be thought to provide a charter for fraud in proceedings of this nature.   by letter dated 7th april 2014, the grandmother’s then lawyers confirmed that it was the view of the husband’s bankruptcy trustee that the change of name form regarding the d street, suburb e property was fraudulent, and that in providing a sworn declaration as he did, the husband committed a criminal offence, (b) by letter dated 2nd april 2014, the same lawyers confirmed that, at that time, (i) the grandmother was not aware that mr tyrell had transferred the d street, suburb e property into his own name, (ii) mr tyrell’s illegal conduct regarding the transfer of title to this property exposed him to one or more criminal charges, (iii) mr tyrell is recorded as having urged his mother to provide evidence of his criminal misfeasance, and (iv) the grandmother gave instructions not to expose mr tyrell to possible criminal prosecution, (c) by letters dated 7th april 2014 and 11th august 2015, the grandmother’s then solicitor advised and sought instructions for the d street, suburb e property to be transferred into her name. those instructions were never provided.   by letter dated 2nd april 2014, the same lawyers confirmed that, at that time, (i) the grandmother was not aware that mr tyrell had transferred the d street, suburb e property into his own name, (ii) mr tyrell’s illegal conduct regarding the transfer of title to this property exposed him to one or more criminal charges, (iii) mr tyrell is recorded as having urged his mother to provide evidence of his criminal misfeasance, and (iv) the grandmother gave instructions not to expose mr tyrell to possible criminal prosecution, (c) by letters dated 7th april 2014 and 11th august 2015, the grandmother’s then solicitor advised and sought instructions for the d street, suburb e property to be transferred into her name. those instructions were never provided.   by letters dated 7th april 2014 and 11th august 2015, the grandmother’s then solicitor advised and sought instructions for the d street, suburb e property to be transferred into her name. those instructions were never provided.
applicant’s orders sought
children that all previous orders are discharged. parental responsibility that the father have sole parental responsibility for the children, [x] born [in] 2006, [y] born [in] 2006 and z born [in] 2010, (“children”). the parties keep each other advised of any change in their contact telephone number and contact email. lives with that the children shall reside with the father. contact that there be no face-to-face contact between the mother and children unless recommended by the child’s treating psychologist. that the children are at liberty to message or call their mother if they choose to do so. that if the children request it of the mother, she may send them presents or cards. medical the father will notify the mother of any significant medical emergency involving the children as soon as possible by email or text message. school that the father shall authorise the school to provide copies of the children’s semester school reports, newsletters, school photo order forms and will cease all other communications with the mother. the mother be restrained by injunction from attending the children’s school, off-campus school subjects or events or any extracurricular activities the children might attend from time to times unless otherwise recommended by the child’s treating psychologist. restraint/non-denigration that each parent shall refrain from making critical or derogatory remarks about the other party and or members of that family in the presence of, or within the hearing of the children (including via social media) and all parties shall do all things reasonably necessary to ensure that no other person, including members of the parties respective churches, makes any critical or derogatory remarks about the other parties and or members of that parties family in the presence or within the hearing of the children. that each parent is restrained by injunction from discussing these proceedings, the parties past relationship and the circumstances of the parties separation, with the children or in the presence or hearing of the children and on all forms of social media including posting information about the children on social media and or allowing third parties to do so that neither parent shall allow any of the children to view any materials forming part of these proceedings. property it be declared that the applicant [mr tyrell] holds the property known as [d street, suburb e] in the state of new south wales, folio identifier ... on trust for the 2nd respondent, [ms b tyrell], subject to his equitable interest in the property. it be declared that the extent of applicant’s equitable interest in the property be 20%. that all property claimed by [ms tyrell] to be "family assets", including but not limited to commonwealth bank account bsb [...93] account [...98] and [...93] [...10] but held in the name of [ms b tyrell], be declared to be the sole property of [ms b tyrell] and be excluded from the property for division between [mr tyrell] and [ms tyrell]. the applicant shall pay to the respondent sum of $ 41,230.00 within 30 days of the date of these orders. except as otherwise provided in these orders: each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property, including choses-in-action, in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, ‘ any money standing to the credit of the parties in a joint bank account are to be split equally between the parties. each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and any joint tenancy of the applicant and respondent in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed. no order as to costs
first respondent’s orders sought
parenting – part one order to be made prior to judgment the father cause the children to attend upon the independent children’s lawyer and a child court expert at the canberra registry of the federal circuit court at 4.00pm on the day these orders are made. parenting – part two primary orders previous orders all previous parenting orders in relation to the children: (a) [x], born [in] 2006, (b) [y], born [in] 2006 and (c) [z], born [in] 2010 are hereby discharged. parental responsibility the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children: immediate handover the independent children’s lawyer and the child court expert are requested to advise the children of the orders made today and the reasons for the decision and to assist the children to begin the transition to their mother’s care. the father shall leave the court precinct within 15 minutes of the court adjourning and thereafter is restrained from returning to the court, the children’s house, or attempting in any way to make contact with the children thereafter except as set out below in these orders. commencing immediately upon on the pronunciation of these orders, the children live with the mother. the father is to take all reasonable steps to actively support and encourage the children to accept order 6. the children shall have no face to face time with the father for a period of six (6) months after these orders are made (“the reintroduction period”). during that period and consistent with order 5 herein, the father is restrained by injunction from contacting or attempting to communicate with the children or from attending any school, sporting or extracurricular activity of the children. the mother has liberty to approach the court on short notice during the reintroduction period. after the reintroduction period, the children spend time and communicate with the father: b) each alternate sunday, from 12.00noon until 8.00pm, c) by telephone, unless otherwise agreed, each tuesday at 6.00pm, d) at other times as may be agreed between the parties. unless otherwise agreed between the parties, handovers occur by the mother delivering the children to the father’s house and collecting the children from the father’s house at the conclusion of time. save for in relation to the father during the reintroduction period, each parent is free to be fully involved in the school, sporting and extracurricular life of the children and may obtain school reports, newsletters and the like and attend all events and functions to which parents are invited. this order operates as an order providing authority in those terms to any relevant organisation. each parent shall inform the other as soon as practicable of any major social, school or extracurricular event involving the children so as to give the other parent the opportunity to participate. each parent shall inform the other as soon as practicable in the event of any serious illness or injury suffered by the children and shall provide sufficient information and any authorisations necessary to enable the other parent to obtain full information from any treating medical practitioner. each parent is hereby restrained from making any derogatory comments about the other parent or any members of their family to or in the presence of the children or allowing anyone else to do so. each parent shall keep the other advised of their residential address, email address, landline telephone number and mobile telephone number by forthwith providing those details to the other, and advising of any change to them within 24 hours of the change. the mother shall take steps (at her cost, if any) to arrange for the children to receive counselling or other therapeutic support to assist them to manage the transition to her care and to deal with any associated issues, such counselling to continue until the therapist recommends otherwise. each parent shall make themselves available to meet with the children’s therapist set out in the previous order, if requested to do so by the therapist. the appointment of the independent children’s lawyer is discharged 14 days from today. property within 24 hours, the husband pay to the wife the sum of $50,000, such sum to be used by the wife to fund her immediate accommodation needs and living expenses for herself and the children, within 42 days, the husband pay to the wife such further sum as the court determines is required to effect a division of the property of the parties such that the wife retains 60% of the property and the husband 40%. in the event the husband fails to comply with the preceding order: a) the husband shall vacate the property at [d street, suburb e] (the [d street, suburb e] property), b) the wife is appointed trustee for sale for the [d street, suburb e] property, c) the wife shall, pursuant to such trusteeship, cause the [d street, suburb e] property to be sold, d) the wife shall cause the proceeds of sale of the [d street, suburb e] property to be applied to pay to her the amount she is entitled to pursuant to the preceding order, and the balance to the husband. except as otherwise provided each party retain, to the exclusion of the other, all other items of property in their names, possession or control.   [x], born [in] 2006, (b) [y], born [in] 2006 and (c) [z], born [in] 2010   [y], born [in] 2006 and (c) [z], born [in] 2010   [z], born [in] 2010
b) each alternate sunday, from 12.00noon until 8.00pm, c) by telephone, unless otherwise agreed, each tuesday at 6.00pm, d) at other times as may be agreed between the parties.
c) by telephone, unless otherwise agreed, each tuesday at 6.00pm, d) at other times as may be agreed between the parties.
d) at other times as may be agreed between the parties.
a) the husband shall vacate the property at [d street, suburb e] (the [d street, suburb e] property), b) the wife is appointed trustee for sale for the [d street, suburb e] property, c) the wife shall, pursuant to such trusteeship, cause the [d street, suburb e] property to be sold, d) the wife shall cause the proceeds of sale of the [d street, suburb e] property to be applied to pay to her the amount she is entitled to pursuant to the preceding order, and the balance to the husband.
b) the wife is appointed trustee for sale for the [d street, suburb e] property, c) the wife shall, pursuant to such trusteeship, cause the [d street, suburb e] property to be sold, d) the wife shall cause the proceeds of sale of the [d street, suburb e] property to be applied to pay to her the amount she is entitled to pursuant to the preceding order, and the balance to the husband.
c) the wife shall, pursuant to such trusteeship, cause the [d street, suburb e] property to be sold, d) the wife shall cause the proceeds of sale of the [d street, suburb e] property to be applied to pay to her the amount she is entitled to pursuant to the preceding order, and the balance to the husband.
d) the wife shall cause the proceeds of sale of the [d street, suburb e] property to be applied to pay to her the amount she is entitled to pursuant to the preceding order, and the balance to the husband.
second respondent’s orders sought
independent children’s lawyer’s orders sought
living arrangements the children shall live with the father. the parents shall do all things necessary to enrol in the [c contact] and changeover service ([c contact centre]) and ensure they are on the waiting list within 21 days of the date of these orders. the child, [z], shall spend time with the mother supervised at [c contact centre] for such times as are able to be facilitated by that organisation. the children [x] and [y] shall be at liberty to spend time with the mother whenever they wish to do so. the children are at liberty to message or call their mother if they choose to do so. the mother is at liberty to send gifts, cards, and letters to the children and the father is required to give any such items to the children. within 14 days of the date of these orders, the terms of these orders are explained to the children by the independent children’s lawyer.
living arrangements 11. [x] and [y] live with the father. 12. [z] live with the mother the parents shall do all things necessary to enrol in the [c] contact and changeover service ([c contact centre]) and ensure they are on the waiting list within 21 days of the date of these orders. 14. [z] shall spend time with his father as follows: for a period of 4 months the father shall be restrained from making any contact with [z]. thereafter [z] shall spend time with the father supervised at [c contact centre] for such times as are able to be facilitated by that organisation for a minimum of 6 months. [x] and [y] are to be invited to spend time with [z] at [c contact centre] as well. thereafter for a further period of 2 months, [z] shall spend time with the father unsupervised each second saturday from 10am to 5pm with changeovers to occur at [c contact centre] thereafter [z] shall spend time with the father from 3pm friday until 9am monday (extending to 9am tuesday if monday is a public holiday) each second weekend and for the first half of each school holiday period. the children [x] and [y] shall be at liberty to spend time with the mother whenever they wish to do so. the children are at liberty to message or call their mother if they choose to do so. the mother is at liberty to send gifts, cards, and letters to the children and the father is required to give any such items to the children. the father is at liberty to send gifts, cards, and letters to [z] and the mother is required to give any such items to the children. at the conclusion of judgement in this matter, [z] be brought to the court by the father, and changeover to the mother be effected at the court.
father’s oral evidence
did you make transactions on that [joint] account? she [[ms tyrell]] had the cards. i didn’t have any... she would do the access on the cards. she looked after them. looked after all that for me. i’m not that [good at] paperwork... i’m not that good [with it].
his honour: but you would have read the document before you signed it, yes? .... i just signed it. you just signed it. someone else told you to sign it, did they? ... if you ask me to sign something, you’re not going to do the wrong thing. i will just sign it. why? what if [mrs tyrell] had come along and said... i always sign. ... so anything that’s put in front of you by either your wife when you were together or by your mother, you would just simply sign? ...yes
... you agree though, don’t you, that in november 2016, you held yourself out as having these assets to [company an] in order to secure finance, didn’t you?--- if that’s what it says, then. yes. and in 2010, when you applied for a loan with a commonwealth bank, you held yourself out as having assets including number [[d street, suburb e]], didn’t you? --- i just went in with my mum. ... his honour: but you represented though, as recorded in the documents that you’ve been taken to, you recorded that you were the owner of this property, yes? --- yes. if that’s – yes. well, that’s what the documents say that you’ve been taken to and you’ve confirmed that it’s your signature on each of those documents? --- okay, yes. i signed it. ... and you signed those documents as the owner, didn’t you? --- i signed them because my mum wanted them done. that’s it. you and [ms tyrell] entered into the negotiations with the builder [for renovations], didn’t you? --- she had a plan of what mum wanted and i was very grateful for it, and i would’ve signed - i signed whatever you - if it’s my signature, it’s me.   copies of three wills of the second respondent grandmother, dated respectively 22nd october 2008, 5th april 2011, and 20th july 2011, were provided to the court by the father’s solicitor after the completion of the final hearing, following a direction from the court. the respondent mother was a beneficiary under the first and third of these wills, (b) a fourth will was executed by the grandmother, dated 24th december 2019. this was the day after the troubling incident at the bank where the mother was allegedly withdrawing all funds from a joint account. this will disinherited her son mr tyrell (but kept him as executor) and removed the respondent mother as a beneficiary. the sole beneficiaries were the grandchildren. there is also a codicil, dated 30th december 2020, to the grandmother’s last will. the codicil grants the applicant father a life interest in the d street, suburb e property, but which terminates if, for example, he re-marries or enters into a de-facto relationship. this last will and codicil were both drawn, and witnessed by, the father’s now solicitor. (c) the solicitor who prepared these first three wills was mr f, the grandmother’s long-time lawyer but who (as earlier noted) ceased acting when he failed to receive instructions from the grandmother regarding the d street, suburb e property.   a fourth will was executed by the grandmother, dated 24th december 2019. this was the day after the troubling incident at the bank where the mother was allegedly withdrawing all funds from a joint account. this will disinherited her son mr tyrell (but kept him as executor) and removed the respondent mother as a beneficiary. the sole beneficiaries were the grandchildren. there is also a codicil, dated 30th december 2020, to the grandmother’s last will. the codicil grants the applicant father a life interest in the d street, suburb e property, but which terminates if, for example, he re-marries or enters into a de-facto relationship. this last will and codicil were both drawn, and witnessed by, the father’s now solicitor. (c) the solicitor who prepared these first three wills was mr f, the grandmother’s long-time lawyer but who (as earlier noted) ceased acting when he failed to receive instructions from the grandmother regarding the d street, suburb e property.   the solicitor who prepared these first three wills was mr f, the grandmother’s long-time lawyer but who (as earlier noted) ceased acting when he failed to receive instructions from the grandmother regarding the d street, suburb e property.
is it correct to you say that you’re very – you remain very upset about [mrs tyrell] having had an affair with [mr m]?---it’s not the first time. i – i wanted to take her back. unless it’s the child people that – the – when the child people came, when she told people that i was raping my kids and stuff, they even said to me if you brang it back into this house, we will take you to court and take your kids off you. so i would have taken her back. [mr tyrell], is it your evidence that - - -?---i would have taken her back. is it your evidence that child protection said that someone made a report that you were raping your kids?---that i was molesting my children or something like that. they came in the house. they went through – they took the children out of school. i didn’t know about any of that and they - - -   tyrell] called out to the [n] boys who were walking past and asked them to stop and listen. he told the boys [n] was accepting girls now but only of a certain calibre. they have to be hot. [mr tyrell continued to say how he worked the boys up to expect a hot chick to come out of the bathroom. his daughter came out of the bathroom and all the boys saw her and she was embarrassed.
and on 11 november 2020 there was some orders made by this court, weren’t there? do you recall entering into those orders?---yes. do you recall that there were orders that were intended to introduce or re-introduce the children to their mother?---no. you don’t recall that?---i don’t. no. what do you think the intention of the orders was in relation to the time that the children were going to spend with their mother?---i thought it was - - - what’s your recollection?---i just thought it was that they actually cared about the children. that they actually cared about their safety. that - - - what - - -?--- - - - people actually cared. that - - - his honour: sorry, which people?---that’s what this – what the court was for. to get them help. get them - - - sorry, to get who help?---the children. [x] and [y] and [z]. well, we arrange - - -?---that’s – yes. - for an independent children’s lawyer to be appointed and ms burgess has been - - - slaving away for all - a good while, has she not?---i’ve never spoken to her for a long time. ever. but you’ve spoken to the family consultant, [ms e]?---who’s that? she’s not here. she wrote the reports?---yes, i saw her. yes. right. so when you say these people are meant to help, well, the court’s tried to ? yes. that’s what it was at least on a couple of fronts, right? about. yes. right? that’s what i meant. i didn’t mean it negative. i meant it in no. i was just trying to clarify, that’s all? yes. ms curran: [mr tyrell], what did you believe your obligations and responsibilities were once you entered into those orders about the children spending time and communicating with their mother? do what the doctors tell me to do. which doctors? the – i saw – i’d take them to their family gp. i’d take them to their – the psychologist. he was – she was organised by new south wales people. i don’t know – i didn’t choose any of them and they just organised it and said go there and i went there and take them to this place and i did and they might not want to have but i still go them there. and you took them to see a psychologist, their psychologist, didn’t you? yes. the one that the – they said to take it to. and was that around march? i don’t know. you don’t know when you took them. so the orders were entered into in the ? i just did – when i was told what to do and i did it. not deliberately. i didn’t mean to hold it up or anything. i didn’t – never did. and so one of the orders that you entered into, order 12, was that [z] shall spend time with the mother supervised at [c contact centre] for such times as able to be facilitated? yes. and what happened with [c contact centre]? [c contact centre] refused it. [c contact centre] refused it? yes. how did that happen? well, they – i brought [z] in that – because they wanted to see me as well and i know that [ms p] had made an order that i go and do courses at [c contact centre] and then that [ms tyrell] would have to as well. his honour: sorry, ms wearne made orders for you to do this? yes. she wanted me to go and – better parenting and all – just – and then when i was there i reminded them i had papers from the court. i don’t know when. i just know i gave them to them and i – if i saw her face i’d know it, but she said that we do not want to see the children at the moment while something – and that – they would have in that in paper at [c contact centre]. because i came punctually every time, and even with them, and she said we do not want to see them at the present while i – i can’t tell you the reason. but it was ...
right? he was – it was weird. it was – everything was so – he had to get cooked – he couldn’t eat what the others were eating. he couldn’t do – but he would still cop it just as good. he – he copped the thrashings and the choking and the thumping in the chest and the kicking on the – on the floor that he couldn’t breathe. he copped it just as sweet as the others, just as sweet as the others he copped it, just as horrific.
ms burgess: so, you have never said to [z] anything along the lines of, “you’re perfectly safe going to visit your mother,” have you? yes, “you’re going to go to [c contact centre].” and i even took him there and the twins on a – i don’t know what day it was – i even took them there to show them where they would go and that everything is cool. his honour: and when did you ? he came with me. when did you do this? when i was first made to go to [c contact centre], when i was first made to go to [c contact centre], because i was told that that’s how they were going to do that, at [c contact centre], and that’s when [c contact centre] said to me that we will take care of whatever it is, but we’re not – we will go – because i gave them all the papers, all the papers, and they did – or chose, whatever it was – i know that one of the ladies said to me, “don’t bring them back. don’t bring the children back for a while. we will let you know.” and then another man contacted me from [c contact centre] and he was going to fix it. he just said he could fix everything. and so i rang back [c contact centre] for an appointment and apparently he was doing it privately or something and he shouldn’t have, from [c contact centre], or something, so they asked me not to come in for that, or meet him at the shops where he wanted to meet us. thank you? but i’ve given them, [c contact centre], every ms burgess: i wasn’t asking about [c contact centre]. i was asking about ? but i’ve taken him there and said, “look, this is how it starts, it’s cool, look at it.” and there was another kid there. i remember there was two little boys. the twins were there and the twins – and [z] went in a room even and played where there was some lego on the left side of the building, so, they were there, i think. have you ever said absolutely directly to [z], “[z], i want you to see your mum and you will be safe seeing her”? when i took him to [c contact centre], yes. no, when you – have you said it to [z]? yes. “they will take care of you, they will make sure nothing happens, everything” no, no, no, you’re misunderstanding me, [mr tyrell]. his honour: no, no, it’s different? i’m not going to say that to him. ms burgess: no? if he’s not seeing somebody together at first, i’m not going to say that to him. his honour: no, no, it’s a different – it’s a different question. ms burgess: so, you will not tell [z] that he would be safe if he saw his mother, you won’t say that to him, will you? no.
it must have been quite confusing for the children the night of 29 december. first of all, you go off with the police, then you come back, and then mum goes off and never comes back. that’s pretty big for kids, isn’t it? it was pretty big for you, wasn’t it? it was – i would say it was big for all of us, but so, what did they think had happened? what did? they – they knew what happened.
but you never told her she wasn’t – you never told the children that she was not coming back to live in the house? no. is that what you’re telling us? they bugged me not to. that – that was one of the reasons i actually got the divorce. at some point, you made a decision that the relationship was over, did you not? yes. okay. did you communicate that to the children? no, no, no.
well, after the kids were refusing to see her and told [ms g] that they didn’t want to see her. that had already happened before the children saw care and protection, hadn’t it? must – yes. yes. okay. so whatever happened at care and protection was not the reason they wouldn’t go and see their mother, was it? no. okay? no. that just made it worse.
his honour: hence – well, that’s why, could i suggest, ms burgess was asking the question, “when did the children think or start to think that their mother wasn’t coming back?” it could not have been just on that one night? they weren’t – they were not unhappy that – when they found out. ms burgess: when did they find out she was never coming home? they didn’t want her to.
can i ask you something, [mr tyrell]. do you feel that you’re in control of your life? i’m trying to. okay. i’m just asking this because of this. your mother and father provided you with accommodation, a house to live in, didn’t they? yes. your mother provided you with access to her bank account, didn’t she? yes. so your mother has been looking after you financially ? yes. all your adult life? yes. okay. when we talk about what was set up for the children, you variously tell us that [ms p] did some of the work, that police did some of the work, the gp did some of the work. what are you doing during all of this? what control are you taking of your life and your children? i’ve never been in that situation before. i – you talk to the people that know so you didn’t take control? i took control and took them where we were supposed to go. to everyone we went to go, they were even – some – i think it was a acl or something was going to talk to them and i had to give the papers to the psychologist for them to talk to them about different court things because i couldn’t. but they never got in touch with the children ever. but you’re the dad? but i’m not allowed to talk to them about that. well, you certainly were allowed to talk to them in january, weren’t you? yes. but you’re saying you didn’t tell them mum had gone? we didn’t – i didn’t know if we were going to get back together again. i used to say that to them, “we will see what happens. give it some time. let it go. let’s see.” just i’m going to suggest, [mr tyrell], that you don’t take control of your own life, let alone the parenting of your children? no. okay. and what you’re letting happen is for the children to run their lives? no. what they you’re letting them ? ... went through, they didn’t deserve. you’re letting them make decisions? no. or you’re letting [x] make the decisions? not [x]. when you were – when the children saw [ms g] – she wrote two reports. do you remember? right. okay. in that second report, which was the – you know, the later – like, there had been six months or so of the children not seeing their mother. okay? right. at paragraph 38 [ms g] says that [y] told her he rings you at lunchtime from school? yes. do you remember he used to do that? yes. they all did that. and he said it was because he was worried about what his mother would do to you. so he’s ringing to check if you were okay, is that right? okay. do you think that’s his honour: so that’s a yes. so that’s a yes? yes. the witness is nodding his head. ms burgess: did you ever say to [y], “hey mate, you don’t need to check on me. it’s my job to check on you”? yes, i did. and i did. but he had a particular reason why he did that, a very yes. can i suggest to you, [mr tyrell], the reason the children did that was because they were looking after you? no. i was told that i was going to get taken care of. the children were told that, “if he doesn’t do what i want” – or something like that, i’m not
ms burgess: she home schooled them, didn’t she? yes, we did. sorry? yes, we did. right up until 2017, wasn’t it? yes, we did. we or she? we. okay. who – when then went to school, each of them went to school – i think [x] was, what, eight or so? the twins would have been eight, if they were eight. 2017 anyway. what year did they start school into? that’s when they started, i think. yes. do you remember what year they went into? i do. 3, i think it was. the twins went into year 3, did they? i don’t know. i don’t know. don’t know. you’re not sure what year they went to? i’m not – i’m just upset, sorry. i okay. when the twins started school, could they read? yes, sort of. their mother taught them to read, didn’t she? we. sir, how could you help with their reading? there’s a big difference in trying to help someone sound. just because you’re not a good reader, doesn’t mean you don’t sit there with your children and try your darndest. and they know that it’s the effort, that you try and they don’t have problems that some other people do. they don’t have they didn’t judge you for your reading ability? no. no? no. but they nevertheless must have needed their mother to learn to read? yes, we – we always home schooled them till that point they went to school. and it was important that i was there, otherwise they would have been could they write? clobbered. yes. who was registered to home school them? [ms tyrell]. his honour: and what was their maths like? different with each other. you know, one was a bit quicker with the uptake on numbers and one wasn’t. it was passable. it was good. maths wasn’t so bad. that was quite and, again, just speaking in general terms – and, again, none of these are criticisms – would it be fair to say that their mother was their primary educator, primary teacher at home for the school subjects, etcetera? we were always together. we did that – school – home schooling wasn’t really that good for them. but, again, i’m just going on so many times yesterday where you said rifling through the paper that paper and those sorts of things, that it’s not your thing? no, it’s not. so, hence, to take up ms burgess’ earlier question, how could you help educate the children in maths, in particular, but reading as well, to a ? because it was such simple words and maths. and i had to be there, otherwise things were not that good. sorry, you had to be there why? well, nothing was that – and it was actually good, you know, for me to learn better. i see? but you – with the maths and the english, i did – yes, some questions i had a lot of trouble with. but we worked together with that. they actually picked up better, “no, dad, you got that wrong. it’s this way.” and then they feel really good about it and they sort of try a bit harder and no, i understand? watching their little faces light up when dad got it wrong and they got it right made them really all right. no. thank you. ms burgess: what made you think that you and [ms tyrell] had the knowledge and the ability to be the teachers for your three children? i don’t know.
his honour: but you say – sorry. but you say all these things happened regularly and that the mother did these to the children. what protective action did you take, you know, when you saw this on such a regular basis? i just – i made sure i was there and i would just step in front of it. just stepped in front and tried to make it all calm and but that happened year after year, according to your evidence. yes? happened so much. ms burgess: but it was [ms tyrell] who decided that they should go to real schools, wasn’t it? we both did. i missed them terribly. but surely if they were getting so hurt at home by this terrible woman ? home schooling was not good for them. no? it’s not. but you didn’t make the move to put them into [school q], did you? i didn’t want them in [school r]. i wanted them in [school q]. i’m suggesting to you that it wasn’t you who wanted them in school, was it? we took them. it was both of us. but it wasn’t you who wanted to do it? no, i missed them terribly. but you can’t say that i – that i didn’t want – at school was the safest place for them.
paternal grandmother’s oral evidence
mother’s oral evidence
now, [ms tyrell], after – sorry, i should ask you this. while you were still living in the house and you were in the relationship with [mr m] there was at least one occasion where you would parade around the house in skimpy clothes? no. and you would say things like, in front of the children and to [mr tyrell], that, “[mr m] fills all my holes and you will never be allowed to do that, [mr tyrell] boy”? no, i wouldn’t – i have never ever in my life even called [mr tyrell]. i was always respectful to [mr tyrell]. i always called him [mr tyrell], not – never [mr tyrell]. and after you left the house or were removed from the house in december 2019 you made reports to youth and community services about [mr tyrell], didn’t you? yes. you alleged on 13 july 2020 that he had touched [x] inappropriately, didn’t you? yes. and there were several other reports you also made thereafter, weren’t there? that was the only occasion i – i had. that was the only report even though there may be other reports? i remember only ringing the one time. in any event, you know that that report was rejected by community and justice, don’t you? i don’t know. they never got back to me. his honour: i’m sorry, mr thomas, what did you say was the date of that report? mr thomas: 13 july 2020.
his honour: why would he do that? he just wanted to boast about his family. he just wanted to – you know, you talk mr thomas: [ms tyrell], it is implausible to say the least? but it’s true. it just didn’t happen, did it? it did happen. now, in your affidavit you, quite properly, acknowledge that you did not bring anything, any money, to the marriage. that’s correct, isn’t it? that’s correct. yes, and you’ve told his honour a moment ago that for the first three years, i think it was – i could be wrong but i think it was three years you were earning money crafting but thereafter you weren’t earning money? that’s correct. yes, and in your affidavit you say you were the primary homemaker and parent and caregiver? that’s correct. i suggest to you that [mr tyrell] played a very substantial role in the parenting and the homemaker duties. i’m not saying you didn’t make any role. i’m saying he played a significant role? i don’t know about significant role. he was around. he was around. his honour: and was he working in the early years of the marriage? he was – he was on and off. he was working for himself but he didn’t have a substantial amount of – of customers. and before i had children, you know, i would – if he did have a repair to do i would help him. i would – you know, i would – he would order the parts and i would, you know, pick them up for him. i would help him bleed the brakes. i would be there with him all the time. i would be with him all – so much so that his father once made a comment that i was like a lost puppy. i was always around [mr tyrell]. mr thomas: well, you’ve also given evidence about [d street, suburb e]. remember you’ve said that you assisted with renovations? yes. i suggest that you did not do any physical work with the renovations. you may have cleaned up, and i don’t mean that in a derogatory sense, but you didn’t knock down walls, do brickwork or carpentry, did you? when the brick walls were knocked down i had to – i removed them as well. i helped [mr tyrell] take them to the bin or take them away to the you helped remove the rubbish, yes? or when he cut down the – we had – i’m not sure if it was 14 trees that – on one side and you helped him remove the rubbish. and in relation to this sister’s, [ms s’s], house you ? i – i painted the picket fence. i – you know, i did a lot of work.
ms curran: what it says is:
during our relationship [mr tyrell] and i operated [...48] as our joint account.
mr fitzgerald: i withdraw the question. paragraph 225 you said:
during the relationship [mr tyrell] and i operated account ending [...48] as our joint account. i always understood it was our joint account.
now, and i think you said in evidence before that you have used that account for family expenses and you did, correct? that’s what i was told it was for. okay. now, with that joint account your name wasn’t on that account, was it? no, i was made third party signatory on that account. right. okay. and what did you understand by being made a third party signature, as you say? that i was – i was able to have access to that account. and did you think it was your money? [mr tyrell] said that it was our money, yes. right. so that’s what you thought? yes. right. to do with as you pleased? yes.
did you ever make [ms d] aware of your contact details? yes. i know [ms h] i had to fill out a form. i think – i – i might have. i’m not sure. you’re not sure. did you ever have – you know that [ms d] was the children’s therapeutical psychologist? yes, yes. did you ever have ? [ms d] – sorry, i’ve never seen [ms d]. you know the orders provided for her to give you information as well as the father? was i meant to give it to her, my no, no, no? i don’t understand. you were entitled to get information from her? no, i never received anything. you had permission in those orders to send things to [ms d] to be given to the children? i – i understood that was for birthdays and christmas. yes? but i don’t did you ever do that? i don’t celebrate those. i don’t – we don’t observe those days. and i – i always thought that it was meant to go through my psychologist or my – my counsellor. did you tell your counsellor, that was [mr t]? no. my counsellor at the time was [ms u]. okay. did [ms u] from the church was the counsellor? yes. okay? and i asked her to contact [ms d] but she didn’t know who – she didn’t – she didn’t know how to initiate it. if she should go first or is [ms u] the person who told you you should forget about your children because you had committed adultery? yes. this was your counsellor? yes. at what point did you ditch this counsellor? tell me you ditched this counsellor? i – i did. well, it was sort of i did and she did as well because was seeing [mr tyrell] at the same time and it was a conflict of interest. his honour: and, sorry, was she – was she also the one that advised you to do the – do the confession to the church thing? yes. and was she involved in that process at all? i was – i was in her office when i had to send [mr tyrell] a text message about the elders had advised me to look at some publications, jehovah’s witness publications, regarding disfellowshipping and adultery and the elders wanted me to send [mr tyrell] the same information and to – and to disclose – and just to tell him that i have committed adultery and to disclose my – my wrongdoing and i was with her in the office when we sent that text message to [mr tyrell]. ms burgess: are you still a member of jehovah’s witness? pardon? no, you – you’re not allowed to be a member? i’m – i’m – i’m disfellowshipped. right. do you still believe in the church? i – i do because i – i sort of – i grew up in it and it you grew up in it? i was – i was 17 when i was baptised
when mr thomas asked you about whether you told child protection that [mr tyrell] had inappropriately touched [x], you said you hadn’t. right? yes. what did you actually tell care and – child protection? do you remember? one time [x] was – she was sleeping in bed with me, and i don’t know when [mr tyrell] would have come to bed as well, and i woke up in the morning, and [x] was in the middle and [mr tyrell] was the other side, and i woke up and [mr tyrell] was awake as well, and he – and he said, “[ms tyrell], i thought – i thought it was you” because he touched her like he would touch me, and he thought – i don’t know, he thought it was me or. okay. so – and that’s what the report to child protection says, isn’t it? yes. that [mr tyrell] touched – told you he touched [x] ? yes. thinking it was you? yes. that doesn’t make [mr tyrell] a paedophile, does it? i didn’t call him. no. it doesn’t make him a child sex abuser, does it? no. it makes him someone who inadvertently touched the wrong person? yes.
the family report of ms e (and supplement)
evaluation this assessment concerns the future living and time spending arrangements for [x], [y], and [z]. allegations regarding [ms tyrell's] violent behaviour towards the children are central to this matter, and the court must decide the veracity of [mr tyrell's] and the children's claims. in this matter, [mr tyrell] presents himself as perhaps too good to be true and his ex-wife as consistently too bad to be true, especially given the apparent lack of much involvement by the department of communities and justice over the years. i have not seen any subpoenaed material from them. in my experience, both parties contribute to each other's behaviour in a relationship. [mr tyrell] painted a picture of a cruel, vicious woman while [ms tyrell] portrayed her ex-husband as having been controlling in many areas of their lives. the parties' membership of the jehovah's witness faith undoubtedly influenced their roles and behaviours during their relationship. [mr tyrell's] current attitude did not suggest forgiveness was a tenet of this faith. no doubt, the impending property dispute has not helped the parties' relationship. in an email dated 8/11/2021 to the judge's associate, ms burgess, the independent children's lawyer, stated that she did not accept "either party's assertion that the views of the children are solely the result of the actions of one or other parent". this certainly accords with my view. indeed, it was difficult not to consider that [mr tyrell's] bitterness and distress about the loss of his wife was colouring his ability to facilitate the children seeing her now. this was certainly not a short marriage, and it was difficult to understand why [mr tyrell] stayed so long if his ex-wife's behaviour was consistently as poor as he alleged. while time and energy could be committed to trying to understand both parents' contribution to the current impasse, the end result is that these children are completely aligned with their father and totally opposed to seeing their mother. without further intervention, it is difficult to see if and when they might wish to see her. however, given the children's and their father's very entrenched views and the children's strong alignments, the success of any therapy is highly questionable. in her email dated 8/11/2021 ms burgess expressed her view that family therapy "is the last chance for the children to develop some level of relationship with their mother, or at least for them to be less polarised in their positions. not seeing the mother has not eased the children's perceptions of her as was originally hoped". it was difficult to understand how not seeing their mother, while in the presence of a man who was so opposed to her, could have in any way have eased the children's perceptions of her, given [mr tyrell's] ongoing hostility. the time away from their mother has resulted in the children further demonising her. the children's complaints had a rehearsed quality, perhaps because they have been repeated so often in previous assessments and therapy and other forums. [x] took a parentified role with her younger brother, [z] who presented as very young and immature for his age. from the children's comments, it was apparent that they had been very involved in the details of this dispute. [y] was worrying about the legal fees. all three children should be enabled to focus on age-appropriate concerns and activities and not be embroiled in this dysfunctional dispute. the ongoing conflict between their parents can only be damaging to them. because she was preparing a children's wishes report, [ms g] did not interview either parent. she did not detail having read any of the court material. [ms tyrell] was not asked to complete the questionnaires [mr tyrell] completed about the children. in her initial report, [ms g] recommended that the children live with their father and that their mother was formally prevented from having anything other than supervised time with the children. in her updated report, [ms g] went further into the children's only contact with their mother should be at their request, noting this "is unlikely to change in the medium-term". the court must ascertain if [ms tyrell's] behaviour during a dysfunctional, unsupportive marriage, given her cultural and religious background, now merit her total exclusion from her children's lives. it must be noted that [ms tyrell] denies having behaved in an abusive manner towards her children and is now very desperate to see them. [mr tyrell] said he believed children from separated families should see both parents. however, it was not apparent what efforts he had made to assist the children in assuming a more positive view of their mother or encouraging them to resolve their issues with her. no therapy has been done with [ms tyrell] and the children. in my opinion, therapy just with the children runs the risk of reinforcing and encouraging their negative perceptions of their mother, particularly with no input from her. family therapy might at least assist the children in understanding better their mother's commitment to and love for them and address their perceptions of her behaviour. hopefully, the children might come to better understand their mother in a less than totally negative way. successful therapy might also address the father's attitudes and behaviour and encourage a more facilitating approach. ideally, such therapy might gradually involve the children embarking on a graduated regime, possibly initially with supervision, to spend time with their mother and rebuild a positive relationship. recommendations it is therefore respectfully recommended that family therapy is commenced as soon as possible for this family.
1. background 1.1 after i completed my report dated 14 december 2021, his honour justice neville indicated that the parties were at liberty to write to me to seek answers to the questions listed below. accordingly, the mother's solicitor, mr bak, did so. 2. comments in response to the questions asked 2.1 what is the impact on the children if orders are made for no time with the mother? 2.1.1 such an order would entirely accord with the children's wishes. the children are certainly old enough to conclude that the court supported the allegations made against them by making such an order, thereby further reinforcing their very negative beliefs about her. they would also consider that family therapy was not a worthwhile exercise. a less definitive order stating that the children did not have to see their mother at present but could do so whenever they wished to in the future might be more appropriate. 2.2 what is the impact on the children if orders are made for time with the mother against their wishes? 2.2.1 in my opinion, the children would react in a distressed, defiant, non-compliant manner to any such orders. they would also feel that the court had not heard their expressed wishes. to not acknowledge their viewpoints would be highly problematic and disrespectful. whether or not the court considers that the children's strong viewpoints are justified, the court might expect that there would be negative consequences if they ignored them. 2.3 if the court ultimately accepts the mother's evidence about the father's conduct and particularly her evidence about the father perpetuating family violence prior to separation and alienation of the children post separation: i. what impact is the children living with him likely to have on them, and ii. what are the risks to them? 2.3.1 these children have not seen their mother for well over two years. the impact of living with their father has resulted in their alignments with him. the risk is that the breakdown of their relationships with their mother is perpetuated. increasingly, each child's focus should be on their education, peer group and future while attaining independence from both of their parents. 2.3.2 in the future, the children may need ongoing psychological help to deal with their damaged relationships with their mother. without therapy, there could also be a danger that these children will develop misogynistic and inappropriate attitudes and behaviours in their future relationships. 2.4 if the court determines that it is in the children's best interests to either spend time with or live with the mother, how should that occur initially (including an immediate change, any requirements for the mother, and any requirements or restrictions on the father)? 2.4.1 i have difficulty responding to this question, given that ordering the children to spend time with their mother against their wishes is doomed to failure at present. to take the draconian step of forcing the children to live with their mother would have adverse consequences. 2.4.2 if the children were to be ordered to spend time with or live with their mother, it would be best if this occurred immediately. the father would have to support this. i do not envisage he could or would do so. 2.5 in all the circumstances of the case, beyond engaging in family therapy, what actions do you recommend the mother undertakes that are or could be beneficial to the children? 2.5.1 [ms tyrell] could try to maintain a link with her children by sending occasional letters and small presents to mark special occasions, perhaps to the school to ensure they receive them. with the assistance of the family therapist, maybe she could write a brief letter to the children apologising for not being the perfect mother but assuring children she still loved them. in the letter, [ms tyrell] could say she would be incredibly grateful if the children could forgive her. [ms tyrell] might add she did not expect them to forgive her but still hoped they would do so.
the family consultant’s oral evidence
i’m sure my friends will, you know, jump up if they think i am not accurately summarising that report. there are a number of things in the report that [ms h] makes specific mention about. one of these was that the father told her the children were highly gifted and intelligent. the father also told her that the mother was highly promiscuous throughout the relationship. she describes his conversations as highly sexualised and i take it that she’s saying that he spoke at some length about the mother’s sexual activities, but he also spoke about providing the children with sex education. she thought or she described the children’s allegations about their mother as unnerving in how rehearsed they appeared. she recommended psychiatric assessment of both parents and effectively comes to the conclusion that family therapy is not possible in this situation. she doesn’t allocate specific blame to either parent. so just with that as a background for your information and the other – my friends might ask more questions in relation to [ms h’s] report. one of the things you say is that any attempt at changing residence of the children is doomed to failure. right? yes. now, [y] and [x] are turning 16 later this month, so i assume your primary reason for thinking it won’t work is simply their age would make it a practical impossibility, is that right? well, partly their age and partly their entrenched attitudes, yes. now, what if we consider just [z]? he’s only 11 years old this year. i gather from your report that he is quite immature in his presentation, and you described him as sitting on his father’s knee during the interview, which i take it would be reasonably unusual for a child of his age, isn’t it? yes. yes? yes. and at paragraph 72 your overall assessment of him is as an immature child? yes. so, now ? yes. and sat on his – i’m sorry. i interrupted you. sorry. no. you go first? i actually said he sat on his sister’s knee as well, yes. all right? yes. now, at paragraph 64 – sorry – 63 of your report you say [z] told you, “i would basically just kill myself”, if he had to see his mother. how seriously would you take such a statement from [z]? i mean, i think any such statements from children need to be taken seriously, however, i only saw him the once and in fairly strained, you know, circumstances. so as i said, it needs to be taken seriously, but i’m not sure of the actual – i doubt – it’s, sort of, an 11 year old dramatic statement, really, isn’t it? right. okay. if [z] were forced to go and live with his mother, what impact do you think this would have on his psychological health? i would be very concerned about the effects of the separation from his father and particularly his sister who he seemed to rely on. as i said, i only, you know – it’s only a brief time that i saw the family, but i would be concerned how he would cope with – with that and with the separation from his siblings. if [z] is with his siblings he’s likely to be totally influenced by their opinions about things, isn’t he? yes. if [z] did successfully transition to live with his mother and was gradually reinstated with time with his father, is it a possibility that he could become a bridge between the mother and his older siblings? i guess anything is possible. i think that’s a big – that’s a big leap. i wouldn’t be – i think there’s a long way to go before we, you know, got to that, the – to be that hopeful. yes. okay. so there’s likely to be psychological damage to [z] if he’s forced to separate from his father and siblings. right? yes. there’s also likely to be damage to [z] if his relationship with his mother is never repaired, isn’t there? yes. which is the worst? goodness. his honour: it is friday, the 13th? yes. i just noticed that, your honour. ms burgess: sorry? look, you know, i think both – both scenarios are highly damaging for the child. i’m not – not going to say which one is worst than the other here. you know, neither outcome his honour: but is the case – sorry. sorry. [ms e] ? sorry, your honour. but here’s a case, isn’t it, that given the complete polarisation of the children and how estranged they are from their mother, it’s almost as if that really radical surgery – it’s either a do nothing or radical surgery. there’s no, sort of, halfway house, is there? not – no. i think we’ve tried the halfway house and i gather from [ms h’s] report, your honour, that it wasn’t successful. so, no, i can’t see any other option.
and there are a number of aspects of the evidence which seem to be – to indicate that the father has difficulty with boundaries. i just want to go through some of those with you. there is no doubt that at some point the children’s bedroom doors were glass. the father, i think, says there was a curtain or something up, but it – child protection asked him to ensure that those doors were changed. all right. there was an issue alleged by the mother of the father showering with the children beyond an age where that might be usual or common, but the father’s reaction to that is that he wore some form of underpants or, you know, something. does that raise concerns with you about his boundaries – physical boundaries in relation to the children? yes. depending on the – obviously it’s inappropriate, yes. one of the things the father did was the family was at [school ab], i guess, where they were looking around the school, and an incident occurs where [x] is in the bathroom and the father is outside and starts joking around with a bunch of [school ab] boys about the hot looking girl who’s going to come out of the bathroom shortly. would you like to verbalise your reaction to that, [ms e]? yes. i’m having trouble hearing you, ms burgess, but sorry? they – they were outside a toilet, was it? i didn’t hear that part. yes. [x] had gone in to use the bathroom? it’s obviously completely inappropriate. i mean, you don’t need me to tell you that. yes, yes. there is evidence of the father attending a parent-teacher interview at which he raised the topic of anal sex? do you want me to verbalise my face? yes, please. his honour: no. the witness: i’m sorry. sorry. i can’t – i have difficulty seeing how anal sex is relevant to a parent-teacher interview.
“the children would be highly traumatised to be removed from their father, but if [ms tyrell’s] story’s given any weight the risk of leaving them with a highly coercive controller is potentially worse for their long term mental health.”
... it’s so complex, isn’t it, because they’ve actually been with the allegedly... coercive controller for a considerable length of time now... i agree with the statement in theory but in the application in this case it is the devil [and] the deep blue sea isn’t it?... it’s just very, very difficult.   tyrell]? he gave me whatever detail is in the report. he said to you that the violence was extreme? yes. and he said to you that the violence against the children was extreme? yes. and ms burgess put to you the question in relation to the fact that it had not been – that the children had not come to the attention of the department and that being ? yes. unusual? yes. and if i say to you that there is in evidence a letter from the principal of [school q] making positive comments in relation to the mother, particularly in relation to her parenting and the presentation of the children, that is something that would provide you with comfort in relation to that independent person’s impression of the mother as a parent? yes. [mr tyrell] told you, didn’t he, that the mother was not very motherly? yes. and that she – he was with them all day? she was? he – that [mr tyrell] was with them all day, did most of the care? yes. and he said that [ms tyrell] insulted the children and told them she regretted ever having them? yes. and if the court finds that [ms tyrell] indeed was a hands-on parent who was involved with them and is not someone who has undertaken the actions suggested by [mr tyrell], his description to you of her poor parenting would also be of some concern, wouldn’t it? if it was validated or substantiated – if it was substantiated, yes. now, against the background of the report of [ms h] that ms burgess read to you – and i will just read to you precisely what she says, page 3:
that [mr tyrell’s] conversations were highly sexualised, speaking often and at length about her activities with boyfriends. when i enquired about the children’s reactions he stated that the children had a far better sex education than most.
now, this is something that is reported by [mr tyrell] to [ms h] in her report of april 2022. i want to add some more information, keeping in mind that background, that report by [ms h]. ms burgess took you to the comments made about [x], when [x] was in the toilet at [school ab]. i would like to read to you the passage, so you have it – i just had the ..... excuse me, your honour. it’s page 60 – i’m sorry, it’s not. it’s page 71 of the tender bundle. i want to read you – this is an email from [ms ac], the english drama teacher at [school ab]. and she calls it “incident report” from 13 february 2019:   tyrell] and his wife [ms tyrell] and his two sons were present at the parent/teacher meeting. below are a few main things that [mr tyrell] said that are of particular concern being inappropriate or alarming.
and i will go to the chief dot point:   tyrell] also told me that when he was in the school last year he had his daughter approx 12 year old who needed to use the female’s toilets. whilst she was in the toilet [mr tyrell] called out to the [school ab] boys who were walking past and asked them to stop and listen. he told the boys that [school ab] was accepting girls now but only of a certain calibre. they have to be popped. [mr tyrell] continued to say how he worked the boys up to expect a hot chick to come out of the bathroom. his daughter then came out of the bathroom and all the boys saw her and she was embarrassed. he was telling me this story as if it was a hilarious joke.
that description by a teacher of the story told by [mr tyrell], in the presence of the teacher and his children, is enormously concerning in relation to indicating his lack of boundaries, isn’t it? of course, yes. and another element that was reported by the teacher is that:   tyrell] told me about his mother-in-law was so horrible that his wife was the beautiful flower that bloomed from a pot of shit. i told him that that was not a particularly nice thing to say in front of his children and wife. and he said it didn’t matter as it was true.
that approach to being spoken to by a teacher and corrected and his response of, “it didn’t matter as it was true”, also shows a significant issue in relation to his boundaries, doesn’t it? an understanding of what is appropriate, yes. and in relation to the issue of the often sexualised conduct and behaviour, i will just read one more of the items that were reported:   tyrell] began by telling me that at [y’s] year 7 previous school he was always placed with a retard child who taught [y] all about anal sex. he said that he thinks it is important the boys need to know about anal sex but doesn’t want [y] to be forced with the loser children.
? sorry, was this a school report? was this a teacher? another teacher report, was it, yes? it is teacher reporting what ? okay. [mr tyrell] said to her ? to them. to her, yes. in the presence of his children and wife at a parent/teacher interview. now, putting that into the context of parents make mistakes versus significant risk factors, those matters identified in that report would be incredibly concerning in terms of risk factors for these children, wouldn’t they? yes. and the evidence of the mother was that that [mr tyrell] would take photographs of her when she was sleeping and, without her consent, and would show them to strangers. would show them to i think the words were “whoever would look”. that lack of boundaries in relation to his then wife would also be enormously concerning? yes. so, [ms e], that history which i’ve started with the comments of [ms h] about the highly sexualised comments, together with the reports of what was said and the attendant of the department seeing that there were glass doors and a lack of privacy, collectively does that cause you to reflect on the issue as to whether the children should remain living with the father? yes but – but, yes but, it’s obviously a matter for his honour to decide. it’s obviously highly concerning. it’s of interest though that – i don’t know what that reflects, that the relevant child protection authorities haven’t been involved. i mean if it’s so grim why have they not been involved or maybe we ..... i don’t know, you know, but yes i just think it’s highly concerning.
but can i say in terms of the fact that he believed a narrative and reports the narrative despite strong evidence, compelling evidence, that the narrative is not right, that narrative being maintained and his inability to accept anything contrary to his own narrative is of concern, isn’t it? yes. and in relation to his belief about the children being gifted, i want to read to you from page 66 of the tender bundle, this is an email from [mr ad], the junior principal at [school ab], to [mr ae], the class teacher or [z]. and it says – i need to get this right – from [mr ad]:
i will speak with [mr ae]..... in relation to his supposed giftedness. might need to drop the hint at the possibility of repeating.   ae] responds and says:
the kid just shouldn’t be in year 5. there is nothing exceptional about him except for his ability to play the [musical instrument]. he would struggle in year 4.
that narrative from the school, together with [mr tyrell’s] narrative about his belief of giftedness, would cause you to pause about his capacity to make decisions that are best for the children, wouldn’t it? yes. yes. i’m having difficulty with your sound. i – it’s – can everyone else hear? it’s just – yes, keep going, i will struggle. well, i will keep ..... up. i’m nearly done. thank you? i struggle, yes. yes. now, at page 69 of the tender bundle, and this is from march 2021, there’s an email between teachers that says about ..... [tyrell] in year 6:
becoming really concerned about [z] being able to access the curriculum. had a meeting with [mr tyrell] today. .....
the teacher then goes on to say he:   is disengaging massively and results are very low. currently his assignments have been hass, b, religion, e, health, e, science, e, math .....
and then over the page:
organisation is an issue but there are also massive gaps in learning and he is a master as masking. seems obsessed with his device. massively immature emotionally and academically in comparison to others in the class.
those concerns, again recorded by the school, in relation to how far behind [z] is and [mr tyrell’s] narrative of – you can’t hear me, [ms e]? i’m hearing bits. i didn’t hear who wrote the email. it was from the school a school teacher. school teacher? can you just – if you – and about [z], was it? about [z]? thank you. yes. that record of how much [z] is struggling, sitting side by side the narrative of [mr tyrell] that he is gifted, would also cause concern in relation to [mr tyrell’s] parenting capacity and focus on the educational needs of his child, wouldn’t it? yes. at paragraph 75 of your report you say:
successful therapy might address the father’s attitude and behaviour.
but you know that the therapy has never occurred. it’s the case, isn’t it, that there’s no prospect of [mr tyrell] ever encouraging this relationship. you form that view, don’t you? i think, yes, i think it’s highly, highly unlikely, yes. unless it was externally in some way forced but i can’t see how that can be achieved very well. and if it is not forced then there is not a significant change – radical surgery, i think as his honour put it – there will be no relationship between these children and their mother, will there? there won’t be any relationship, no.
ms burgess: [ms e], ms curran put to you that the father has a belief in a narrative and reports that narrative despite compelling evidence to the contrary. and she was talking about the children’s level of giftedness. if the father has the capacity to delude himself in that manner, is it equally possible that his narrative about the mother’s treatment of the children and him, the violence, is also delusional? yes. i think i said at – where was it – in – you know, paragraph – i will just find it – i said, you know, he presented himself as too good to be true and her – it’s something along those lines anyway. so, yes, i think the insight, as we are saying is very – in this matter he presents himself as too good to be true and his ex-wife is consistently too bad to be true, you know. paragraph 68 of my report. so, yes. his honour: sorry, now you’re on mute, ms burgess. ms burgess: i don’t know how i did that. but it could be entirely delusional and he would still tell the same story over and over to people and to the children? well, it – or it could be his genuine perception, his genuine delusional belief, yes. yes? yes.
if it was to happen, it’s to happen immediately. and is there anything else that would be helpful for the transition to succeed that you could suggest knowing now this additional material? such as, for example, would some form of psychiatric assessment of the father or the parents be helpful? would some sort of counselling for the father be helpful? is there anything else that may assist us to make this transition succeed?‑‑‑i can’t think of any – i can’t see how a psychiatric assessment would assist the father or anyone’s insight into, you know, their stance. so, no, i can’t see anything that would help. but i’m very pessimistic, as i have said in my other – in my supplementary report about the success of any such move. i’m finding myself thinking through, you know, if this was truly a child protection case we would have care plans and we would have steps in place and it would be – it just would not be this. i’m just struggling. it would just not be this all or nothing. you know, we would have – we have all worked in child protection too, there would be monitoring and care plans and things could move forward in a measured way. and i just can’t see how anything like that can be achieved in this matter.
oral evidence of the mother’s psychologist mr t
the report of ms g
5.6 for these reasons, it is recommended that:
1. the children live with their father. the mother be formally prevented from contacting, attending or approaching the children, including at their home, school, external activities or in public. the children need to feel safe in their home and neighbourhood. the children continue to access psychological counselling and their school psychologists are informed of their circumstances. a copy of the relevant sections of this report are to be provided to the treating clinicians for each child. the children’s only contact with their mother is at their request. this is unlikely to change in the medium-term.   they have experienced (on the report of all the children) “significant physical, emotional and psychological maltreatment from their mother” (11th february 2020 report, par.5.1), (b) the father “appears to have been unable to provide protection from the maltreatment”, which has led to them presenting with differing responses “with x appearing to assume a self-contained and care-taking role, y becoming emotionally confused and vulnerable, earnestly seeking kindness and z vigilant and alert to incident” (par.5.1), (c) ms g opined that the “psychological recovery from such experiences is likely to be life-long.” each child seemed to be experiencing, she said, “social difficulties”, among other things, (d) ms g noted (par.5.3) that the children’s narratives “demonstrated that there has been significant discussion in the home about the events they have experienced and the court process, (e) in her second report (31st august 2020), ms g recorded (par.5.1) that the children had become “more certain of their desires to not have contact with their mother.”   the father “appears to have been unable to provide protection from the maltreatment”, which has led to them presenting with differing responses “with x appearing to assume a self-contained and care-taking role, y becoming emotionally confused and vulnerable, earnestly seeking kindness and z vigilant and alert to incident” (par.5.1), (c) ms g opined that the “psychological recovery from such experiences is likely to be life-long.” each child seemed to be experiencing, she said, “social difficulties”, among other things, (d) ms g noted (par.5.3) that the children’s narratives “demonstrated that there has been significant discussion in the home about the events they have experienced and the court process, (e) in her second report (31st august 2020), ms g recorded (par.5.1) that the children had become “more certain of their desires to not have contact with their mother.”   ms g opined that the “psychological recovery from such experiences is likely to be life-long.” each child seemed to be experiencing, she said, “social difficulties”, among other things, (d) ms g noted (par.5.3) that the children’s narratives “demonstrated that there has been significant discussion in the home about the events they have experienced and the court process, (e) in her second report (31st august 2020), ms g recorded (par.5.1) that the children had become “more certain of their desires to not have contact with their mother.”   ms g noted (par.5.3) that the children’s narratives “demonstrated that there has been significant discussion in the home about the events they have experienced and the court process, (e) in her second report (31st august 2020), ms g recorded (par.5.1) that the children had become “more certain of their desires to not have contact with their mother.”   in her second report (31st august 2020), ms g recorded (par.5.1) that the children had become “more certain of their desires to not have contact with their mother.”   the children described significant physical, emotional and psychological abuse which ended when the mother left the home. (b) each child stated they do not want contact with their mother. (c) x provided information unprompted, and several times mentioned court, although at the time of the interviews on 29th january 2020, there had been no appearances yet in this court. there was a concerning statement that the mother had said to the court that the father touched x inappropriately and that x reported greater anxiety since the previous court date. ms g also stated that it was clear from x’s statements that she had discussed her recall of events with her father and brothers and there was a possibility of rehearsed speech. (d) y expressed that he experienced sadness about what the mother and her lawyer said about the father, including that the father will never win and will have to pay to see his children. (e) z described the incident in 2019 and ms g commented that it was clear this discussion had been previously had/overheard with the father. z also made sexualised comments about the mother and her new partner. z said the mother ran away with her new partner.   each child stated they do not want contact with their mother. (c) x provided information unprompted, and several times mentioned court, although at the time of the interviews on 29th january 2020, there had been no appearances yet in this court. there was a concerning statement that the mother had said to the court that the father touched x inappropriately and that x reported greater anxiety since the previous court date. ms g also stated that it was clear from x’s statements that she had discussed her recall of events with her father and brothers and there was a possibility of rehearsed speech. (d) y expressed that he experienced sadness about what the mother and her lawyer said about the father, including that the father will never win and will have to pay to see his children. (e) z described the incident in 2019 and ms g commented that it was clear this discussion had been previously had/overheard with the father. z also made sexualised comments about the mother and her new partner. z said the mother ran away with her new partner.   x provided information unprompted, and several times mentioned court, although at the time of the interviews on 29th january 2020, there had been no appearances yet in this court. there was a concerning statement that the mother had said to the court that the father touched x inappropriately and that x reported greater anxiety since the previous court date. ms g also stated that it was clear from x’s statements that she had discussed her recall of events with her father and brothers and there was a possibility of rehearsed speech. (d) y expressed that he experienced sadness about what the mother and her lawyer said about the father, including that the father will never win and will have to pay to see his children. (e) z described the incident in 2019 and ms g commented that it was clear this discussion had been previously had/overheard with the father. z also made sexualised comments about the mother and her new partner. z said the mother ran away with her new partner.   y expressed that he experienced sadness about what the mother and her lawyer said about the father, including that the father will never win and will have to pay to see his children. (e) z described the incident in 2019 and ms g commented that it was clear this discussion had been previously had/overheard with the father. z also made sexualised comments about the mother and her new partner. z said the mother ran away with her new partner.   z described the incident in 2019 and ms g commented that it was clear this discussion had been previously had/overheard with the father. z also made sexualised comments about the mother and her new partner. z said the mother ran away with her new partner.   the children did not want to see the mother. (b) x was described as eager to share memories of the mother treating her and the father poorly. x stated she wanted to find someone to love her dad. in response to a recent investigation from police, x made comments about the mother’s private medical history, which no-one but the father could have known and therefore he must have been x’s source of information. (c) y noted there was still significant discussion of the mother at home and he referred to the father’s lawyer as “our lawyers”. (d) ms g noted the children’s narratives had become confused due to high levels of discussions.   x was described as eager to share memories of the mother treating her and the father poorly. x stated she wanted to find someone to love her dad. in response to a recent investigation from police, x made comments about the mother’s private medical history, which no-one but the father could have known and therefore he must have been x’s source of information. (c) y noted there was still significant discussion of the mother at home and he referred to the father’s lawyer as “our lawyers”. (d) ms g noted the children’s narratives had become confused due to high levels of discussions.   y noted there was still significant discussion of the mother at home and he referred to the father’s lawyer as “our lawyers”. (d) ms g noted the children’s narratives had become confused due to high levels of discussions.   ms g noted the children’s narratives had become confused due to high levels of discussions.
limited report of ms d
4.2 since [z] has learnt that he may have to stay with his mother, his level of anxiety has increased significantly and there have been behavioural problems. this is due to his feelings of powerlessness of not being able to have his adamant desire to have not contact with his mother. 4.3 it is my professional opinion that the impact, not only on [z], but also his siblings if he was removed from his father's care would cause severe psychological damage. for this reason, it is my recommendation that until such time as they have been able to learn how to process and deal with their reported experiences that they have no contact with their mother. i also note and fully concur with the report of forensic psychologist, [ms g], dated 11th february 2020 and her recommendations.
while i am reluctant to recommend that counselling is ceased when children report it being helpful, i am concerned that without holding both sides of this story, it is challenging to truly help these children deal with what must have been a traumatic family life and distressing childhood memories from a balanced perspective.   the covering email referred to the court being provided a report “in relation to the above matter that is listed on the 10th june 2022.” no one except the parties and their lawyers have access to the commonwealth courts portal that has this information, which also means that ms d could not have known about the so-called “listing” on 10th june without someone “on the inside” of the litigation telling her, (b) there was no direction or order by the court seeking or requesting such a report. on its face, it purports to be an “expert report” which, for the purposes of the current litigation, it is not, especially in circumstances where others were formally appointed or retained.   there was no direction or order by the court seeking or requesting such a report. on its face, it purports to be an “expert report” which, for the purposes of the current litigation, it is not, especially in circumstances where others were formally appointed or retained.
the report of ms h
family in preparation of this report i read the family report provided by [ms e] and her supplemental report questions. i read some of the court orders provided and spoke with the children’s psychologist [ms d]. current arrangements the children are currently residing with the father full-time and have not seen or spoken with their mother since december 2019. information provided by the father [mr tyrell] [mr tyrell] arrived late and seemed disorganised, he was overly vocal and chatty with reception staff about his relationship and court case, which the staff reported as “very odd” and “inappropriate’. he began our interview by showing me photos on his phone that his daughter had taken for a school photography assignment: a homeless man on an old train in black & white and quite stunning. he described how he had spoken at length to this man and he had agreed to pose for the photos because of how nice he and his daughter were. he spoke of feeling ‘charitable for people who fall on hard times’ and appeared insistent on presenting a good impression. [mr tyrell] was a little vague about his employment and career, stating he was a part-time [tradesman] but had been off work due to injuries. i was unsure about how the family afforded schooling and he was concerned about future money and the ability for him to keep the family home. [mr tyrell] insisted that his main role in this world is “to be a father to those three amazing children” and that he had done most of the parenting, not that they needed a lot as they were highly gifted and intelligent. he described teaching them from a very young age to use sharp knives and that children are smart enough, other parents just don’t get it. he went on to describe his children and their talents and how proud he was of them. when asked about the children’s mother, [mr tyrell] described how violent she was with him and with the children, always raging at them for the slightest mistake. she had come from a highly abusive home, whereas he had parents that were ‘still in love’ throughout their marriage and spoke of an idealised version of the physical nature of their relationship. he described [ms tyrell] as being highly promiscuous throughout their relationship and that he always felt that she was going to leave him. he described her as walking around the house in a g-string and taunting him about the sex she was having with other men, often in front of the children. he spoke of how she played the children off each other and the youngest [z] was often kept with her and that he was “treated as a baby” sleeping in her bed. [mr tyrell] describes himself as “trying to be as good a husband as possible”, that he would try to keep his wife happy. he said not many other husbands would “rub cream over their wives every night to prevent stretch marks when they were pregnant”. [mr tyrell] said they home schooled the children as [ms tyrell] insisted which was a great deal of work for both of them until he tried to get them into good schools. he went into a long speech around the benefits of their schooling and how well each of them has improved in the last two years. he was insisting that [y] would be returning to [school ab] soon, where he can gain a better education. when asked about [ms tyrell’s] violence and behaviour, he stated it was really only worse after having the children, before that he could tolerate it being directed at him. he stated that some protective thing came over him when she was hurting the children and that he needed to step in. when asked why he didn’t get her help, he simply said she refused and that he knew the kind of abusive family she grew up in and how it had changed her to her core. i asked if he gained advice from elders from his fellowship and he thought about it and nodded but said “it was a difficult situation to bring up” and he thought that his love and the children’s love would help her. it is interesting that [mr tyrell] was so concerned with his wife’s behaviour but did not seek any means through conventional mental health services or his church. [mr tyrell] spoke of his conerns around his wife’s sexual nature (in general) toward other men and potentially alluded to sexual abuse in her history. he stated that he understood why people suicide with that much pain inside of them, which seemed an interesting link to be made when he had not spoken of her suicidal behaviour at all. he spoke of saving a man from killing himself by a lake when he was able to ‘connect with him and bring him back from the brink’. he became a little distant and sad, when i enquired as to how he had so much empathy for these people, he stated that he too was sexually abused by an older man (friend of his parents) as a child and understood the pain that it carries. he seemed a little embarrassed and admitted that he had not spoken to many people about this. [mr tyrell’s] conversations were highly sexualised, speaking often and at length about arguments that he and [ms tyrell] had around her activities with her “boyfriends” and how she would taunt him by walking around the house in her underwear, often while the children were around. when i enquired about their reactions he stated that his children had a far better sex education than most and that from a very young age he would take any opportunity in the natural world to show them insects reproducing etc. in a way for them to understand the topic in a normal way. in terms of ending the marriage, [mr tyrell] stated he had not thought of it previously. i asked if this was due to him being a jehovah’s witness and he agreed saying they are unable to divorce unless there is adultery proven. [mr tyrell] describes the end of his marriage due to his wife’s affair as a difficult time for him. he states that part of him still loves her but that he is hurt that she found someone else but that he “could not make her happy”. [mr tyrell] is hoping to find a new partner, stating the children keep hoping he finds a “nice lady”. [mr tyrell] was asked to complete psychological questionnaires after his interview which i could email to him. i also asked him to sign a permission form on behalf of the children for me to contact their psychologist. over the next few days [mr tyrell] attended my offices at times other than when he was booked and phoned the reception staff repeatedly without being clear about why he was calling. the staff found him time consuming and unaware of any boundaries around confidentiality and their time. information provided by the mother [ms tyrell] [ms tyrell] arrived immaculately dressed looking slightly ‘old worldly’ in her attire, she was quiet and polite. she cried easily as she spoke of the loss of contact with her children and how much she missed them. [ms tyrell] described her 25-year marriage as one of terror and coercive control. she was just 17 years when her mother and [mr tyrell] organised them to meet through their church. he was older and charming and she stated she saw marriage as an escape from her abusive mother and was particularly naïve to men and relationships but wanted to be the best she could for her new husband. [ms tyrell] described that she had tried to be the best wife possible for [mr tyrell] but that she was always getting something wrong. he was very demanding of her attention, physically, and would often have her on ‘medications’ that he would get from the doctor to keep her well. he would often allow elders from their fellowship to live with them for periods of time, in a caravan on their property. [ms tyrell] said she trusted these men as elders of the fellowship and was showing them hospitality but that [mr tyrell] would often become angry and jealous at any attention she would give these men and accuse her of having affairs. [ms tyrell] stated that [mr tyrell] never wanted children, keeping her on the pill, preferring them to be a couple travelling and living their best life for over 10 years. when they did fall pregnant once [mr tyrell] arranged an abortion, telling [ms tyrell] that he had spoken with their doctor and that the ‘medication’ she was taking might have deformed the growing baby, so she couldn’t keep it. [ms tyrell] described her grief at having to go through this curette procedure and aftermath of emotions which sent her into a deep depression for a few months. after this, she decided that she would never be able to survive that experience again and told [mr tyrell] she was keeping the next baby “no matter what”. [ms tyrell] stated that when she was pregnant with the twins, [mr tyrell] ‘flipped’ to being overtly proud of having twins and [ms tyrell’s] ability to carry them to full term. [ms tyrell] stated that their relationship became worse after the children came along as, particularly with twins, her attention was understandably elsewhere. he was jealous of her relationship with the children and care of them and became increasingly cold and angry towards her. once the twins were old enough, [mr tyrell] would take them with him and she often felt that he was deliberately turning them against her. since [z] was born, they had been quite separate as a couple with the older children with [mr tyrell] and she with [z]. she reports that [mr tyrell] would scare her and the children by driving too fast and she was often concerned they would be in an accident. [ms tyrell] states that [mr tyrell’s] jealousy continued and he was convinced she was always having affairs, which she denies, until the end of her marriage. she stated that [mr tyrell] had organised [mr m], a [tradesman] to come to the house in exchange for some building materials that [mr tyrell] had. [ms tyrell] stated that [mr m] came over often and was especially kind to her and the children. [ms tyrell] spoke of their affair as incredibly shameful and unsettling but that she believed [mr m] loved her and she was incredibly lonely in her marriage. when [ms tyrell] described the last night she saw her children, she became terribly distressed. she said [mr tyrell’s] violence towards her had been escalating and she went to the police for help. after they arrested [mr tyrell] and he was released, she couldn’t understand what had happened. the police informed her she could not return home due to the fvo. she described at that time her disbelief to the police and that she had nowhere to go when the police told her “you have a boyfriend don’t you?”. she did go to see [mr m] but he didn’t want to have anything to do with her and she ended up staying in a refuge. she was of the belief now that the relationship with [mr m] was set up by [mr tyrell] in order to divorce her and not real as she believed. [ms tyrell] has been living in a refuge before securing housing through government housing, she is trying to gain employment but has little experience having not worked outside the family home. she is somewhat connected to her extended family in sydney but reports those relationships have been overly strained through her time with [mr tyrell] and his dislike of her family. [ms tyrell] appeared to be highly naive around her rights and abilities to seek advice and legal means to make contact with her children. she described that she had never been allowed to even visit a doctor without her husband being present. she was completely dependent on [mr tyrell] for everything in her 25 year marriage. at the end of our session, [ms tyrell] stated she had brought presents for children that she had been collecting over the two years she hadn’t seen them. she asked if i could give them to them. i said no initially, stating it would put me in a difficult position when the children don’t know me. i then reconsidered, thinking it might be helpful to ask the children at the end of my interviews, to gauge their reactions, and to ascertain the level of alienation present. information provided by the children the information provided by all three children seemed overly rehearsed and pressured without a great deal of independent thought. [x] brought her laptop to show me some vague pictures of mum standing over [z] on the floor as indicating her violence, [y] brought his notebook to refer to events as he had previously written them down and [z] wanted [x] to come into his session, so that he “wouldn’t forget anything” but i spoke to him about the importance of meeting everyone individually and getting his thoughts and that there were ‘no right answers to anything’. the children all reported being happy at their schools and very happy at home with their dad. their unprompted attempts to tell me how wonderful life was with their dad and how much they hated their mother and never wanted to ever see her again, was quite unnerving in its rehearsed manner and not overly typical in children who are actually traumatised by repeated family violence, who often want their family to stay the same, but without the fighting. the children repeated much of the information recorded in the family report: that their mother was violent, had many boyfriends and abortions and would scream at them regularly. they also stated that things with their father were ‘amazing’ now that he was looking after them as he had done looking after [ms tyrell] doing “everything for her”. they all stated that they hoped their father would now find a nice lady to marry and look after him. they all could not recall any positive memories of their mother or what she did for them, which appeared highly strange, even when the question was repeated to each child, they very quickly replied with ‘no, nothing, never’. when i queried [y] about his dad telling me he was moving back to [school ab] he said he hated it there and was frequently bullied because it was a sporting school and he is more mechanically minded. the children told me that their mother was having an affair with a man called [mr m], that their dad drove past his house to see [ms tyrell’s] car there. the children told me that this man was a very bad man, involved with drugs and violence and one child told me that he owed dad “a lot of money”. the children had lots of disturbing information about their mother’s repeated abortions and extra-marital relationships throughout the marriage. when i queried how they knew these things that parents don’t normally share in such detail with children they said ‘they found things around home’. i told each of the children in turn that their mother had left them a bag of items that she wanted them to have that she had been collecting in the time apart from them, i stated if they felt uncomfortable, they could leave the things in my room and did not have to take anything with them, but that their mother had told me why she had chosen each item for them particularly if they wanted to know. while the children refused in the family report interviews to be observed with their mother, i thought this could have been a safer way to connect with their mother and observe their responses for further insight to their feelings and experiences. all three children stated they ‘did not want anything from that woman’ and were not at all interested in even examining or hearing anything about the gifts. i asked the children about their cultural heritage and they spoke of dad’s [country af] background and their grandparents. when i asked about their mother’s the children all stated that they didn’t know or couldn’t remember, which appeared unusual. i asked [mr tyrell] in the waiting room, in front of the children, what was the children’s cultural heritage from their mother’s side and he paused and stated “[country ag], i think” before hurrying the children to leave. later that day and the following days, [mr tyrell] called my office, explaining that the children were highly distressed that i may have been insinuating that the children were not his by querying their background. i told [mr tyrell] that it seemed unusual that the children had such a good knowledge about their [country af] heritage but not their mother’s heritage. information from [ms ah] in a phone conversation with [ms ah] she stated that she had seen the children for a number of sessions together and separately on occasion. [ms ah] had been in contact with [mr tyrell] but had never had any contact with [ms tyrell]. she reported similar versions of the events as both [mr tyrell] and the children and was very much involved with their story without questioning alienation as a possibility because the older children were so adamant about events. when i questioned whether she thinks she would feel differently if she had more information from the mother’s perspective, she stated that the children’s memories were pretty clear. she proposed that if [ms tyrell] had no access to money, then she wouldn’t have bought hundreds of pairs of shoes that she had seen photos of at the house. while i am reluctant to recommend that counselling is ceased when children report it being helpful, i am concerned that without holding both sides of this story, it is challenging to truly help these children deal with what must have been a traumatic family life and distressing childhood memories from a balanced perspective. psychological testing the neo personality inventory as a base measure of personality to compare with the results given in the pai. the neo pi-r, the standard questionnaire measure of the five factor model (ffm), provides a systematic assessment of emotional, interpersonal, experiential, attitudinal, and motivational styles. the neo pi-r is a concise measure of the five major domains of personality, as well as the six traits or facets that define each domain. taken together, the five domain scales and 30 facet scales of the neo pi-r, including the scales for the agreeableness and the conscientiousness domains, facilitate a comprehensive and detailed assessment of normal adult personality. i also administered the parenting stress inventory (psi) the psi is used to measure the relative stress in the parent-child relationship. child characteristics in the full scale include: distractibility/ hyperactivity, adaptability, reinforces parent, demandingness, mood, and acceptability. parent measures include: competence, isolation, attachment, health, role restriction, depression, and spouse. the psi is used for early identification of dysfunctional parent- child interactions, parental stress, family functioning, risk for child abuse and neglect, and for evaluation of child custody decisions. [ms tyrell's] profile suggests her most dominant feature is her low extroversion. such people are quite introverted, quiet and unassertive. they rarely experience strong feelings of joy or excitement and are often described as reserved, serious and loners. she is very high in agreeableness, indicating people in this range are genuinely concerned with others and may be described as soft-hearted and generous. in terms of difficulties she may have, her profile suggests she may be gullible, easily taken advantage of and have difficulty standing up for herself. she is potentially open to exploitation or victimisation due to a failure to protect herself. her profile suggests that she is untrusting of others and may perceive threats in benign incidents. she is reluctant to take any leadership roles or opportunities to take chances to assert herself. she may have a lack of social support and difficulty sustaining personal relationships. [ms tyrell’s] profile suggests she has few stressors in her parenting relationship other than social isolation. she is confident and relaxed about her role as a parent and is attuned to her children’s emotions. [mr tyrell's] profile suggests his most dominant feature is his very high extraversion. he enjoys the company of others and may look for leadership opportunities. people would describe these people as active and sociable. he is high in agreeableness indicating people in this range are genuinely concerned with others and may be described as soft- hearted and generous. in terms of difficulties he may have, his profile suggests he may have indiscriminate trust of others and can be easily taken advantage of. he may fail to take practical cautions with respect to property, savings or other things of value. others may comment on excessive talking to inappropriate self-disclosure and social friction, he may use inappropriate attempts to dominate and control others. his profile suggests an inability to tolerate being alone, excessive need for the presence of others and a lack of respect for others personal boundaries. men scoring in this range have high sexual promiscuity and provocative behaviour with an overemotional reaction to minor events and prone to loss of control when perceived to be alone. [mr tyrell’s] profile suggests he has few stressors in his parenting relationship, he is confident and relaxed about his role as a parent but does show some tendencies to related children’s emotions, particularly sadness and crying, as related mostly to physical injuries, and perhaps little insight around deeper emotional needs. his profile suggests he does feel strongly that having children has caused more problems in his intimate relationship than expected. recommendations for family therapy current situation this is a really challenging situation with two stories that are so opposed in regards to who the perpetrator is that it is hard to make sense of. it is difficult to believe that things have been as bad as both paint the relationship for so long and that they sustained over 25 years together. they both speak of their faith with the jehovah’s witness fellowship, but there are many inconsistencies with both reporting being removed from their community and the children not having a great deal of knowledge of the faith. i know that traditionally, witnesses do not celebrate birthdays or christmas and yet there was talk of [ms tyrell] not sending cards or presents as a sign of parental love. [mr tyrell] appears to be close with the elders of that community so i am unsure of why he has been removed. the family does appear to have lost some of the community around them. it appears that after over two years of isolation, the children have been completely alienated from their mother and there are enormous feelings of fear in each of the children to open themselves up to any possibility of any contact, even when they were offered any type of writing, phone or digital means of contact but it is a little uncertain what is actually causing this fearful reaction. i am concerned about [mr tyrell’s] overly positive and grandiose descriptions of how amazing his children are and how helpful he is as a parent. he appears to have little ability to reflect on any negatives in his own behaviour and how his relationship came to such a conflictual end. i clarified the question of heritage with [ms tyrell], who confirmed she was [country ag] and that she was surprised and disappointed that the children indicated that they didn’t know their heritage when they have all been involved with school projects involving their heritage and [country ag] costumes, cooking and traditions for school events. recommendations family counselling would seem near impossible with both parents having little overlap in their versions of their past relationship, their present relationship or their children’s emotional understanding and experiences. while [ms tyrell] is willing to do “anything” to be reunited with her children, her denial of the violence inflicted by her appears hard for her to admit to. [mr tyrell] is challenging to pin down on any details and prefers to be leading the conversation to his grandiose descriptions of himself as the ‘idealised parent’. he too appears to have difficulty admitting to any wrongdoing, even normal couple conflict that would be expected in a long relationship with normal life difficulties. the children would be highly traumatised to be removed from their father but if [ms tyrell’s] story is given any weight, the risk of leaving them with a highly coercive controller is potentially worse for their long-term mental health. these children have few other trusted adults in their lives that they could live with while regaining some safety in their relationship with their mother, and their father would be unlikely to allow them to have any contact with their mother. i am unsure about what could be possible for them to build up a safe level of contact, within their personal limits. while the children have a good rapport with their psychologist, it appears she may be also involved somewhat in re-enforcing the “good guy-bad guy” dynamic and less about both parents having their strengths and weaknesses to work on. dependent on the court investigations as to more of the truth within this relationship, the children will definitely need on-going skilled counselling around being able to come to terms with their parent’s relationship, the truth about their childhood and their on-going relationships with each of their parents. i am unsure as to whether i can provide such counselling as the children may have some concerns of my involvement so far with their family. i would recommend psychiatric assessments for both parents to examine their abilities to regulate their own emotions and behaviours in regards to their children’s needs. there is an obvious concern with their financial settlement and future finances being linked to custody of the children. i am unsure about how counselling at this stage will move them into a more collaborative view of the future for their children.
applicant’s opening written submissions
parenting proceedings parental responsibility whether the presumption in s61da(1) applies. the father submits the presumption in s61da(1) does not apply because: the mother has engaged in abuse of children (s61da(2)(a)) the mother has engaged in family violence (s61da(2)(b)) the father submits the court will find that there was family violence by the mother throughout the parties’ relationship. it is in the children’s best interests for the father to continue to have sole parental responsibility, as he has for the past 2 years, as a result of consent orders between the parties. the mother had a final avo made against her for a period of 6 months, which was originally taken out by police on 29th december 2019. best interests – primary considerations meaningful relationship (section 60cc(2)(a) of the family law act) the children have suffered severe trauma from the mother when she lived at home. the children are in therapy and have been for over 18 months to deal with the trauma. once the trauma has been dealt with, then contact with the mother may be appropriate, however this may be a medium to long term outcome, rather than a short one. see affidavit of [ms g] paragraph 1.3, page 22 and paragraph 5.2 page 29. if the court were to entertain a change of residence for the children and cut contact with the father, this would be significantly more traumatic and cause psychological harm that outweighs the benefits of the children having a relationship with the mother at this time. see supplementary family report paragraph 2.2.1 page 2. see affidavit of [ms g] paragraph 5.2, page 29 the need to protect the child from harm (section 60cc(2)(b) of the family law act) if the children are forced to have contact with their mother at the present time, there is a significant risk that the children will be exposed to an unacceptable risk of psychological and/or physical harm including self-harm by the children. in addition, contact would also exacerbate the trauma already suffered by the children and would be detrimental to all concerned see affidavit of [ms g] paragraph 5.2, page 30 best interests – additional considerations s60cc(3)(a) - the mother’s application is contrary to the children’s wishes. the children are currently 15 years and 11 months old (twins) and 11 years and 4 months respectively. given that the older children are nearly 16 and the youngest is nearly 12 and their maturity, their views should hold significant weight for the court. see affidavit of [ms g] paragraph 5.2, page 29, the children are currently have been very clear in their view in the wishes reports(x2) and the family report. the children are of sufficient maturity to understand the consequences of these decisions. see affidavit of [ms g] paragraph 5.1, page 29, the oldest and youngest, has indicated that they would self-harm or “kill” himself rather than see their mother, which is a significant factor that must be taken into consideration. s60cc(3)(g) see affidavit of [ms g] paragraph 4.9, page 29, paragraph 63 family report page 16, paragraph 2.12, page 24, paragraph 63 family report page 16. all the children have each expressed a strong and steadfast desire to have not contact with the mother. the father has moved away from his faith. however, he has and will continue to encourage his children to explore their own faith (given that two of the children attend private christian schools) and will continue to support the children to practicing any faith that they choose to/or not. the father has taken a mature and responsible attitude to parenting and supporting his children. he has supported the children attending therapy to address the trauma and allow them to heal, hoping this will enable them to interact in a safe and healthy way with their mother. 60cc(3)(i). s60cc(3)(j) - family violence is relevant. findings will need to be made after the evidence is concluded. the father’s contention as to parenting is summarised thus: prior to the parties’ separation, the father was the primary carer, the mother helped but not significantly. the children did not have a close, loving relationship with the mother during the relationship, they fear her. they did what they needed to do to survive. the father has not alienated the children at all. if the children are able to deal with the trauma’s suffered without stress and court proceedings, in the medium to longer term, a relationship with the mother may be salvageable. however, if the children are forced at this time, it will do irreparable damage. financial proceedings contentions as to property interests, superannuation and financial resources the property is the property of the second respondent. the husband has an equitable interest at best of 20% for the maintenance and upkeep of the property. the husband contends arises from the following: the real property is not the property of the parties and that at best the applicant holds at best a 20% equity in the property. the property is the property of the 2nd respondent (item 1) the wife made minor contributions during the relationship. it is just and equitable to make an order for property adjustment as sought by the applicant father item 7 listed in wife’s case outline should not be included as these are toys of the children, not property of the parties. item 9 listed in the wife’s case outline should not be included as these funds in the cba bank account belong to [ms b tyrell] and should not be included in the property pool. contributions the husband lived in the [d street, suburb e] property at the start of the relationship and paid rent. in consideration for a lower rent, he maintained the property over time. he has not inherited property as asserted by the wife. the wife did not make contributions to the property during the relationship. in the context of the relationship and the husband’s role prior to separation as homemaker and parent and his sole responsibility for the children post separation plus the contributions to the property, including his initial contributions. there should be an adjustment of 10% assessment applicant: 60% respondent: 40% 'future needs' the final parenting arrangements will bear significantly on any s75(2) adjustment. each party effectively seeks to be a sole caregiver. the contended adjustment is premised on the husband’s proposed parenting orders being made in his favour: the parties both are on disability pensions. whoever the children reside with, will be entitled to the family tax benefit making their wage higher. the husband is 10 years older than the wife the husband’s has significant injuries sustained and as result is unlikely to obtain full time work in the future. the wife is 10 years younger and has indicated she is going to study to be a [health care worker], making her ability to earn income is more likely than the husband. assessment applicant: 5 -10% respondent: 0% justice and equity the father contends that the property settlement is just and equitable based upon the factors set out in 75(2) and 79(4) of the family law act. further the father’s propose property settlement allows the father and the children to remain the only place that the children have called home. if the court finds that the property belongs entirely to the 2nd respondent, it would unjust for the court to make property orders sought by the mother. overall division sought applicant: 65% - 70% respondent: 30% - 35%
applicant’s oral submissions
it wasn’t a transfer, and it’s very significant because as we’ve said in our submissions, your honour, is that that constitutes a fraud which deprives [mr tyrell], the applicant, of the right to rely upon that transfer, and the authorities of [bb lawyers] we’ve referred your honour to as well as [bc lawyers] make that very clear.
the question therefore remains whether the court will allow the plaintiff to enforce the contract. the suggestion is that the court will not do so and that its refusal so to do is dictated by the principle ex turpi causa non oritur actio or by the more specific rule that the court will not enforce the contract at the suit of a party who has entered into a contract with the object of committing an illegal act. the effect of the principle ex turpi causa non oritur actio was expressed by fry l.j. in cleaver v. mutual reserve fund life association (1892) 1 qb 147, at p 156 :". . . no system of jurisprudence can with reason include amongst the rights which it enforces rights directly resulting to the person asserting them from the crime of that person. if no action can arise from fraud, it seems impossible to suppose that it can arise from felony or misdemeanour." cleaver's case (1892) 1 qb 147 was cited with approval in beresford v. royal insurance co. ltd. (1938) ac 586 where lord atkin said (1938) ac, at pp 598-599:". . . the principle is that a man is not to be allowed to have recourse to a court of justice to claim a benefit from his crime whether under a contract or a gift. no doubt the rule pays regard to the fact that to hold otherwise would in some cases offer an inducement to crime or remove a restraint to crime, and that its effect is to act as a deterrent to crime. but apart from these considerations the absolute rule is that the courts will not recognize a benefit accruing to a criminal from his crime."
first respondent’s opening written submissions
parenting proceedings parental responsibility whether the presumption in s61da(1) applies. the mother submits the presumption in s61da(1) does not apply because the mother contends the father has engaged in family violence (s61da(2)). the mother submits the court will find that there was family violence by the father over a significant period of time throughout the parties’ relationship. the parties have a non-existent and dysfunctional parenting relationship. the father has demonstrated no capacity to make proper, responsible decisions about major long term issues in the children’s best interests and it is contended it is in the children’s best interests for their mother to have sole parental responsibility. best interests – primary considerations meaningful relationship (section 60cc(2)(a) of the family law act) since living in the care of their father since 29 december 2019 the children have not had the benefit of any meaningful relationship with their mother. the only way to ensure that the children have a meaningful relationship with the mother, and it is submitted in turn have a meaningful relationship with both parents, is for the children to live with the mother and after a hiatus, maintain their relationship with the father by periods of contact. the need to protect the child from harm (section 60cc(2)(b) of the family law act) living with the father has exposed and will continue to expose the children to an unacceptable risk of harm. of primary importance in these proceedings is the need for the children to derive benefits from a meaningful relationship with both parents. that outcome can only be achieved if both parents are significantly involved in the children’s lives which objective would be scuppered if the mother continues to be eliminated from the children’s lives as has been the case to date. none of the additional considerations carry sufficient weight to outweigh the desirability of both parties having the opportunity of being meaningfully engaged in the children’s lives, which on the mother’s evidence can only be achieved through the orders sought by her. best interests – additional considerations s60cc(3)(a) - the mother concedes her application is contrary to the children’s wishes but submits little weight ought to be afforded to those wishes where the children have been alienated against her and further that even to the extent weight is afforded to those wishes, the primary and other additional considerations outweigh that particular factor. careful consideration of this factor is required given the children’s respective ages and maturity levels, and the fact that the children have not spent any time with the mother or had any relationship with her since 29 december 2019 s60cc(3)(g) – the parties practiced in the jehovah’s witness faith throughout the relationship and raised the children in this faith. the church has had a significant impact on this family. the mother’s position is that she will facilitate the children practicing any faith that they choose to, but in a way that supports healthy development and will facilitate the children becoming functioning, independent and well-rounded adults as is her evidence. s60cc(3)(i) - the attitude to parenting and responsibilities of the father, including his inability to communicate or support family therapy are illustrative of his poor attitude. even after clear recommendations are made by [ms e], this attitude has not changed. s60cc(3)(j) - family violence is relevant. findings will need to be made after the evidence is concluded. the mother’s contention as to parenting is summarised thus: prior to the parties’ separation, the mother was the children’s primary carer from birth until 29 december 2019, the children had a close and loving relationship with the mother during the relationship, including [y] sending the mother messages in december 2019 saying that he loves her, inexplicably, the children’s attitude towards the mother is now extreme and have only developed to become extremely negative following the children being in the father’s sole care since 29 december 2019, and such change was almost immediate, the father has actively and consistently taken steps to alienate the children against the mother over a period of two years. the mother has demonstrated that she will facilitate a relationship between the children and the father as she has done throughout the relationship, and in the orders that she is seeking. in addition, any concerns the court might have in that respect would be ameliorated by the fundamentally different basis from which that parenting relationship starts (ie. there is some existing positive relationship), conversely, if no order is made for the children to live with the mother immediately the consequence of that is that these children will never have any kind of relationship with their mother. financial proceedings contentions as to property interests, superannuation and financial resources the property has been valued at $1.1 million. it is unencumbered. it is understood the husband and second respondent contend it is the property of the second respondent albeit the husband asserts an equitable interest in it. the contention of the wife arises from the following: the real property is property of the parties (item 1) the funds in the bank account are or were the property of the parties (item 9) the wife made relevant contributions during the relationship, it is just and equitable to make an order for property adjustment as sought by the wife. item 6-8 – the wife contends for that property to be included as it has not been accounted for properly (or at all) by the husband item 9 – the wife asserts that lump sum withdrawal was a withdrawal of cash savings that were property of the parties and the amount has not been subsequently accounted for by the husband. contributions the husband had the [d street, suburb e] property at the start of the relationship and inherited property during the relationship, but of any inherited property, the wife made direct contributions to that property and it seems to have little or no referable asset in the balance sheet. in the context of a long relationship and if the wife’s contentions about her contributions as a homemaker and parent, and noting her direct contributions to the property of the husband’s family and their property, the initial contribution would arguably no adjustment or if any adjustment, a modest one of 0-5%, so as to render an equal assessment of contributions appropriate. assessment applicant: 45-50% respondent: 50 – 55% 'future needs' the final parenting arrangements will bear significantly on any s75(2) adjustment. each party effectively seeks to be a sole caregiver. the contended adjustment is premised on the wife’s proposed parenting orders being made. the husband has a higher earning capacity than the wife. the husband is older than the wife. adjustment (if any) applicant: 0% respondent: 10 – 20% justice and equity the wife seeks orders for an immediate partial payment from the husband and a subsequent residual payment, contemplating that the latter will likely require borrowings against or a sale of the [d street, suburb e] property. overall division sought applicant: 65% respondent: 35%
first respondent’s oral submissions
his honour: sorry. does it follow from that that because the parties – that is, the formerly married parties – had lived there as husband and wife for such a long period of time that that not only represented to the world that it was their marital residence but it adds further weight, so to speak, to the actions post-separation in trying to remove it from, as it were, that status quo circumstance and being part of the pool? ms curran: yes. yes, your honour. it’s not only that element, it is that element that they had lived there for such a long time but that coupled with [ms b tyrrell’s] acquiescence and knowledge of the treatment of the property and you will see in the written submissions at paragraph 26 i go through the timeline of not only her knowledge and support of them being in the home, treating it as their home and it, in effect, being their home to her inaction in taking any steps whatsoever to reverse the transfer of the property once that had been achieved and specifically in relation to that she knew of the contract for renovations on the property.
after that time she does nothing to put into effect a reversal of what she now says to this court and what she said to the trustee in bankruptcy was a transfer without her knowledge and consent. the missing pieces of evidence that were up to [ms b tyrell] to produce to this court is there is no evidence from [mr f], her solicitor, who was her solicitor for each of these transactions. your honour, a jones v dunkel inference ought to be applied by the failure to call [mr f] to give any evidence in relation to that, on the basis that his evidence would not have assisted her case. your honour, whilst i’m addressing you in relation to jones v dunkel, the other elements that are relevant in relation to that is there was also no evidence called by [ms b tyrell] or [mr tyrell] in relation to the bank manager at the – on the occasion of 23 december 2019. the respondent, [ms tyrell’s] solicitors, issued a subpoena to the bank to try to obtain whatever records there were but there has been no effort by those who have the – who you would expect to have called that witness to indeed have done so. your honour, [ms a tyrell] also conceded that she knew that [mr tyrell] was using the joint account and although her affidavit evidence refers to the fact that it was not a joint account, in fact, it was a joint account.
ms curran: and the power of attorney indeed. what comes of that, your honour, is we say nothing because it’s the application of the first respondent that step one is to determine the assets of the parties or either of them and the assets of the parties include number [d street, suburb e] and includes number [d street, suburb e] because it was property that was – that the second respondent either acquiesced or is estopped from doing anything in response to an application. no application was made by her is the point. there was no application made at any time despite the opportunity and the occasion to do so and the only times the second respondent had made her claim of ownership or of title to the property is (1) in seeking to defeat the trustee in bankruptcy when that application was made and (2) in seeking to ensure that the wife/mother in this application fails in her application for property division under the family law act, your honour. and other than that, despite many opportunities and many transfers of other properties, [ms b tyrell] has sat on her hands. she has done nothing. she had acquiesced in what she knows to have been the transfer of the property and even with the opportunity and capacity to have done something to make an application to change that has not done so. ... ms curran: and that goes to the enmeshing of the position as between the applicant and the second respondent in all respects and, your honour, when looking at the timing of the events, there is no doubt that there is that enmeshing. from the fact, in fact, that the enduring power of attorney that we’ve just tendered is dated 20 december 2019. it’s signed on the 24th but the date on the front of it is 20 december. that pre-dates by three days the events at the commonwealth bank on 23 december 2019 which is referred to as the catalyst for the event that caused the grandmother, mrs ms b tyrell, to the $500,000 allegation and the transfer happened on the 23rd.
second respondent’s opening written submissions
financial proceedings contentions as to property interests, superannuation and financial resources the property at [d street, suburb e] has been valued at $1.1 million. it is unencumbered. the second respondent contends that it is her property and should be excluded from the division of property between the husband and the wife. the contention of the second respondent arises from the following: the real property was in the name of the second respondent’s husband before they married and the property was to intended to pass to the second respondent after her husband’s death. the name on the certificate of title for the real property was changed without the second respondent’s knowledge or authority. the significant improvements to the real property were funded by the second respondent. the applicant and the respondent had the benefit of below market rent while living at the property. the wife made minor relevant contributions to the second respondent’s property, the funds previously held in the cba account ending ...48 are the property of the second respondent and were the proceeds of property previously held or inherited by the second respondent. the funds held in the cba account ending ...10 are the funds remaining from those previously held in the cba account ending ...48 withdrawn in contributions the husband holds the property known as [d street, suburb e] on trust for the second respondent husband. the husband made some direct contributions to the [d street, suburb e] property and other property held by the second respondent. the wife made minimal contributions to the [d street, suburb e] property and other property held by the second respondent. the second respondent provided the funds to pay out the loan for the major renovations to the [d street, suburb e] property and other debts incurred in those renovations. the second respondent contributed funds to avoid the [d street, suburb e] property being sold to satisfy the creditors of the applicant’s bankruptcy. any contributions from the husband and the wife are offset by the benefit of residing in the [d street, suburb e] property at below market rent. assessment the second respondent does not need to make an assessment of the contribution assessment between the husband and the wife the second respondent’s contributions to the [d street, suburb e] property outweigh contributions made by the husband and wife to that property and other property owned by the second respondent. future needs the second respondent does not need to make an assessment of adjustment for future needs between the husband and the wife justice and equity the second respondent does not need to outline any matters relevant to determining whether any division between the husband and the wife is just an equitable however, it would not be just an equitable for property that belongs to the second respondent to be divided between the husband and wife. the second respondent does not need to make an assessment of the overall adjustment between the husband and the wife. the second respondent is seeking that the [d street, suburb e] property and the funds held in the cba account ending ...48 be declared to be the property of the second respondent to the exclusion of the husband and the wife
second respondent’s oral submissions
his honour: two things, mr fitzgerald. would you accept – sorry, those who don’t have their microphone on mute, such as mr thomas, could they be put on mute just for the moment because otherwise i’m getting feedback and so forth here. so, mr fitzgerald, regarding that account, what, if anything, turns on the fact that the applicant and the first respondent, it would seem, basically for the duration of their married life together not only lived in the residence as obviously husband and wife, family, etcetera, with the acquiescence at least of the second respondent, but in relation to the account, that they basically had their own drawing rights on funds, and it was only just when it went pear-shaped in december 2019, to mix metaphors, you know, that the tap was turned off for [ms tyrell]? mr fitzgerald: i think i made the point in my submissions that i think the largesse of the second respondent, if i can put it that way, is not sufficient to convert the funds in that account into matrimonial assets or joint assets or family assets, whichever way you wanted to put it. i agree that they – that the applicant and the respondents did have quite a deal of access to that account. i think it was perhaps somewhat more than the second respondent perhaps realised, but i don’t think i can take it further than that. his honour: right. would you also accept that – this is apropos your submission that following probate being granted, etcetera, and properties being transferred pursuant to the will of [mr aj]. i’m not asking you to give any evidence from the bar table, but would you accept that it would be standard, ordinary, proper practice that a transfer of property pursuant to a grant of probate under the will – it would be astonishingly rare – some other words could be added – for those dispositions not to be completed in terms of transfers rather than just sort of leaving them, effectively, in limbo, such as, you know, “we just didn’t get around to correcting the transfer,” or whatever it is? and – sorry. and the second part to that same question is nobody called [mr f]. mr fitzgerald: no. can i take the second part first. his honour: sure. mr fitzgerald: i think the – again, my understanding is the files were requested. i think the email was from ms wearne yesterday that ms curran referred to that said those files were incomplete from some time ago. i think the documents of relevance that have been obtained from [mr f] were included in the applicant’s tender bundle. i accept that it would have been better to call [mr f] to give evidence perhaps as to whether there was or not anything further. in relation to the first part of the question, yes, i would accept that it would be the best thing to make all of those dispositions and to do all of that work in transferring the titles at the one time, but, obviously, that wasn’t done, and, as i said before, it seemed to be only done when it became a matter of necessity, and it was really rather haphazard, one would have to say. his honour: delicately put, mr fitzgerald. just going back to the email because i haven’t seen it. i’ve been told about it, as you say that ms curran referred to it and you’ve referred to it. so this was some email that came in yesterday, was it, from ms wearne? were the documents from [mr f] or his firm – were they sought pursuant to a notice to produce or a subpoena, or was it just a request? mr fitzgerald: i believe it was just a request.
ms curran: your honour, might i make a submission in relation to that course. his honour: yes. ms curran: the email which i’m reading before me says: we made inquiries to [f lawyers] in relation to the files they held and requested under authority from [ms tyrell] senior prior to her being adjoined to these proceedings for the files relating to the estate of [ms s] and [mr tyrell] as well as the conveyancing files. [f lawyers] provided us some documents in relation to the estates for both [ms s] and [mr tyrell]. we were advised that there were no records available for the conveyance. we were also provided with a copy of the records relating to the bankruptcy. this file contained some records relating to the sale of the [town l] property. as well, as we obtained the records, we did not see the need to apply for a subpoena. the points that i make are there was a duty of disclosure that has not been complied with. we have no idea the extent of the records, and, most importantly, [mr f] was not called. so we have the possibility of some partial records that might be produced after the close of evidence, and it seems to me the prejudice to the respondent in being able in any way to respond to that in a meaningful way other than to say they should have been produced – they were required under the wills to be produced, and the jones & dunkel inference looms large through the failure to call [mr f]. i hear what your honour says about what one might do if they are produced, but they are partial records, and the prejudice to us in relation to further evidence coming in at this time seems to be significant. his honour: in addition to those submissions, again, by way of observation only, my concerns are heightened when you tell me from the email that they were requested before the grandmother gave evidence. like, respectfully, what the heck was going on? so should i be making any other directions other than a “request” that ms wearne provide the documents and copies of correspondence passing between ms wearne and [mr f]? i mean, we don’t – like, why a subpoena was not issued i don’t know, so as to keep it on a more formal footing. i mean, yes, it’s late in the day, and i accept the concerns that have been expressed about possible prejudice one way or the other, but the usual story, order and method, proper process, is invariably the best course rather than, “look, i just sent a note across, but we’re just finding out this yesterday and today.” ms curran: and i’m loath to say it, of course, your honour, but aon risk v anu and compliance with the proper practice and process and the obligations of full and [mr tyrell] disclosure and the cost that has been put to the respondent in trying to meet a case that has never been particularised and pleaded is extraordinary, and it’s extraordinary to be receiving this information the day before a trial when it was clearly within the knowledge of one of the solicitors on the record. his honour: troubling, could i suggest. what i propose doing is simply this: making a direction for ms wearne to provide to the court the documents – all documents she received from [mr f]/his firm and copies of the correspondence passing between the lawyers seeking that information and its production, and that’s to be provided by 12 noon on 20 may. to the degree – again, this is really just more abundant caution. it’s not, again, done in any pressured or otherwise way. but i would be proposing to reserve everyone’s costs just on this separate aspect of the production of documents even though it’s an informal production of documents. and should it be necessary, any and all of the lawyers who are involved in this proceeding, as soon as those documents are available, may inspect and copy them. i don’t expect, but there might be – no one knows – i don’t expect there to be any claim for privilege, seeing that it was meant to be just, one would assume, a straightforward probate/conveyance, but who knows. was there anything further that anyone wished to say either on this discrete aspect or in response to the submissions of mr fitzgerald? ms curran: your honour, in relation to this discrete aspect, i just reserve our position in relation to an application. the case has closed ‑ ‑ ‑
ms curran: just in relation to – there were just two points i wanted to make, and i can’t find my notes, but they were that, first of all, if there was a previous will, it was never produced. so any inconsistency between the evidence of [ms tyrell] senior in the witness box and her evidence in her affidavit, which refers to preparing a new will after the separation incident, was entirely within her control to produce the previous will in support of any orders that your honour might make. ... mr fitzgerald: ‑ ‑ ‑ my understanding was that the request was for a copy of the will that [ms b tyrell] made in december 2019. ... mr fitzgerald: yes. thanks. yes. and i did request that before i went on leave for about 10 days and returned on tuesday, so i’m sorry about the lateness of it. i didn’t receive it before i went on leave. ... ms burgess: we were all copied in to the request, and then we see that the will would, presumably, have actually been in the possession of ms wearne for long, and she did not respond to mr fitzgerald saying, “hey, it’s cool. i wrote it. i’ve got a copy of it.” that’s the concern there.
independent children’s lawyer’s opening written submissions
parenting proceedings parental responsibility shared parental responsibility is not a practical option in this matter. there should, however, be a requirement for the residential parent to send regular (at least each term) information to the other parent including details about the children’s progress, extracurricular activities, and health. best interests – primary considerations meaningful relationship (section 60cc(2)(a) of the family law act) the children have had no relationship with the mother since december 2019. at best, the father has done nothing to provide for the children to have a relationship with her, at worst, he has actively poisoned the children against her. [mr t] considers it to be parental alienation. the member of the jw church supporting the mother post separation encouraged the mother to give up on having a relationship with the children. [ms e] says that the children living with their father perpetuates the breakdown of the relationship with her [sup report 2.3.1]. her view is that the children may need future psychological assistance to deal with the damaged relationship. however, she is also of the view that the age of the children means that any attempt to re-establish a relationship by court order is doomed to failure. the need to protect the child from harm (section 60cc(2)(b) of the family law act) the father alleges the mother was easily angered and would kick the children, choke them, and hit them with a “hitting stick” but provides no real particularity of his allegations. although he alleges on-going violence by the mother to the children but apparently took no action to prevent. the mother denies violence against the chldren the mother alleges the father physically disciplined the children, hitting them on the legs or bottom with his hand or utensils. the father denies. the mother alleges inappropriate behaviour by the father by showering with the children beyond early childhood. there is also a veiled suggestion of something inappropriate about the trips to the ‘workshop’. the mother alleges belittling of the children for their appearance and absence of privacy for the children. in not having time with the mother, the children are protected form any physical harm she represents, but are totally unprotected from any harm occasioned by the father. the greatest harm to the children is most likely the loss of a parent. it is the icl’s view that this harm cannot now be ameliorated by the court. the children are completely aligned with their father and have been from the time of separation. the father has, most likely, contributed greatly to this harm by, at best, making no attempt to encourage the children to know their mother, and, at worst, by exposing the children to his perspective and actively keeping the children from their mother. the mother has contributed to the harm, at worst by behaving badly towards or in front of the children, at best, by being, herself a person disempowered by the father and by her own church. best interests – additional considerations views of the children the children have clearly and consistently expressed a view that they do not wish to see the mother. following a ‘break’ recommended by [ms g], the children were left only with the father’s side of the dispute and consolidated their view of the mother. whilst the views of the children are likely to be influenced by the father the twins are now 16, which makes it difficult to ignore their views. [z] is only 11 years old and, with the right supports in place, and a positive attitude from the father, may be able to develop an alternative viewpoint. capacity of the parents each of the parents – effectively – claims he or she did most of the parenting and care of the children and the other parent did very little. the father has had a diagnosis of depression and anxiety but apparently ceased attendance on the pychologist. given his portrayal of himself and the mother, to [ms e] [para 68] it is questionable whether he has some issues or simply lacks all insight. the mother has a report from [mr t]. she has undertaken therapy from july 2020 to the present for supportive counselling and to assist her emotional self-regulation. [mr t] does not see the mother’s mental health as impacting significantly on her ability to parent the children. [mr t] says mother’s story is consistent with alienation of the children by the father. the mother alleges poor role modelling by the father due to him: - shop lifting - steals creatures, - kills cats. - exposing12 year old [mr ak] [mother’s younger brother] to porn - disputes with neighbours including poisoning their roses the father alleges inappropriate behaviour by the father at the time of the affair with [mr m] by her dress and graphic statements about sex with [mr m]. attitudes the father lacks insight into the impact on the children of the loss of their relationship with their mother. he takes no responsibility for that relationship. his view of the breakdown of the marriage is that he did nothing wrong & the mother was totally at fault. family violence the mother alleges ongoing sexual assault by the father from 2011. she alleges being given unknown pills and being pressured to abort a pregnancy. she alleges belittling and control of her movements. she alleges being forced to shower with the father and to share his toothbrush the father alleges ongoing family violence – physical and verbal – by the mother towards him and the children. cultural issues the mother is ethnically [country ag]. she claims the father prevented her from sharing her language with the children. the father claims the mother refused to teach them. both claim the other parent’s opposition was based on [country ag] being gypsies. nothing of significance turns on this. further proceedings if the court makes orders forcing the children to spend time with the mother further proceedings are likely.
icl submissions for 13 may 2022 parental responsibility espr is not likely to be practical in this matter. spr should lie with the parent with whom the children live. sharing of information should be required and the orders should specifically authorise schools to provide information. protection of the children the father strongly asserts that the children were violently abused by the mother: physically and verbally. he alleges bruising on a highly frequent basis. the mother adamantly denies any physical punishment whatsoever. it is the icl view that neither parent is entirely credible. the mother was under considerable strain home schooling 2 of the children for a number of years, with a toddler underfoot. the father appears to have been present much of that time – but it is evident that the primary responsibility for teaching fell to the mother. it is probable that some of the actions of which the children complain did in fact happen. the likelihood is low that the mother’s behaviour was as frequent or as severe as the father claims. [he says ‘there was never not violence’] the children attended schools from about 2016: the twins would have been turning 10 that year, z was beginning school. the mother has provided the court with a letter from the school describing the mother in very positive terms as a parent. it is not conceivable that in the 3 years of school attendance prior to separation the school did not raise serious concerns if the father’s claims are accurate. if the children, or any of them, lived or spent time with the mother it is not likely that there would be a pattern of continued physical abuse even if it occurred in the past. the children are so much older and better able to self-report. the children are not without risk in their father’s care. the mother makes allegations in relation to his behaviour (the children do not report any such) but there is also “a vibe” of oddity in the father’s parenting. his belief that the children are somehow exceptional in the face of objective contrary evidence is concerning. how will he address their needs if he is blind to them? there are other oddities around the issues of glass bedroom doors and co-bathing with the children wearing some form of underpants. there is no evidence of inappropriate sexual behaviour, and the mother makes no such claim but it may point to a lack of boundaries in the father’s relationship with the children. a lack of boundaries arises in other contexts. he has almost certainly told the children things about the mother and about their relationship that should not have been shared with them. he talked about anal sex in a parent-teacher interview. he acknowledges referring to his daughter as “hot” when talking to [school ab] students. he has no real insight into the impact of his views on the children, or the impact of them not having a relationship with their mother. relationships the children have had no relationship with their mother since december 2019. the father has done nothing to facilitate a relationship with the mother despite claiming the children love her in his oral evidence. in oral evidence he reiterates suggesting to the children that they send their mother a card. that is the apparent extent of his encouragement. if the children remain living with their father it is likely they will never repair the relationship. [ms e] says living with the father perpetuates the breakdown of the relationship. [sup report 2.3.1]. capacity there are question marks over the father’s capacity as a parent: - his unrealistic assessment of them, - his unquestioning reliance on other people (gp, psychologist, lawyer) to tell him what he should do to assist his children, - his inability to shield the children from his emotions and views – taking the children past [mr m’s] house, letting the children know things about [mr m], - his inability to protect them if indeed they were being physically hurt by their mother (he says he stepped in front of them but he could not break the stick she used to hit them because he needed it to scratch his back). - his exposure of the children to information they should have been protected from eg [x] told [ms g] “she got [z] and me to steal for her and now she’s blaming dad” – something that must have come from the mother’s affidavit but the father denies showing it to her. - bizarrely he claims to have never told the children their mother was not going to return to the family home or that the relationship was over. he seemed nonplussed at the idea there would be any need to have that conversation. future orders the mother asks for orders that the children live with her. [ms e] says such action would be doomed to failure. this is very likely accurate – particularly in relation to [x] and [y] who will be 16 years old this month. [z], however, is only 11 years old and according to the report, is quite an immature child. if he is ordered to live with his mother it may not be doomed to failure, especially without the influence of his older siblings. [z] attends a different school to those of his siblings and this may assist in him settling into a life with his mother. the father would need to be restrained from moving [y] to [z’s] school to avoid that influence. the icl tentatively supports such an experiment subject to further evidence from [ms e] as to whether such an attempt would be damaging to [z]. if [z] were successfully reunited with his mother, he may become the bridge between the mother and the other children. a relationship with both parents is likely to be in the interests of all the children.
independent children’s lawyer’s oral submissions
ms burgess: i thought in addition to the written submissions i would briefly look at the issue of credibility as that has been addressed as a specific issue in this matter. it’s my submission that the credibility of both parents is less than perfect. [ms e] indicated that both parents had presented themselves as unrealistically better than they were and the other parent as unrealistically worse than they were. so they both have some issues there. i think it’s unlikely that the mother has never used any form of physical punishment or discipline or assault on the children, especially in circumstances where she was attempting to home school them. however, the father has a whole litany of behaviours that make him entirely untrustworthy in terms of truth. he has loan applications. he has false – a false declaration transferring a house into his name. he has his undeniably incorrect claims about the competency of the children to various people. he makes fairly wild allegations about the mother’s promiscuity, yet only two examples are ever given, and one of them is denied, and i’m not sure if affairs and promiscuity are the same thing, but i’m no expert in these matters. he has his honour: very delicate, ms burgess. ms burgess: yes. he wants this court to believe that the mother was such a feral, abusive woman, that the violence was every day and there were bruises, and yet no one at school saw this. just because they were very good at putting on a show, it just doesn’t gel. he’s not believable in this respect. the – i agree with mr thomas. the protection of the children is the most important role of the court. we’re dealing with a situation where the allegation is that the risk of the mother was violence. given the ages of the children, this is unlikely to be a problem into the future, and it also has to be taken with the grain of salt that comes with the father, as was discussed with [ms e], having the ability to believe a narrative and report a narrative which is patently incorrect in relation to other things, so why not in relation to this violence. but whether or not a degree of violence occurred – and i’m not condoning violence – but whether or not it occurred, the chances of it occurring into the future are slim. the flipside of that is the risk of the children in the home of the father. i take some issue with the categorisation of the limitations on the father’s parenting as being mere mistakes. the risks – some of the risks to the children in the care of the father come from the father’s innate deficiencies. he does not have the wherewithal to support their educational needs nor even to recognise those needs. that must put them at some risk at least of believing things about themselves that are going to cause them to be seriously disappointed later in life. that’s not a mistake. it’s an incapacity. sorry. i’m trying to look at the court and to read my notes at the same time, so i’m his honour: no, no, you don’t have to look at me. please, whatever’s easiest for you, ms burgess. ms burgess: the other problems with his parenting are the issues about boundaries. it is not a mistake to describe your daughter as hot to a bunch of boys and think it’s hilarious. that is a mindset. you don’t – we can all make – well, i can accidentally make an inappropriate joke. that is a lot more than an inappropriate joke. that is an attitude of objectification about his own daughter and a belief or an assumption that other people will be as intrinsically amused by his enormous wit. it is not just a mistake that people have found him to be inappropriately sexual in the content of his conversations. it’s, again, a mindset. it is the person he is, that he does not have these boundaries, that he saw nothing wrong with glass doors on his children’s bedrooms, that he saw nothing wrong with his children learning about anal sex from another child in a classroom, but his horror is that his child might be forced to sit next to a loser or a retard. the audacity of that attitude to someone with a disability is mind-boggling. i know that i have said in my submissions that there’s a vibe of oddity in this matter, and there is. there’s this miasma of inappropriateness that doesn’t go so far as sexual interference with children, but we have [x], who’s obviously parentified. she’s the one [z] is dependent on. we have these vague reports of [z] kissing her father. we have an allegation of the father mistakenly thinking that [x] was the mother when they were all in bed together. these things are all explainable. they can fall into the “this could be a mistake that lots of people could make” category, but the miasma around it is of someone who does not know how to parent appropriately, who does not have insight into the impact of his own behaviours on his children and their development, and the largest risk with the children in this regard is the attitude of the father to the mother. it is blatantly evident that the father has had more influence on the children than he is willing to admit. the – [x] has made statements to professionals that she could not have known the content of without it coming from the father. the father’s explanation of how [x] came to be aware of her mother’s abortion is ridiculous. a curette is not an abortion. women have curettes for a variety of reasons, one of which may be an abortion. but the child knows her mother had an abortion, and it would be impossible to believe that a woman would tell her child that. there is nothing in the presentation of the mother that would indicate she was so lacking in personable boundaries that she would want to share information of that kind. when ms curran was taking [ms e] through the details of the boundary issues, it was – [ms e’s] increasing concern about the father was quite evident to the court, if not always in words. [ms e] is very concerned about the impact there would be on [z] of being separated from his father and siblings. the idea, however, is not that this would be a permanent separation. there is no proposal to cut the father and the siblings out of [z’s] life. the flipside is that the mother is, has been and will be into the future cut out of the children’s lives. so when we’re comparing these two risks, the lesser risk is probably leaving [z] with his mother with a hiatus so that he settles in and is not unduly influenced by his father or by his siblings. that doesn’t mean they’re separated forever. his honour: can i ask this, ms burgess. if the court goes down the road of [z] moving in with his mother – and there’s been no – and no contact between [z] and his dad, would there or should there be provision for [z] if he so wished to contact any of his siblings? ms burgess: it is – i think it’s probably too difficult in the interim, that [x] in particular is so aligned with her father that you could not be confident that the same influence would not be brought to bear on [z]. his honour: i see. ms burgess: y is probably less of a concern. his honour: right. thank you. ms burgess: i keep coming back to the failure of the father to protect the children from what he says occurred. i notice that mr thomas’ questions, i think, to [ms e] were – or perhaps [ms t] – [mr t], i can’t recall, were about the impact of religion on the kinds of decisions that people make, presumably including, you know, staying in a particularly unsavoury environment because of religious beliefs. the problem with that is the father is not devout and makes no claim to be devout. in his written material, he indicated that he stopped attending church or whatever service they have quite a number of years ago. and in his oral evidence, he did not attest to being particularly strong in relation to his religion. so it seems unlikely that some deeply held religious belief in the sanctity of marriage or something of that nature – that’s a kind of catholic terminology, i guess, but it’s the only terminology i know – would cause him to stay and keep his children in a dangerous situation for the sake of religion. it’s just – there isn’t the evidence that that would occur. i take mr thomas’ point – he apparently has the transcript – that [mr tyrell] did at some point say that the mother would just use something else if he destroyed the back scratcher. however, i do note that that was not his initial response. his initial response was about his needs over and above those of the children, and i think that is consistent with his presentation all along. his upset about his wife’s behaviour, his upset about his wife’s leaving, are much more important than the impact of anything on the children. it fits in with his – it is absolutely bizarre that at the point of separation, the only parent who was having any communication with the children fails to tell them what’s happening. i can only assume that [mr tyrell] thought that he wasn’t meant to tell them what was happening, so, therefore, he’s going to say that he didn’t tell them what was happening, but you can’t have three children in the family home with you and their mother has just vanished, taken away by police, and you don’t have any conversation about it with them. this is not believable. i was hoping that [ms e] would see [z] as a bridge to the other children starting to have a relationship with their mother, but she clearly thought that was an overly pollyanna conception of the world. she is unable to say whether we should do this thing of moving [z]. his honour: she did agree, though – sorry, but she did agree, though, that – this was in response to my question earlier on – that the analogy that i used was radical surgery, and she agreed there was that, and then she used the analogy of, “everyone is between the devil and the deep blue sea.” so ms burgess: yes, a rock and a hard place, the least worst of choices. his honour: yes. ms burgess: and it is the father who has put us into the position of having to make the least-worst choice. he didn’t have to excise the children’s mother from their life. he chose to do so for whatever reason, whether that was on someone’s advice or his own druthers, although it’s hard to tell what he actually wanted at the time, so perhaps it was all on advice. i don’t think that moving the older children would be useful or successful. they are simply too old. you can’t lock them up in the bedroom until they get over their hump with their mother. and if all three children went with their mother under force of orders, then the chances are that all three children would disembark from that ship within a few hours. so if you send all three children, you definitely lose [z] as well, but if only [z] is moved, there is a chance that [z] will settle in and have a relationship with his mother, and that’s all i can advocate at this point, that a chance should be given for [z] to have two parents, not just one fairly inadequate parent. he might have two inadequate parents, but at least there’s some chance of your needs being met between the two of them. i don’t know if there’s anything further i can really say unless your honour has further questions.
supplementary written submissions on behalf of the first respondent
second respondent's knowledge of the circumstances regarding the change of name the second respondent deposes that she did not "properly understand how or why" the change of name was lodged resulting in the property at [d street, suburb e] ("the [d street, suburb e] property") being in the applicant's name. she also deposes that the bank "might have made a mistake on the deed for the [d street, suburb e] property." her oral evidence was vague (t69-71). this is contrary to the evidence now available and raises real doubt as to her credit and truthfulness. the second respondent's sworn evidence as to her lack of knowledge regarding the change of ownership is contrary to the evidence now available, and arguably misleading. in letters dated 7 april 2014 (1) and 22 april 2014 (2), [mr f] provided unequivocal advice about the change of name, advising the second respondent of the history of the transfer. [mr f] provided advice as to her options and capacity to seek to reverse the transfer of title. there is also reference in letter dated 11 august 2015 to "my letters to you of 18 may and 20 july 2015" noting an "absence of further instructions" and noting he was "happy to assist" in respect of the issue of the property remaining in [mr tyrell’s] name. the letters of 18 may 2015 and 20 july 2015 still have not been produced. the second respondent's evidence that she did not understand why the [d street, suburb e] property was in the applicant's name should be rejected. failure to remedy the ownership issue the second respondent deposes that she asked [mr f] "a number of different times at different times to transfer the [d street, suburb e] property back into [my] name, but it was not done". her oral evidence was vague but asserted in effect that the lawyer made a mistake (t65 and t70). that is not supported by the [mr f] file at all. in fact, the contrary. [mr f] repeatedly gave advice about how to remedy the ownership issue, which was not followed. he sought instructions to do so, which were not provided. there were at least three occasions when [ms b tyrell] was prompted to remedy the ownership issue. the first was when her late husband died. in the letter from [mr f] to the trustee in bankruptcy dated 3 april 2014 (3), [mr f] says "we did not receive instructions to transfer the title to either [d(2)] or [d street, suburb e] into [ms tyrell's] name as part of our involvement in her late husband's probate." implicitly, [mr f] had provided that option at that time. the second respondent did not ask him to transfer the [d street, suburb e] property "back into her name" then. the second such occasion arose during the bankruptcy proceedings when the second respondent became aware of the [d street, suburb e] property being held in the applicant's name and [mr f] advised the second respondent to have it transferred. the second respondent did not ask him to transfer the [d street, suburb e] property "back into her name" then either. the third occasion was following the conclusion of the bankruptcy proceedings. in the letters from [mr f] to the second respondent identified in paragraph 3 above, [mr f] again advised the second respondent of the option to seek to alter the transfer, saying, "your [d street] property is still in [mr tyrell's] name and that should be changed. i would be happy to assist you with that if you require." again, she did nothing to alter the title. the second respondent has failed to produce any evidence in support of her assertions that she made several requests to [mr f] to transfer the [d street, suburb e] property into her name. there is no correspondence in the [mr f] file to support those assertions. her evidence about that material fact should be rejected. the second respondent's inaction is evidence that she, like the applicant, considered and considers the [d street, suburb e] property to be the property of the applicant. the only event that has motivated the second respondent to seek to claim the property as her own was her desire to defeat the claim of the respondent for a just and equitable property settlement as between the husband and wife, after the parties had separated. significance by reason of her own conduct the second respondent should be estopped from seeking the relief she seeks, the basis of which was never properly particularised. alternatively the respondent argues the invocation of the doctrine of laches, where the second respondent has inexcusably and inexplicably delayed in asserting her rights, notwithstanding the occasions set out above. these matters support the dismissal of the second respondent's application. the respondent's case is even more compelling with the deliberate non-disclosure of relevant material by the solicitor, now produced after the evidence in the trial has concluded, which raises serious issues as to the credit and credibility of the second respondent. non-disclosure until the [mr f] file was produced, the respondent submitted the court ought draw an inference from the second respondent's unexplained failure to call evidence from [mr f], that the evidence would not have assisted the second respondent's case. the [mr f] file was produced to falcon legal under cover of letter dated 20 august 2021. ms wearne deposes that she received it on 9 september 2021. the applicant's affidavit in relation to property matters and the second respondent's affidavit were both prepared by ms wearne and both filed on 14 september 2021. both swear evidence that is directly contradicted by the [mr f] file (as outlined, in respect of the second respondent, above). adverse findings should be made arising from the non-production of the [mr f] file. it is plainly relevant. any assertion that it is not relevant is, with due respect, blatantly incorrect. any privilege was clearly and repeatedly waived from an early stage. the documents had to be disclosed. they were not. if the court had not queried whether documents from [mr f] would be produced, via subpoena, the respondent still wouldn't know the [mr f] file had ever been in the possession of the applicant. the [mr f] file is adverse to the case of the applicant and later the second respondent that the [d street, suburb e] property ought to be excluded from the matrimonial pool of assets available for division. that is no longer a matter of inference. costs separately to anything else the respondent seeks an order for costs for the work done by her solicitors dealing with the production of the [mr f] file. had the documents been produced when they were required to be produced, all this work would have formed part of the trial, such that these costs are incurred unnecessarily (relying in particular on s117(2a)(c) as to conduct). alternatively, it is conceded that any (or all) costs applications might be more conveniently dealt with together after judgment.
supplementary written submissions in reply on behalf of the applicant and second respondent
submissions in response to first respondent submissions dated 3 june 2022 these submissions are in response to the first respondent submissions dated 3 june 2022 concerning the [mr f] file. second respondent’s knowledge of the circumstances regarding the change of name the first respondent challenges the evidence of the second respondent as to her knowledge of the circumstances regarding the change of name, in particular: her deposition that hat she did not properly understand how or why the change of name was lodged, her deposition that the bank might have made a mistake on the deed for the [d street, suburb e] property, her oral evidence was vague, her evidence is contrary to the evidence now available and raises real doubt as to her credit and truthfulness, and her sworn evidence as to her lack of knowledge regarding the change of ownership is contrary to the evidence now available and is arguably misleading, the submissions of the first respondent imply that the second respondent’s evidence was that she had no knowledge at all of the “change of ownership”. this is misleading. firstly, as per the previous submissions on behalf of the second respondent, the change of name does not effect a “change of ownership”. secondly, [ms b tyrell] became aware of the change of name at the time of the bankruptcy proceedings. this was clearly stated in paragraph 12 of her affidavit of 6 october 2021. she referred to the letter from [mr f] of 11 august 2015 and a copy of that letter was attached to her affidavit ( 3) she was cross examined by counsel for the respondent concerning that letter. she also acknowledged that she knew it was done around the time a loan was arranged for the renovations to the [d street, suburb e] property. the fact that [ms b tyrell] was sent correspondence from [mr f] in the context of the bankruptcy proceedings is not inconsistent with her deposition that she did not “properly” understand how or why the change of name was lodged. that assumes a number of things. firstly, that she received all of the correspondence. secondly, that she read it, or it was read to her. thirdly, that she actually understood it. even if all of those things are accepted, it is still not inconsistent with [ms b tyrell], not properly understanding how or why the change of name was made. in her oral evidence, she said that the [d street, suburb e] property was “in her name”. and her deposition that the bank might have made a mistake clearly indicates that she did not have a clear understanding of what had been done. [ms b tyrell] was incorrect in relation to these and some other matters but that does not necessarily mean that she was untruthful. [ms b tyrell’s] evidence was vague on occasions. that does not necessarily raise doubt as to her credit or truthfulness. allowances should be made for her age and english as a second language. the second respondent appeared to be giving evidence to the best of her ability. there was confusion at times because of her hearing and the conduct of the cross examination with the second respondent via avl and the interpreter by separate telephone link. the interpreter also stated that it was “not very easy to get her answers 100% correctly.” failure to remedy the ownership issue [ms b tyrell] stated in her affidavit of 6 october 2021 that she had asked [mr f] on a number of occasions to have the [d street, suburb e] property reinstated in her name, the last occasion being “last year” that is, 2020. in her evidence, [ms b tyrell] said that she was calling him ([mr f]) and that it “must have been in the twenties”. the submission is that the evidence of requests is not supported by the file. there could be a number of reasons for this. files are not always complete. letters and other documents can go missing. telephone messages do not always find their way into a file. file notes do not always record everything that is said. it appears that at least some requests were made after the last correspondence in the [mr f] file. the respondent’s submission is that, because the second respondent did not act to have the [d street, suburb e] property reinstated in her name, it is evidence that she considered that property to be the property of the applicant. firstly, the second respondent maintained that she did make requests for the property to be reinstated. secondly, the letter of 22 april 2014, notes that, at that time, the second respondent was reluctant to expose the applicant to criminal prosecution. thirdly, the transfer of other properties into the name of the second respondent, namely the properties at [al street, town l] and [town j], should be considered. those properties were not transferred shortly after the grant of probate for the estate of [mr k]. those transfers were only done when it became necessary to do so because of the sale of those properties. significance & non-disclosure the letters in the first respondent’s “[mr f] tender bundle” from [mr am] dated 11 august 2015, (tender document 4), and 2 september 2015, (tender document 5), were attachments 3 and 8, respectively to the affidavit of [ms b tyrell] of 6 october 2021. the letter in the “mr f tender bundle” from [mr am] to afsa dated 3 april 2014, (tender document 3), was included in attachment 0032 in the affidavit of [mr tyrell] sworn 8 april 2022. in relation to tender documents 1 and 2, the first respondent submits that these letters demonstrate that the second respondent was not being truthful when she stated that she did not properly understand how or why the change of name came about. as submitted above, the second respondent had already acknowledged some understanding as to how and when the change of name came about but not a proper or complete understanding. the first respondent’s submissions also include the following at paragraph 15: ”both ([mr tyrell] and [ms b tyrell]) swear evidence that is directly contradicted by the [mr f] file (as outlined, in respect of the second respondent, above).” that submission is misleading given the contents of paragraph 6 above. the submissions seek to rely on the doctrine of estoppel, or alternatively, the doctrine of laches. the second respondent should not be estopped from asserting her right to the [d street, suburb e] property. even if it is accepted that she did not take action concerning the [d street, suburb e] property, it is not clear why she should be estopped. she did not, for example, allow another, presumably the first respondent, to act to her detriment as a result of the inaction. in relation to laches, it is not clear, why the first respondent, or the applicant, should be permitted to benefit from the alleged lack of action. further, it is not clear why the second respondent, or the applicant, should be permitted to benefit from the invalid change of name. other the submissions of the first respondent still do not address the fact that the change of name was not a valid transfer, or a transfer at all, of the [d street, suburb e] property into the name of the applicant. even if it was a transfer, it was invalid because it relied on a false statutory declaration which was patently incorrect and illegal. costs three of the five letters in the [mr f] tender bundle had been produced to the first respondent. the remaining letters do not contradict the second respondent’s evidence for the reasons given above and any orders concerning costs should take into account those matters. it is conceded that any (or all) costs applications might be more conveniently dealt with together after judgment
outline of principle - parenting
... maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents, obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement having been incurred.
... it must not be assumed that one parent (the father) cannot move and that the mother must, in every case, subordinate her ambitions and wishes, not to the needs of the child, but to the wishes of the father to pursue his life in a place of his choosing. it is the interests of the child which are paramount, not the interests or needs of the parents, let alone the interests of one of them.  4] the problems that family law legislation deals with are human problems: with all their attendant variety and complexity. and at the end of a court proceeding under such legislation, a judge must make an order - usually an order that says yes or no to some application. "[a] complicated mass of human experience has to be reduced to the simplest possible terms." because the problems are human problems, because they are as varied and complicated as they are, the legislature speaks in terms more often found in statements of aspiration than legal prescription. it is, then, hardly surprising that the guiding principles prescribed by the legislation for application in cases concerning the guardianship or custody of children or related issues, are principles that seldom, if ever, permit syllogistic reasoning. [205] further, when considering the reasons given by a judge who has made an order in an application about the guardianship or custody of children, it is necessary to bear steadily in mind that the judge must grapple with the chaotic complexity of real life, make predictions not only of what he or she concludes may happen in future but also of what will be "best" for the child, and do so having regard to what the parties have chosen to contest or emphasise in the course of the hearing.
on the one hand, the appellate court is obliged to “give the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first instance.” on the other, it must, of necessity, observe the “natural limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on the record. these limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the “feeling” of a case which an appellate court, reading the transcript, cannot always fully share. furthermore, the appellate court does not typically get taken to, or read, all of the evidence taken at the trial. commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the obligation at trial to receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence and to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.   the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))  ] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s 60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.  ] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.  ] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):  6] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.  ] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
i am conscious that a long-distance relationship, with longer but less frequent times spent together, is inevitably different from a relationship where people live closer together with regular face-to-face contact. but it does not itself mean it cannot be meaningful.
we also observe that in champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 the full court (thackray, o’ryan & benjamin jj) observed at [103]:
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994.) (emphasis in original)
the full court also observed at [191]: “the first and very important observation we would make about this complaint is that the expression ‘meaningful relationship’ is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’ ”.  7] for our part, we echo the view expressed by the trial judge of the serious nature of depriving the father of contact in circumstances where that appears to have been engineered by the mother, without any fault on the part of the father at all. this cannot be in a child's best interests. [178] it also does not appear to us to be appropriate for a parent to be able to manipulate the family law system to such an extent that the other parent's hope of ever seeing the child again, rests upon the possibility that she may wish to seek him out in later adolescence or adulthood. [179] we think that a family court would not be doing its duty if it were to simply give in to these sorts of considerations, except in the most extreme case and only then, when a positive determination is made that the welfare of the child requires it.
given the overriding consideration of the welfare of the child, the court must consider the conduct of the parents, not with a view to rewarding one or punishing the other, but to ascertain from such conduct whether the welfare of the child will be better served in the custody of one or the other.
consideration and disposition – parenting
outline of principle - property ] section 79 demands a consideration, separately, of all of its requirements without conflation. provided a trial judge has done so, and the reasons demonstrate that this has been done, no error is demonstrated by a failure to follow a particular order in doing so. further, the breadth and depth of the consideration of the s.79(2) issue, and the extent of an adequate exposition of it in the reasons, will vary from case to case. in that respect, the plurality in bevan said, at [82], that the separate s.79(2) issue will, “...in many cases ... [be] ... effectively answered in the affirmative by the way the parties present their cases.” [20] each of those conclusions conforms entirely with what was said about those issues by the high court in stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52, (2012) 247 clr 108. [21] first, it is “...not possible to chart [the] metes and bounds” of the relevant discretion. just as importantly, it was recognised specifically that the characteristics of individual marriage unions, in so far as they acquire, hold and deal with property, differ. in “many cases”, the union is underpinned by “...stated and unstated assumptions between the parties to a marriage that the arrangement of property interests, whatever they are, is sufficient for the purposes of the husband and wife during the continuance of their marriage” (stanford, at [41]). and, in “many cases”, (but, not all) the “...just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied...” by the fact of separation: “[i]t will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order ... because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife” (stanford at [42]).
“...what is ‘plainly wrong’ will vary in the eyes of different beholders” and also the fact that the “...functions and purposes of the court ... [involve] ... difficult and evaluative decisions...” such that “...any two decision-makers may, with complete integrity and upon the same material, often come to differing conclusions”. (cdj at [186(2)], per kirby j).  ] ... as we have already said, there is no requirement to attribute different percentages to different periods in the relationship. indeed the full court has cautioned against it: see dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, (2012) 50 fam lr 244, lovine & connor and anor [2012] famcafc 168, (2012) flc 93-515 and bolger & headon [2014] famcafc 27 where the full court said at [28], “[d]oing so ... is not consistent with a holistic assessment of the parties’ contributions which is what s.79(4) requires.” it is only if error can be demonstrated in the overall result that the appeal would succeed.  8] ... the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by s.79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.  ] any and all such contributions, whether or not they sound in, or are directly linked to, the property available for distribution, should be considered and assessed together with the nature, form and extent of all other contributions of all types contemplated otherwise by s 79(4). [19] that is true of assets or income generated within the relationship and it is equally true of assets or income coming from outside of the relationship (for example, as here, in the form of inheritances). in the same way, s 79(4) specifically requires the court to take into account contributions made to the welfare of the family (and substantively and “...not in any merely token way...”, see, mallett v mallett (1984) 156 clr 605 at 636 per wilson j) notwithstanding that those contributions may not be, or cannot be seen to be, directly linked to the available property at trial, or any increase or decrease in the value of the property. [20] put another way, consistent with authority, the s 79 discretion involves as a necessary requirement that “... trial judges weigh and assess the contributions of all kinds and from all sources made by each of the parties throughout the period of their cohabitation and then translate such an assessment into a percentage of the overall property of the parties or provide for a transfer of property in specie in accordance with that assessment.” (in the marriage of aleksovski [1996] famca 111, (1996) 20 fam lr 894 at 903). in aleksovski, kay j outlined the well-known “gold bar” analogy and said “[w]hat is important is to somehow give a reasonable value to all of the elements that go to making up the entirety of the marriage relationship” (at 83,443). [21] those same principles can be expressed as saying that the requirements of the section are met by approaching the assessment of contributions holistically and by analysing the nature, form, characteristics and origin of the property currently comprising that to which s 79 applies, and, in turn, analysing the nature, form and extent of the contributions (of all types) contemplated by s 79. that task is also undertaken by reference to the nature and form of the particular marriage partnership manifested by the particular circumstances of this particular marriage. is it, for example, a relationship, as deane j put it in mallett at 640-641 “...where the parties have adopted the attitude that their marriage constituted a practical union of both lives and property...” or is it, for example, a union where parties lived very separate domestic and financial lives? [22] the analysis just referred to might, obviously enough, also involve an examination of when contributions were made and the use made of contributions. but that is quite different to attributing to, or searching for, a necessary causal connection between contributions and the available property as a requirement for a particular contribution having significance in the overall assessment of what is just and equitable.  ] we wish also to refer to the approach of the federal magistrate in attributing percentages to differing periods within the relationship, or types of contribution made. there is in our view little to be gained, and much to be said against, approaching the task of assessing contributions by attaching percentages to components of it. (the same, it might be said, applies to attributing a percentage to each of the relevant s 75(2) factors). [24] there can be little doubt that the classification of contributions by reference to terms such as “initial contributions”, “contributions during the relationship”, and “post-separation contributions”, can be helpful as a convenient means of giving coherent expression to the evidence in a s 79 case and to giving coherence to the nature, form and extent of the parties’ respective contributions. however, the task of assessing contributions is holistic and but part of a yet further holistic determination of what orders, if any, represent justice and equity in the particular circumstances of this particular relationship. so much is clear from the terms of s 79 itself and, in particular, s 79(2). the essential task is to assess the nature, form and extent of the contributions of all types made by each of the parties within the context of an analysis of their particular relationship. [25] doing so is also consistent with the demands of authority that the ultimate assessment of contributions should be made without “...giving over-zealous attention to the ascertainment of the parties’ contributions...” (norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513 at 524) and the well-established recognition in the authorities (acknowledged specifically by her honour in this case) that the process required of the court by s 79 is the exercise of a wide discretion, not the performance of a mathematical or accounting exercise. [26] the necessarily imprecise “wide discretion” inherent in what is required by the section is made no more precise or coherent by attributing percentage figures to arbitrary time frames or categorisations of contributions within the relationship. indeed, we consider that doing so is contrary to the holistic analysis required by the section and, in the usual course of events, should be avoided.
the consideration of the relevant matters referred to in s.75(2) of the act, pursuant to s.79(4), like the assessment of contributions, is holistic. also, like the assessment of contributions, it is not an accounting exercise.
... the principle upon which estoppel in pais is founded is that the law should not permit an unjust departure by a party from an assumption of fact which he has caused another party to adopt or accept for the purpose of their legal relations. this is, of course, a very general statement. but it is the basis of the rules governing estoppel. those rules work out the more precise grounds upon which the law holds a party disentitled to depart from an assumption in the assertion of rights against another. one condition appears always to be indispensable. that other must have so acted or abstained from acting upon the footing of the state of affairs assumed that he would suffer a detriment if the opposite party were afterwards allowed to set up rights against him inconsistent with the assumption. in stating this essential condition, particularly where the estoppel flows from representation, it is often said simply that the party asserting the estoppel must have been induced to act to his detriment. although substantially such a statement is correct and leads to no misunderstanding, it does not bring out clearly the basal purpose of the doctrine. that purpose is to avoid or prevent a detriment to the party asserting the estoppel by compelling the opposite party to adhere to the assumption upon which the former acted or abstained from acting. this means that the real detriment or harm from which the law seeks to give protection is that which would flow from the change of position if the assumption were deserted that led to it. so long as the assumption is adhered to, the party who altered his situation upon the faith of it cannot complain. his complaint is that when afterwards the other party makes a different state of affairs the basis of an assertion of right against him then, if it is allowed, his own original change of position will operate as a detriment. ... the justice of an estoppel is not established by the fact in itself that a state of affairs has been assumed as the basis of action or inaction and that a departure from the assumption would turn the action or inaction into a detrimental change of position. it depends also on the manner in which the assumption has been occasioned or induced. before anyone can be estopped, he must have played such a part in the adoption of the assumption that it would be unfair or unjust if he were left free to ignore it. but the law does not leave such a question of fairness or justice at large. it defines with more or less completeness the kinds of participation in the making or acceptance of the assumption that will suffice to preclude the party if the other requirements for an estoppel are satisfied.... ... whether a departure by a party from the assumption should be considered unjust and inadmissible depends on the part taken by him in occasioning its adoption by the other party. he may be required to abide by the assumption because it formed the conventional basis upon which the parties entered into contractual or other mutual relations ... or because knowing the mistake the other laboured under, he refrained from correcting him when it was his duty to do so, or because his imprudence, where care was required of him, was a proximate cause of the other party's adopting and acting upon the faith of the assumption, or because he directly made representations upon which the other party founded the assumption ...
the reference to "financial resources" in the context of s.75(2)(b) has long been correctly interpreted by the family court to refer to "a source of financial support which a party can reasonably expect will be available to him or her to supply a financial need or deficiency". the requirement that the financial resource be that "of" a party no doubt implies that the source of financial support be one on which the party is capable of drawing. it must involve something more than an expectation of benevolence on the part of another. but it goes too far to suggest that the party must control the source of financial support...
section 75(2)(o) plainly extends to any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account as showing that a party to the marriage is or is not able to pay spousal maintenance or is or is not able to support himself or herself. the paragraph has accordingly long been correctly interpreted by the family court as permitting consideration by a court of "all of the financial matters which are relevant to [a] particular case". nothing in the language or structure of s.75 prevents a fact or circumstance which falls within s.75(2)(o) being also a fact or circumstance which gives rise to a matter under another paragraph of s.75(2), including s.75(2)(b).
consideration and disposition – property
the asset pool  strictly speaking, neither party brought any property (or any property of any substance) into the relationship. this was simply because the husband, who was 10 years older than his 18 year old wife when they married, relied then, and essentially continues to rely (apart from some sporadic work as a tradesman), upon the property and financial resources of his mother, the second respondent. the wife, as a young bride who met the husband through connections with the jehovah’s witness church, had no property to her name, and little or nothing financially, to bring into the relationship, (b) as noted multiple times, the paternal grandmother was the source of property and finances for the married parties throughout their long relationship. circumstances also meant that there was no accumulation of any superannuation by either of the marital parties, (c) a fundamental issue in these circumstances concerns the d street, suburb e property, which was the marital residence for 25 years or thereabouts. the grandmother inherited this property (and other properties) from her husband upon his death. the grandmother knew that the husband and wife did renovations to this property in 2009. she also knew that a builder was engaged to do those renovations and that the husband (and wife) represented to the builder in writing that he was (or they were) the owner(s) of the property. later, she also knew that the husband had falsely represented to company an that he owned this property. she also knew that he had signed a change of name form in which he misrepresented his identity regarding the ownership of this property. the grandmother also knew from correspondence from the official trustee that the trustee considered the actions of the husband regarding the d street, suburb e property as fraudulent. she also knew that her former solicitor, as long ago as 2014 and 2015, requested her instructions regarding the correction of the register so that she was shown as the registered proprietor of the property and not her son. she never gave these instructions. she did, however, give instructions to her then solicitor not to pass on information that would lead to the father being charged with, for example, deceit or fraud, regarding the d street, suburb e property. the grandmother also took action to pay out the debt owing by her son (or his estate) to the official trustee. in effect she stood by (or formally “sat on her hands”) throughout the years of the parties’ relationship in the light of the various misrepresentations noted regarding the property. these, and quite a number of other factors set out in the wife’s written submissions at par.26, give rise, it was submitted, to the merging of finances, and more particularly that the property in question should be regarded as an asset to be included in the asset pool, (d) in the light of the circumstances outlined (and referred to in submissions), the issue for the court is whether those circumstances, and in particular, the conduct of the paternal grandmother, and equally the complicit and other actions of the husband, having regard to the principles in grundt and in valder & saklani, properly entitle or give rise to the d street, suburb e property being considered “property” of the parties to be included as an asset in the property pool. in my view, the conduct (action and omission) over such a long period of time by the grandmother, and the conduct of the husband (e.g. his various and multiple representations to company an, among others, that the property was his), separately and together, which resulted in the title to this property being and remaining in the husband’s name, require that the d street, suburb e property be included in the asset pool. individually and collectively, their actions and omissions reasonably led multiple third parties, and importantly the wife, to believe that this property was either the husband’s in his own right, and/or that it was “theirs”, by virtue of the action of the grandmother, and with her express or tacit consent, notwithstanding that the registered proprietor was the husband.   as noted multiple times, the paternal grandmother was the source of property and finances for the married parties throughout their long relationship. circumstances also meant that there was no accumulation of any superannuation by either of the marital parties, (c) a fundamental issue in these circumstances concerns the d street, suburb e property, which was the marital residence for 25 years or thereabouts. the grandmother inherited this property (and other properties) from her husband upon his death. the grandmother knew that the husband and wife did renovations to this property in 2009. she also knew that a builder was engaged to do those renovations and that the husband (and wife) represented to the builder in writing that he was (or they were) the owner(s) of the property. later, she also knew that the husband had falsely represented to company an that he owned this property. she also knew that he had signed a change of name form in which he misrepresented his identity regarding the ownership of this property. the grandmother also knew from correspondence from the official trustee that the trustee considered the actions of the husband regarding the d street, suburb e property as fraudulent. she also knew that her former solicitor, as long ago as 2014 and 2015, requested her instructions regarding the correction of the register so that she was shown as the registered proprietor of the property and not her son. she never gave these instructions. she did, however, give instructions to her then solicitor not to pass on information that would lead to the father being charged with, for example, deceit or fraud, regarding the d street, suburb e property. the grandmother also took action to pay out the debt owing by her son (or his estate) to the official trustee. in effect she stood by (or formally “sat on her hands”) throughout the years of the parties’ relationship in the light of the various misrepresentations noted regarding the property. these, and quite a number of other factors set out in the wife’s written submissions at par.26, give rise, it was submitted, to the merging of finances, and more particularly that the property in question should be regarded as an asset to be included in the asset pool, (d) in the light of the circumstances outlined (and referred to in submissions), the issue for the court is whether those circumstances, and in particular, the conduct of the paternal grandmother, and equally the complicit and other actions of the husband, having regard to the principles in grundt and in valder & saklani, properly entitle or give rise to the d street, suburb e property being considered “property” of the parties to be included as an asset in the property pool. in my view, the conduct (action and omission) over such a long period of time by the grandmother, and the conduct of the husband (e.g. his various and multiple representations to company an, among others, that the property was his), separately and together, which resulted in the title to this property being and remaining in the husband’s name, require that the d street, suburb e property be included in the asset pool. individually and collectively, their actions and omissions reasonably led multiple third parties, and importantly the wife, to believe that this property was either the husband’s in his own right, and/or that it was “theirs”, by virtue of the action of the grandmother, and with her express or tacit consent, notwithstanding that the registered proprietor was the husband.   a fundamental issue in these circumstances concerns the d street, suburb e property, which was the marital residence for 25 years or thereabouts. the grandmother inherited this property (and other properties) from her husband upon his death. the grandmother knew that the husband and wife did renovations to this property in 2009. she also knew that a builder was engaged to do those renovations and that the husband (and wife) represented to the builder in writing that he was (or they were) the owner(s) of the property. later, she also knew that the husband had falsely represented to company an that he owned this property. she also knew that he had signed a change of name form in which he misrepresented his identity regarding the ownership of this property. the grandmother also knew from correspondence from the official trustee that the trustee considered the actions of the husband regarding the d street, suburb e property as fraudulent. she also knew that her former solicitor, as long ago as 2014 and 2015, requested her instructions regarding the correction of the register so that she was shown as the registered proprietor of the property and not her son. she never gave these instructions. she did, however, give instructions to her then solicitor not to pass on information that would lead to the father being charged with, for example, deceit or fraud, regarding the d street, suburb e property. the grandmother also took action to pay out the debt owing by her son (or his estate) to the official trustee. in effect she stood by (or formally “sat on her hands”) throughout the years of the parties’ relationship in the light of the various misrepresentations noted regarding the property. these, and quite a number of other factors set out in the wife’s written submissions at par.26, give rise, it was submitted, to the merging of finances, and more particularly that the property in question should be regarded as an asset to be included in the asset pool, (d) in the light of the circumstances outlined (and referred to in submissions), the issue for the court is whether those circumstances, and in particular, the conduct of the paternal grandmother, and equally the complicit and other actions of the husband, having regard to the principles in grundt and in valder & saklani, properly entitle or give rise to the d street, suburb e property being considered “property” of the parties to be included as an asset in the property pool. in my view, the conduct (action and omission) over such a long period of time by the grandmother, and the conduct of the husband (e.g. his various and multiple representations to company an, among others, that the property was his), separately and together, which resulted in the title to this property being and remaining in the husband’s name, require that the d street, suburb e property be included in the asset pool. individually and collectively, their actions and omissions reasonably led multiple third parties, and importantly the wife, to believe that this property was either the husband’s in his own right, and/or that it was “theirs”, by virtue of the action of the grandmother, and with her express or tacit consent, notwithstanding that the registered proprietor was the husband.   in the light of the circumstances outlined (and referred to in submissions), the issue for the court is whether those circumstances, and in particular, the conduct of the paternal grandmother, and equally the complicit and other actions of the husband, having regard to the principles in grundt and in valder & saklani, properly entitle or give rise to the d street, suburb e property being considered “property” of the parties to be included as an asset in the property pool. in my view, the conduct (action and omission) over such a long period of time by the grandmother, and the conduct of the husband (e.g. his various and multiple representations to company an, among others, that the property was his), separately and together, which resulted in the title to this property being and remaining in the husband’s name, require that the d street, suburb e property be included in the asset pool. individually and collectively, their actions and omissions reasonably led multiple third parties, and importantly the wife, to believe that this property was either the husband’s in his own right, and/or that it was “theirs”, by virtue of the action of the grandmother, and with her express or tacit consent, notwithstanding that the registered proprietor was the husband.   the multiple misrepresentations by the husband regarding the ownership of the property. he now seeks to avoid any adverse consequence (particularly from his perspective) of this conduct and to preserve all property and funds for the benefit of the children of the relationship and to exclude the wife from any access to them. he (and/ or his mother) seeks to do this by virtue of him being executor and trustee of his mother’s estate pursuant to a recent amendment/codicil to the grandmother’s will, and by having her power of attorney. by these documents he is, and certainly will be, the person with complete authority to access and use the entirety of the grandmother’s estate, officially of course, in accordance with the grandmother’s testamentary directions. he seeks, and/or his mother seeks, to exclude the wife from having any access, and for the court to have no regard, to that property and those funds, (b) more summarily, the grandmother and the husband now seek to remove both real estate (the d street, suburb e property) and funds (from the “joint account”) from the possible claims by the wife, (c) although it was raised by the court during the hearing, no one formally ran an argument pursuant to s.106b of the act by which transactions may be set aside that are designed to defeat claims under the act. because of the findings i have made, and in the light of the case law i have outlined, and because this section was not argued, i will not pursue it further. that said, in my view, there are more than sufficient grounds for arguments to be run on the basis of this section.   more summarily, the grandmother and the husband now seek to remove both real estate (the d street, suburb e property) and funds (from the “joint account”) from the possible claims by the wife, (c) although it was raised by the court during the hearing, no one formally ran an argument pursuant to s.106b of the act by which transactions may be set aside that are designed to defeat claims under the act. because of the findings i have made, and in the light of the case law i have outlined, and because this section was not argued, i will not pursue it further. that said, in my view, there are more than sufficient grounds for arguments to be run on the basis of this section.   although it was raised by the court during the hearing, no one formally ran an argument pursuant to s.106b of the act by which transactions may be set aside that are designed to defeat claims under the act. because of the findings i have made, and in the light of the case law i have outlined, and because this section was not argued, i will not pursue it further. that said, in my view, there are more than sufficient grounds for arguments to be run on the basis of this section.
... once it has been established that there has been a deliberate non-disclosure ... then the court should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the innocent party. to do otherwise might be thought to provide a charter for fraud in proceedings of this nature.
in circumstances where there has not been full and [mr tyrell] disclosure of financial circumstances by a party, it is open to a court to find that an indeterminate undisclosed amount is held by one of the parties and to make property orders without reference to an overall pool.
property interests, superannuation and financial resources
description
ownership
applicant's value
respondent's value
assets
1.
d street, suburb e
husband
1,100,000
2.
motor vehicle 2
wife
2,000
3.
motor vehicle 1
8,000
4.
cba ......39
400
5.
bank ao......84
200
6.
tools
10,000
7.
lego
5,000
8.
other household contents
9.
cash withdrawn from cba ...48 account on 23 december 2019
23 december 2019
500,000
assets subtotal
$0
$1,830,600
liabilities
10.
none to be included
liabilities subtotal
superannuation
name of fund
type of interest
member
11.
none
superannuation subtotal
total (assets – liabilities)
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation)
financial resources
12.
financial resources subtotal
other
13.
other subtotal
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation + financial resources + other)
resources + other)
contributions
section 75(2) factors
just & equitable considerations
conclusion
postscript: matters of ethics & referrals
associate: dated: 14 september 2022
dated: 14 september 2022
annexure a
chronology of events
annexure b
annotated tender bundle index
relevance of tender bundle documents federal circuit and family court of australia cac 103/2020 between mr tyrell (applicant) and ms tyrell (first respondent) and ms b tyrell (second respondent) and independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia cac 103/2020 between mr tyrell (applicant) and ms tyrell (first respondent) and ms b tyrell (second respondent) and independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
cac 103/2020 between mr tyrell (applicant) and ms tyrell (first respondent) and ms b tyrell (second respondent) and independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
between mr tyrell (applicant) and ms tyrell (first respondent) and ms b tyrell (second respondent) and independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
mr tyrell (applicant) and ms tyrell (first respondent) and ms b tyrell (second respondent) and independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
and ms tyrell (first respondent) and ms b tyrell (second respondent) and independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
ms tyrell (first respondent) and ms b tyrell (second respondent) and independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
and ms b tyrell (second respondent) and independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
ms b tyrell (second respondent) and independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
and independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
independent children’s lawyer 21 april 2022
21 april 2022
no
afsa subpoena #10 material
pages
relevance for submission
statement of affairs dated 19.07.2012
1 - 12
ownership of d street, suburb e property
letter from afsa to mr tyrell dated 13.07.2015
13 - 17
confirmation of date of annulment of bankruptcy
declaration of intention to present debtor's petition dated 28.06.2012
18 - 20
letter from afsa to mr tyrell dated 15.07.2013
21 - 22
ownership of d street, suburb e property, credibility
credibility
email from kjb to itsa dated 01.08.2013
23
letter from afsa to mr tyrell dated 09.10.2013
24 - 25
letter from mr am to trustee in bankruptcy dated 24.06.2013
26
ownership of d street, suburb e property, ms b tyrell’s knowledge of property owned in husband’s name, ms b tyrell’s failure to remedy ownership issue despite representations that the property is rightfully hers,
ms b tyrell’s knowledge of property owned in husband’s name, ms b tyrell’s failure to remedy ownership issue despite representations that the property is rightfully hers,
ms b tyrell’s failure to remedy ownership issue despite representations that the property is rightfully hers,
declaration of intention dated 19.07.2012
27
timeline of events re property
28 - 29
this chronology provides timeline re the varying and conflicting representations he made to afsa  )
grant of probate [mr k] dated 12.09.2011
30  )
change of name dated 15.07.2010
31
knowledge of ownership of d street, suburb e property, credibility – contradictory representations to afsa to suit his case
credibility – contradictory representations to afsa to suit his case
cba subpoena #8 material  )
low documentation loan declaration dated 13.5.2010
32
ownership of d street, suburb e property, representations about the value of his assets
representations about the value of his assets  )
change of name dated 15.7.2010
33  )
application wealth package dated 15.7.2010
34 - 35
knowledge of husband’s joint interest with ms b tyrell in the cba ...48 account  )
loan account authority borrower dated 15.7.2010
36 - 38
knowledge of husband’s joint interest with ms b tyrell in the cba ...48 account, usage of cba ...48 account as parties’ joint account
usage of cba ...48 account as parties’ joint account  )
cba loan application dated 22.2.2011
39 - 45
ownership of d street, suburb e property, d(2) street, suburb e property, town l property
cba subpoena #13  )
cancelled authority to operate (third party) dated 30.06.2015
46 - 47
prior to cancellation wife was an authorised operator on the account, knowledge of husband’s joint interest in ...48 account, usage of cba ...48 account as parties’ joint account
knowledge of husband’s joint interest in ...48 account, usage of cba ...48 account as parties’ joint account  )
request to cancel authority to operate (third party) dated 23.12.2019
48 - 50
same as above – usage continued until 23 december 2019 when ms tyrell’s authority was removed  )
withdrawal from x...48 ($500,000) on 23.12.2019
51 - 52
deliberate transfer of funds from ...48 account to quarantine the funds, where documents above show that the husband was a joint account holder. no evidence of wife attempting to remove $500,000 – and bank manager was not called (jones v dunkel) wife’s evidence was her attempt to withdraw $50,000.
no evidence of wife attempting to remove $500,000 – and bank manager was not called (jones v dunkel) wife’s evidence was her attempt to withdraw $50,000.  )
letter from mr f to cba – property transfer dated 20.05.2020
53 - 54
knowledge of existence of the false statutory declaration – requests that cba provide them with a copy of the change of name document.  )
customer compliment overview by husband dated 23.12.2019
55
husband is recorded as referring to his wife as estranged.
company an subpoena #9 material  )
company an application dated 16.11.2016
56 - 58
lists value of total assets as $2,644,000, with a value of $800,000 on personal home and $1,680,000 on investment properties. husband’s occupation. contradicts evidence to the court that he has no interest in any of the d street, suburb e properties, the d(2) street, suburb e property, or the town l property. this well post-dates the bankruptcy proceedings.
husband’s occupation. contradicts evidence to the court that he has no interest in any of the d street, suburb e properties, the d(2) street, suburb e property, or the town l property. this well post-dates the bankruptcy proceedings.
contradicts evidence to the court that he has no interest in any of the d street, suburb e properties, the d(2) street, suburb e property, or the town l property. this well post-dates the bankruptcy proceedings.
this well post-dates the bankruptcy proceedings.
section 69zw material  )
incident report dated 08.08.2017
59
stealing– noted he was identified and known to steal from that shopping centre – consistent with wife’s evidence. page 6 – of nsw police notes from 09.08.2017 – “known for stealing... store at and store au” – this report was from chemist.
page 6 – of nsw police notes from 09.08.2017 – “known for stealing... store at and store au” – this report was from chemist.  )
incident report dated 04.03.2017
issue with neighbour while renovation/clearing and making ready for sale at town j property – antisocial type behaviour  )
incident report dated 17.02.2017
60  )
incident report dated 25.01.2017  )
61  )
incident report dated 01.12.2016
further unusual behaviour/issue with neighbour  )
incident report dated 18.06.2012
62
husband’s behaviour left daughter who was 6 years old at the time, locked in a car in an underground car park. when confronted by police, he was aggressive and belligerent to police officers, and started mocking the police officers.
left daughter who was 6 years old at the time, locked in a car in an underground car park. when confronted by police, he was aggressive and belligerent to police officers, and started mocking the police officers.
school ab subpoena material  )
pastoral care incident dated 25 june 2019
63
disturbing behaviour, problematic engagement with school  )
incident report dated 13 february 2019
71
disturbing, inappropriate and sexualised discussion and unusual engagement with the school. long file note about meeting at school where father made strange, offensive and odd comments. these comments included discussion anal sex with the boys and the discussion with school ab boys about his then 12 year old daughter. teachers found the conduct disturbing.
long file note about meeting at school where father made strange, offensive and odd comments. these comments included discussion anal sex with the boys and the discussion with school ab boys about his then 12 year old daughter. teachers found the conduct disturbing.
teachers found the conduct disturbing.  )
pastoral care incident dated 19 november 2020
64
smear campaign against the mother, to the school, attempts to isolate mother against school – although this was 11 months since the mother had seen the childrne at all  )
pastoral care incident dated 27 november 2020
65
antisocial behaviour  )
emails between school staff 26 to 28 may 2020
66-67
addressed father’s irrational belief and assertions that the children are gifted and z ought to be in the year above him  )
emails between school staff 26 november 2020
68
disproves father’s assertion that children have been doing much better at school and thriving since ms tyrell left this together with the evidence of school records and the xxn of father shows he believes and maintains his own narrative in spite of clear contrary evidence.
this together with the evidence of school records and the xxn of father shows he believes and maintains his own narrative in spite of clear contrary evidence.  )
emails between school staff 31 march to 19 april 2021
69-70
disproves father’s assertion that children have been doing much better at school and thriving since ms tyrell left  )
highlights antisocial and problematic behaviour with engagement with the school. long file note by ms ac about meeting at school where father made strange, offensive and odd comments – in presence of her, wife, childrne including his wife being a beautiful flower that grew from a “pot of shit.”
long file note by ms ac about meeting at school where father made strange, offensive and odd comments – in presence of her, wife, childrne including his wife being a beautiful flower that grew from a “pot of shit.”
catholic education subpoena material  )
incident reports 30 january 2020 to 2 march 2020
72-75
smear campaign against the mother, to the school, attempts to isolate mother against school, attempts to prevent children from having a relationship with the mother, including making false assertions
attempts to isolate mother against school, attempts to prevent children from having a relationship with the mother, including making false assertions
attempts to prevent children from having a relationship with the mother, including making false assertions
x was not completely resistant to spending time with the mother at this point. supports mother’s assertion of the ongoing attempts she made to have a relationship with the children
supports mother’s assertion of the ongoing attempts she made to have a relationship with the children  )
incident reports 25 june 2020 to 3 may 2021
76-82
attempts to prevent the mother from having a relationship with the children
paranoia displayed by the children/extent of alienation by the father
concerning/problematic behaviour by the children at school
dept of education subpoena material  )
letters re absence from school w 31 march 2021
83-86  )
letters re absence from school w 29 march 2021
87-88
other documents referred to in affidavit of ms tyrell sworn 8 april 2022
affidavit of ms tyrell sworn 8 april 2022  )
email from company ar dated 04.07.2019 (paragraph 79)
89
weird/antisocial/ problematic behaviour  )
interim apprehended domestic violence order dated 06.01.2020 (paragraph 122)
90-92
did not include the children as the father asserted on multiple occasions and in evidence  )
letter from av lawyers to mr tyrell dated 07.01.2020 (paragraph 210)
93-94
supports mother’s assertion of the ongoing attempts she made to have a relationship with the children by seeking agreement to spend time. ignored by father although he had retained his current solicitor. note father’s evidence that “ms aw” was the solicitor who attended the police station with him the night the mother was served with an avo and removed from the house.  )
letter from av lawyers to mr tyrell dated 15.01.2020 (paragraph 210)
95-96
supports mother’s assertion of the ongoing attempts she made to have a relationship with the children by seeking to reach agreement to spend time.  )
final apprehended domestic violence order dated 24.02.2020 (paragraph 209)
97-101  )
circle of security parenting certificate dated 12.06.2020 (paragraph 199)
102
mother’s attempts at improving herself and her parenting capabilities  )
positive parenting programme certificate dated 02.07.2020 (paragraph 199)
103  )
working with strong emotions certificate dated 15.09.2020 (paragraph 199)
104  )
photos from town j property clean out 19 january 2016 (paragraph 252)
105-113
supports mother’s assertions that she and mr tyrells both undertook a significant amount of work at the town j property in readiness for sale  )
letter from mr ax (school q school principal) dated 12.02.2020
114
supports mother’s assertion that she made significant attempts to remove the children from the home schooling environment, and supports mother’s parenting ability. also supported the fidning that the mother was not violent, aggressive, angry. this is also supported by the xxn of her psychologist mr t who has treated the mother over a significant period and has not seen the mother angry.
historical title searches  )
d street, suburb e,
115
see below  )
ay street, town j
116
supports wife’s case that this property was transferred pursuant to probate in 2017 (after bankruptcy proceedings) but the d street, suburb e property was not transferred  )
al street, suburb e
117
supports wife’s case that this property was transferred pursuant to probate in 2012 (but noting this was before bankruptcy proceedings) but the d street, suburb e property was not transferred  )
az street town l
118
supports wife’s case that this property was transferred pursuant to probate in 2015 (after bankruptcy proceedings) but the d street, suburb e property was not transferred
dcj material produced on subpoena
pdf: “subpeona response tyrell tyrell”  )
report ...12
212-213
unnamed caller. suspect mr tyrell may have a brain injury (unconfirmed). reports made by z that “mum’s actually the one who hits dad..” “caller thinks mr tyrell is telling this to the children.”  )
report ...86
192-194
caller in mr tyrell. detailed and extreme allegations of violence by mother against children and father – report made 8/1/20 – mother says is false  )
report ...70
169-170
report that the children had been badly ‘beating up’ by the mother, and this happened two weeks ago. mother used to draw blood and claw them so hard.’ 16/1/20 – two weeks ago would have been around the time of separation – no allegation of the children being beaten was made to police at the time of separation (29/12/19) – mother says is false  )
147-148
caller recorded more details of historical extreme violence by mother including that “reports would beat kids to the ground, ....would massage and bandage ms tyrells hands after she beat [them].  )
asm ...94
100-102
mother’s report 13 july 2020 of her concerns about the father’s behaviour having being told he kissed x on the lips, of the privacy issues with the doors, comments on tampons. father interpreted this as being accused of being a child molestor. mother’s evidence is compelling as in xxn she reported what she had said accurately having not seen any record from the department.
father interpreted this as being accused of being a child molestor. mother’s evidence is compelling as in xxn she reported what she had said accurately having not seen any record from the department.
mother’s evidence is compelling as in xxn she reported what she had said accurately having not seen any record from the department.  )
21 july follow up notes
62-63
children were all aware of how separation and “has impacted their father mr tyrell and how he misses and loves their mother”. caseworkers record being concerned about the children’s knowledge of the separation and have spoken to father abut being mindful of what info he is sharing with the children. father told careworkers that he is not sharing too much and “is mindful of protecting children.” caseworkers are not sure of this, and feel like father is not censoring the info and the children are carrying his sadness”
father told careworkers that he is not sharing too much and “is mindful of protecting children.” caseworkers are not sure of this, and feel like father is not censoring the info and the children are carrying his sadness”
caseworkers are not sure of this, and feel like father is not censoring the info and the children are carrying his sadness”  )
45-47
caseworker noted there were doors on bathrooms and bedrooms but some were “clear glass” – father denied in xxn - then referred to frosting commitment. mr tyrells room noted “high heels, wigs, hari pieces, porn videos – mr tyrell says belong to ms tyrell. agreement “put away pornographic clothes, put frosting or curtain on glass doors on bedrooms” z said shower with father last week – mr tyrell said 6 months ago. all three kids kept diaries because requested by court – not true
mr tyrells room noted “high heels, wigs, hari pieces, porn videos – mr tyrell says belong to ms tyrell. agreement “put away pornographic clothes, put frosting or curtain on glass doors on bedrooms” z said shower with father last week – mr tyrell said 6 months ago. all three kids kept diaries because requested by court – not true
agreement “put away pornographic clothes, put frosting or curtain on glass doors on bedrooms” z said shower with father last week – mr tyrell said 6 months ago. all three kids kept diaries because requested by court – not true
z said shower with father last week – mr tyrell said 6 months ago. all three kids kept diaries because requested by court – not true
all three kids kept diaries because requested by court – not true
nsw police  )
nsw police documents page 2/14
flag 1
page 2 – 9/1/20 cr supported in seeking contact with her children  )
nsw police documents page 3/14
flag 2
page 3 – 6/1/20 – explained avo does not prevent d from being in location  )
nsw police documents page 4/14
flag 3
page 4-5 – the 30/12/19 incident – she reported the 23/12 bank incident, the 29/12 incident youngest child in laundry, barged the def aside and elbowed her in the stomach with his right elbow...fr was accompanied by his solicitor – alleged tried to steal from “victims mother’s account to her own personal account...police do not believe the version supplied by the defendant  )
nsw police documents page 5/14
flag 4
page 5 – joint account, money belonged to victims mother, victim controls access to $ not plausible, and $240,000. the evidence supports c did have authority to operate the joint account, that he did cancel her access to money on 23.12.2019 and that he did not pay what he claimed for – and ceased making payments for it – resulting in repossession.
the evidence supports c did have authority to operate the joint account, that he did cancel her access to money on 23.12.2019 and that he did not pay what he claimed for – and ceased making payments for it – resulting in repossession.  )
nsw police documents page 6/14
flag 5
page 6 – 9/8/17 – known for stealing... store at and store au – this one was chemist..
gp notes – both for husband and wife
various pdfs provided  )
ba medical clinic mr tyrell’s medical file – 2 december 2019
mr tyrell’s medical file – 2 december 2019
pdf: “mr tyrell 1-100” page: 84/100
“mr tyrell 1-100” page: 84/100
page: 84/100
84/100
struggling with relationship ms tyrell unhappy has told mr tyrell she wants a divorce? she has a boyfriend – the opposite to mr tyrell, rich, physically aggressive mr tyrell feels pushed away, no hugs, no sex, no discussions about anything yesterday, ms tyrell went away for the day with a boyfriend. feels pushed out of the relationship and not allwed to attend kids concerts etc, this has been longstanding.
ms tyrell unhappy has told mr tyrell she wants a divorce? she has a boyfriend – the opposite to mr tyrell, rich, physically aggressive mr tyrell feels pushed away, no hugs, no sex, no discussions about anything yesterday, ms tyrell went away for the day with a boyfriend. feels pushed out of the relationship and not allwed to attend kids concerts etc, this has been longstanding.
has told mr tyrell she wants a divorce? she has a boyfriend – the opposite to mr tyrell, rich, physically aggressive mr tyrell feels pushed away, no hugs, no sex, no discussions about anything yesterday, ms tyrell went away for the day with a boyfriend. feels pushed out of the relationship and not allwed to attend kids concerts etc, this has been longstanding.
mr tyrell feels pushed away, no hugs, no sex, no discussions about anything yesterday, ms tyrell went away for the day with a boyfriend. feels pushed out of the relationship and not allwed to attend kids concerts etc, this has been longstanding.
yesterday, ms tyrell went away for the day with a boyfriend. feels pushed out of the relationship and not allwed to attend kids concerts etc, this has been longstanding.
feels pushed out of the relationship and not allwed to attend kids concerts etc, this has been longstanding.  )
ba medical clinic mr tyrell’s medical file 5 december 2019
mr tyrell’s medical file 5 december 2019
5 december 2019
pdf: “ mr tyrell1-100” page: 85/100
“ mr tyrell1-100” page: 85/100
page: 85/100
85/100
miserable not allowed to touch ms tyrell, but she is able to hug her boyfriend in front of mr tyrell mr tyrell is continually being put down.
not allowed to touch ms tyrell, but she is able to hug her boyfriend in front of mr tyrell mr tyrell is continually being put down.
mr tyrell is continually being put down.  )
ba medical clinic mr tyrell’s medical file 13 december 2019
mr tyrell’s medical file 13 december 2019
13 december 2019
still very upset upset about ms tyrell’s behaviour being pushed away from kids planneeds to look out for himself advised to call family court.
upset about ms tyrell’s behaviour being pushed away from kids planneeds to look out for himself advised to call family court.
being pushed away from kids planneeds to look out for himself advised to call family court.
planneeds to look out for himself advised to call family court.
needs to look out for himself advised to call family court.
advised to call family court.  )
ba medical clinic mr tyrell’s medical file 19 december 2019
mr tyrell’s medical file 19 december 2019
pdf: “mr tyrell 1-100” page: 86/100
“mr tyrell 1-100” page: 86/100
page: 86/100
86/100
situation is worsening still does not go inside with ms tyrell unless the kids are there. approached the family court but no counselling as yet has a friend of a friend, who is a lawyer offer to see him, at no charge.
still does not go inside with ms tyrell unless the kids are there. approached the family court but no counselling as yet has a friend of a friend, who is a lawyer offer to see him, at no charge.
approached the family court but no counselling as yet has a friend of a friend, who is a lawyer offer to see him, at no charge.
has a friend of a friend, who is a lawyer offer to see him, at no charge.  )
ba medical clinic medical practice wife’s medical file 2 december 2019
wife’s medical file 2 december 2019
2 december 2019
pdf: “ms tyrell 1-100” page: 66-67/100
“ms tyrell 1-100” page: 66-67/100
page: 66-67/100
66-67/100
wife reports that she “does not want to continue the relationship”  )
ba medical clinic wife’s medical file 28 december 2019 – wife reports to the doctor – this is the day before the fv incident
wife’s medical file 28 december 2019 – wife reports to the doctor – this is the day before the fv incident
28 december 2019 – wife reports to the doctor – this is the day before the fv incident
pdf: “ms tyrell 1-100” page: 67-68/100
“ms tyrell 1-100” page: 67-68/100
page: 67-68/100
67-68/100
“stressed + on monday – went to bank to withdraw money mr tyrell started calling her a slut, whore, prostitute, x was with her. he has stopped her having access to account extremely embarrassed. he has removed the internal doors. he is vindictive and controlling. she says that mr tyrell is telling them lies, is running her down in front of the children, does not feel that any couple counselling is viable, as mr tyrell keeps telling her that she has no skills and no education, cant live with him like this, but has no where to go, says he keeps the kids up late, he is verbally abusive, but no physical abuse, does not want to uproot kids by looking at moving out f. does not want to leave”  )
ba medical clinic wife’s medical file 8 january 2020
wife’s medical file 8 january 2020
8 january 2020
pdf: “ms tyrell 1-100” page: 68/100
“ms tyrell 1-100” page: 68/100
page: 68/100
68/100
records to her gp the events of 29.12.2019 consistent with her statement to police and her evidence – ms tyrell was washing child in laundry, mr tyrell came in and wanted to wash him, elbowed her out of the way, avo, no contact with children, mr tyrell has told court that she hits the children.
ms tyrell was washing child in laundry, mr tyrell came in and wanted to wash him, elbowed her out of the way, avo, no contact with children, mr tyrell has told court that she hits the children.  )
ba medical clinic wife’s medical file 23 june 2020 – gp writes support letter for housing
wife’s medical file 23 june 2020 – gp writes support letter for housing
23 june 2020 – gp writes support letter for housing
pdf: “ms tyrell 301-365” page: 46-47/65
“ms tyrell 301-365” page: 46-47/65
page: 46-47/65
46-47/65
pressing for housing for ms tyrell. includes “ms tyrell is in a particularly unpleasant relationship breakdown. there was physical abuse in the marriage, but this has been far overshadowed by the then, and ongoing, financial and emotional abuse. he has been and remains very controlling. this has extended to her car being repossessed, as it was being paid for by her husband apparently as part of the separation agreement. this remains one more episode of humiliation for ms tyrell”
[1] see transcript, 13th may 2022, p.253. hereafter, all references will be “t” followed by the page number. the trial was conducted over 3 days, 21st and 22nd april and 13th may 2022. [2] at pp.10 & 11 of this report.[3] see also the wide description given to “financial resource” by the full court in white and tulloch v white (1995) 19 fam lr 696 at 701-702.[4] chang v su [2002] famca 156; (2002) 170 flr 244.[5] the correspondence referred to here is part of the mother’s second tender bundle, dated 27th may 2022. it is formally tendered and assigned the exhibit number, 5.[6] it was noted in the mother’s evidence that the father actively encouraged her relationship, which ultimately became (relevantly according to the tenets of the jehovah’s witness tradition) “adulterous.” once a relationship was so declared, this meant that the mother could be (and was) “disfellowshipped”, and she was counselled by that church to have nothing further to do with her children. it could, and likely should, be inferred that there was a concerted effort and process to ostracise and shame the mother, at least in relation to access to the children, but who would then be left in the father’s sole care at the former marital residence.[7] byrnes v kendle [2011] hca 26; (2011) 243 clr 253.[8] see further the extended discussion by heydon and crennan jj in byrnes v kendle, at [133] – [139] by reference to the detailed earlier discussion by deane j in orr v ford [1989] hca 4; (1989) 167 clr 316 of the various and often overlapping circumstances that give rise to, and the distinctions between, “acquiescence”, “estoppel by conduct”, “election to abandon or not enforce rights”, “laches” and “gross laches.” although not spelt out, and notwithstanding no reference to these high court authorities, in my view, the factual circumstances plainly on display here are readily captured by these terms and the discussion by heydon and crennan jj in byrnes v kendle. the submissions of the wife, set out later, do refer to laches but without reference to authority.[9] proposed order 6 requires some attention. for more abundant clarity, rather than “the pronunciation” of orders, presumably the word grasped for is for the orders to be “pronounced.”[10] see t 17 – 19.[11] t 19.[12] t 19 – 20.[13] t 20.[14] t 20.[15] t 21.[16] t 21.[17] t 22.[18] see t 22. other instances where the same evidence was given by mr tyrell regarding his lack of knowledge and ability regarding paperwork is to be found at t 28, 30, 33, 60 and 147.[19] see for example t 23 – 28. among other things, see for example the cross examination of mr tyrell in relation to material produced under subpoena from nsw police regarding the frequency of his attendance at the property and that, according to these same records, the process of renovation and cleaning of the property had been going on for “the past year”. these records of themselves tend to support more the wife’s evidence that the clean-up of the town j property took rather longer than ms tyrell said. [20] t 29.[21] t 30.[22] t 30.[23] t 31.[24] t 32.[25] t 33 – 34.[26] t 34.[27] t 35.[28] see t 36 – 43 and documents commencing at page 33 of the mother’s tender bundle. [29] t 43.[30] t 44.[31] see part 6.1 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021.[32] t 47. see also the further discussion at t 58 – 59. [33] t 48.[34] t 49.[35] t 50. he also said that ms tyrell kept her own bank account, to which he did not have access, for her own money. the funds in this account came only from government benefits. see also t 65.[36] t 53.[37] t 54. see also even more graphic details about his claims in relation to, for example, allegedly having a “sex room” or “sex dungeon” at his residence and that in some way the children had allegedly heard such claims as well. some of his claims also related to explicit detail, allegedly recounted by the mother to the children, of the mother’s sexual encounters with her boyfriend mr m (see t 77 – 78). the father contended that the children were very hurt by the mother’s affair (see t 79). later, the father confirmed that when care and protection authorities had spoken with the children regarding various allegations, he did in fact briefly speak with the children about it. but he maintained that the allegations regarding these matters and what he understood to be allegations of being a paedophile were all made by the mother to care and protection (t 82). [38] t 62.[39] t 66 – 68.[40] t 69.[41] t 66 – 70. these matters are recorded in documents in the mother’s tender bundle at p.71.[42] t 71 – 73.[43] t 74.[44] t 76.[45] t 74 – 75. [46] t 80.[47] t 130.[48] t 80.[49] see in particular t 85 and 86. in this place, he said everything was largely an act and that “we were really good at hiding it”, referring to the violence and injuries. the inconsistency between the father’s evidence and the independent evidence from the schools which describe the mother as always affectionate and caring towards the children and attending to their every need at all times, is clear and cogent. this is especially in circumstances where the father said “she could not even hug her children and tell them i love them”. [50] see t 125.[51] t 81.[52] t 82.[53] t 84.[54] t 84.[55] t 86.[56] t 88.[57] t 89.[58] t 92 – 93.[59] t 93 – 94. see also t 132 – 133 where there was a discussion with the father about him discussing with x the mother having had a curette. it was noted to him by the icl that this discussion was likely highly inappropriate and equally misleading because of the father having linked the curette to the mother allegedly having an abortion. [60] t 95.[61] t 96.[62] t 99.[63] t 99.[64] see t 100.[65] t 101.[66] t 102.[67] t 112.[68] t 113.[69] t 114.[70] t 117.[71] t 118 – 119.[72] t 120 – 122. the father’s oral evidence here regarding financial matters was inconsistent with his own affidavit evidence, as well as the mother’s affidavit evidence.[73] t 124 – 125.[74] t 126.[75] t 128.[76] t 129.[77] among other places, see t 131.[78] t 130.[79] t 135.[80] t 138. see further, ms e’s december 2021 report, par.55.[81] t 141 – 144.[82] t 146 – 151. [83] t 154 – 168. [84] t 168 – 175. [85] t 179. [86] see t 176 – 182. [87] t 199.[88] t 200. in my view it is unnecessary to canvass some other parts of the mother’s cross examination that related to her contentions against the father that were challenged by him regarding allegations of theft that involved the children when they were younger, and also in relation to the father being a poor role model. see for example t 201 – 206.[89] t 201.[90] t 207.[91] t 208.[92] t 209 – 210. [93] t 210.[94] t 211 – 212.[95] t 212.[96] t 214 – 215. [97] t 216 – 218. [98] t 220 – 221.[99] t 221. [100] t 223.[101] t 227 – 228.[102] t 228.[103] t 229.[104] t 230. see also the further explanation of this incident at t 235. [105] t 230 – 231.[106] see for example, t 210, and paragraphs 7 and 9 – 34 of the mother’s affidavit dated 8th april 2022 in relation to her allegations that the father raped her throughout the marriage, forced her to have an abortion, was financially coercive and shared intimate photos of her to strangers. [107] t 232. [108] t 232 – 233. [109] t 234.[110] t 247 – 249.[111] t 249 – 250. [112] t 251 – 252.[113] t 253.[114] t 253.[115] t 256. [116] t 258. all of this section of ms e’s evidence and the quotes from ms h’s report can be found at this citation. [117] t 259.[118] see t 260. [119] t 262 – 265.[120] t 265 – 266.[121] t 267 – 268.[122] t 267.[123] t 294. [124] t 295. [125] t 295. [126] generally see t 302. [127] t 302. [128] yango pastoral company pty ltd v first chicago australia limited [1978] hca 42; (1978) 139 clr 410.[129] t 307. for completeness, the mother’s tender bundle came with an index. this was later provided as an annotated index. this document, for ease of reference, is annexed to these reasons at annexure b.[130] the mother’s closing submissions are at t 283 – 294.[131] t 284 – 285.[132] jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298 especially at 308, 312 and 320-21. these submissions are at t 285.[133] see black & kellner [1992] famca 2; (1992) 15 fam lr 343, among others. see too chang v su [2002] famca 156; (2002) 170 flr 244.[134] t 288.[135] for other general submissions regarding financial matters, see t 291.[136] t 293.[137] t 308. [138] t 309 – 310.[139] t 311 – 312.[140] t 313 – 314.[141] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238.[142] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.211 [150].[143] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.228 [204] & [205]. of course, the comments by both kirby & hayne jj were in a legislative context different to that which operates today. accepting that qualification, respectfully, their honour’s comments remain important.[144] fox v percy [2003] hca 22; (2003) 214 clr 118 at pp.125-126 [23]. see also the extensive discussion by mchugh j in the same case at [65] – [93].[145] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[146] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. more recently still, a further full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[147] godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102; (2007) 208 flr 287.[148] m v s [2006] famca 1408; (2008) 37 fam lr 32.[149] mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483.[150] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[151] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[152] bondelmonte v bondelmonte [2017] hca 8; (2017) 259 clr 662 at [34] – [35] and [43]. of course, in considering a child’s views, the court should also be mindful of potential consequences if orders are made that are contrary to any expressed views of a child or children. [153] in the marriage of r [2002] famca 383; (2002) 169 flr 243; 29 fam lr 230.[154] among other places, see the full court decision in partington v cade (no.2) [2009] famcafc 230; (2009) 42 fam lr 401 at [48] and [[56].[155] in the marriage of kress (1976) 13 alr 309.[156] i should be taken to follow seriatim the dreaded legislative scaffold or perilous “pathway” unless otherwise stated. i will not necessarily specify each paragraph from the “considerations” along the way.[157] chapman v chapman [2014] famcafc 91; (2015) 51 fam lr 176.[158] ajo v gro (2005) 33 fam lr 439.[159] fields v smith [2015] famcafc 57; (2015) flc 93-638; (2016) 53 fam lr 1.[160] dickons v dickons [2012] famcafc 154; (2014) 50 fam lr 244.[161] grundt v great boulder proprietary gold mines ltd [1937] hca 58; (1938) 59 clr 641 at 674 – 676.[162] see k.r handley, estoppel by conduct and election, (second edition) (london: sweet & maxwell, 2016) par.1-007.[163] valder & saklani (2014) 251 clr 505.[164] hall v hall [2016] hca 23; (2016) 257 clr 490.[165] stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108.[166] chang v su [2002] famca 156; (2002) 170 flr 244; (2002) 29 fam lr 406.[167] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4(1)(a). [168] in the marriage of pierce [1998] famca 74; (1998) 24 fam lr 377 at [28]. [169] it will be recalled that even the husband’s experienced counsel referred to his conduct in relation to the change of name as “fraudulent.”