last updated: 29 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
booysen & ferreira [2022] fedcfamc2f 1248
orders
the court orders that:
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge kemp
introduction
notations:
proposals  the mother sought that the father pay 60% of her costs associated with the review application within 90 days of the date of these orders. (b) the father sought that the mother’s application for costs be dismissed.   the father sought that the mother’s application for costs be dismissed.
the law  subject to subsection (2), subsection 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa, 117ac and 118, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a) and (5) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just. (2a) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to: (a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant. (3) to avoid doubt, in proceedings in which an independent children's lawyer for a child has been appointed, the court may make an order under subsection (2) as to costs or security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, to the effect that each party to the proceedings bears, in such proportion as the court considers just, the costs of the independent children's lawyer in respect of the proceedings. (4) however, in proceedings in which an independent children's lawyer for a child has been appointed, if: (a) a party to the proceedings has received legal aid in respect of the proceedings, or (b) the court considers that a party to the proceedings would suffer financial hardship if the party had to bear a proportion of the costs of the independent children's lawyer,   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.   a party to the proceedings has received legal aid in respect of the proceedings, or (b) the court considers that a party to the proceedings would suffer financial hardship if the party had to bear a proportion of the costs of the independent children's lawyer,   the court considers that a party to the proceedings would suffer financial hardship if the party had to bear a proportion of the costs of the independent children's lawyer,
the court must not make an order under subsection (2) against that party in relation to the costs of the independent children's lawyer.  ) if: (a) under section 91b, an officer intervenes in proceedings, and (b) the officer acts in good faith in relation to the proceedings,   under section 91b, an officer intervenes in proceedings, and (b) the officer acts in good faith in relation to the proceedings,   the officer acts in good faith in relation to the proceedings,
the court must not, because of the intervention, make an order under subsection (2) of this section against the officer, or against an entity (including the commonwealth or a state or territory) by or on behalf of whom the officer was engaged or employed.   in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2) in proceedings in which an independent children's lawyer has been appointed, the court must disregard the fact that the independent children's lawyer is funded under a legal aid scheme or service established under a commonwealth, state or territory law or approved by the attorney-general.
“sub-section (2) requires a finding of justifying circumstances as an essential preliminary to the making of an order. beyond this there is nothing in the subject matter or in the interrelationship of the two provisions, which imposes any additional or special onus on an applicant for an order for costs”.
"...in exercising its discretion to award or refuse costs, a court should look at the matter primarily from the perspective of the defendant. to do so conforms to fundamental principle. if one thing is clear in the realm of costs, it is that, in criminal as well as civil proceedings, costs are not awarded by way of punishment of the unsuccessful party. they are compensatory in the sense that they are awarded to indemnify the successful party against the expense to which he or she has been put by reason of the legal proceedings".
“indeed, the list of matters set out in sub-s (2a) to which the family court is directed to have regard in making orders under s 117(2) indicates clearly that the subject-matter of the orders to be made under s 117(2) is the costs which a person may be ordered to pay another as indemnity for that other's liability for professional fees and out of pocket expenses reasonably incurred in the litigation, that is, "costs" as that expression is ordinarily understood in the law.”
application of the law
section 117(2a)(a) the financial circumstances of the party  in terms of his affidavit material, the father provides in his affidavit of 27 december 2021, a chronology of facts from july 2021 to december 2021 so as to provide the court with some clarity, he says, in relation to the background of the parties’ parenting dispute. the parties appear to have had a long history of disputation and the father refers to “battles” in [country c], [country b] and the united kingdom. [7] the court notes that there are in existence orders made in the high court (in the united kingdom “the uk”) by justice of the district registry, family law division made on 13 july 2021. those orders permitted the mother to leave the united kingdom with the child and to travel to australia. there was a requirement, in accordance with those orders, for registration of those orders with the family court of australia, as then named, and as referred to by that court in those orders.”   the court notes that there are in existence orders made in the high court (in the united kingdom “the uk”) by justice of the district registry, family law division made on 13 july 2021. those orders permitted the mother to leave the united kingdom with the child and to travel to australia. there was a requirement, in accordance with those orders, for registration of those orders with the family court of australia, as then named, and as referred to by that court in those orders.”
section 117(2a)(b) if any party in receipt of legal aid
section 117(2a)(c) the conduct of the parties in relation to the proceedings ] the court is satisfied that, at that point in time, the father was well aware that an application for costs would be made if he did not, otherwise, provide immediate confirmation as a consent to the stay of the, then, filed contravention application in this court. in terms of the mother’s affidavit filed on 9 march 2021, she has relevantly attached the affidavit of the proceedings on 10 december 2021, attaching the transcript of the proceedings on that date. the court asked ms mccarthy to identify in that transcript what the father’s position was in terms of the permanent stay application noting that the registrar responded to the substantial factual background stating:
i am not interested in what happened in 2018. i do not want to hear a background. i do not want to hear a background story about it. why are you filing 2 sets of proceedings in different courts? you cannot run them both
section 117(2a)(d) proceedings necessitated by the failure of a party to comply with previous orders
section 117(2a)(e) whether any party wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings
section 117(2a)(f) any offers in writing  on 29 march 2022, an open offer was made which sought that the father pay 70% of the mother’s costs, and (b) on 31 march 2022, when the matter was stood down for negotiations, an offer was made which sought that the father pay 60% of the mother’s costs.   on 31 march 2022, when the matter was stood down for negotiations, an offer was made which sought that the father pay 60% of the mother’s costs.
the father did not accept those offers.   costs and disbursements up to and including hearing of 10 december 2021 rendered by and paid to petkovic & todd solicitors, totalling $8,475.60, (b) unbilled work in progress for the review application, totalling $9,035.25, and (c) the costs for the hearing of the review application, totalling $3,900.00.   unbilled work in progress for the review application, totalling $9,035.25, and (c) the costs for the hearing of the review application, totalling $3,900.00.   the costs for the hearing of the review application, totalling $3,900.00.   in terms of the offer made on 29 march 2022: $12,257.60 (exclusive of gst), and (b) in terms of the offer made on 31 march 2022: $12,846.41 (exclusive of gst).   in terms of the offer made on 31 march 2022: $12,846.41 (exclusive of gst).
“if one considers the issue as a matter of policy, that is, on the basis of what the parliament's objective and purpose was in enacting the legislation, it is clear that the parliament wished to encourage settlements thereby reducing the cost of litigation to the parties and to the community. that must mean that a party cannot reject or ignore a reasonable offer seriously made except at his or her peril as to costs. at the same time a party cannot sit tight and postpone a decision as to acceptance until a matter is at the door of the court. by that time an offer which might have been acceptable to the offeror because of savings in time and preparation costs, may have become unattractive. in this case the offer was left open for a reasonable period, was clear and capable of acceptance which would have saved the parties considerable costs....”
“whilst s 117(2a) does not provide any direct guidance to where weight should be given in any one particular case, it is very important for the court to give proper consideration to written offers of settlement that have been made. ...the failure to heed a reasonable offer in circumstances where there is adequate knowledge of the parties at the time the offer is made to give it a proper consideration, is something to which very significant weight indeed ought normally be given.”   the terms of the mother’s offer were, substantially, on a “take it or leave it basis”. that is, the father should pay somewhere between 60% and 70% of the total costs she had incurred. there was no other position adopted, namely, for example if the review application was not pressed she would seek no costs. (b) the father’s position was that he felt he had something to argue for on the review application and his financial position was such that he did not wish to accept the wife’s offers or, it would appear, promote a counter offer in respect of the payment of any of her costs. (c) the mother’s offers did not promote the calculation of costs on any application of the schedules to the rules or the division 2 rules.   the father’s position was that he felt he had something to argue for on the review application and his financial position was such that he did not wish to accept the wife’s offers or, it would appear, promote a counter offer in respect of the payment of any of her costs. (c) the mother’s offers did not promote the calculation of costs on any application of the schedules to the rules or the division 2 rules.   the mother’s offers did not promote the calculation of costs on any application of the schedules to the rules or the division 2 rules.
section 117(2a)(g) such matters as the court considers relevant
indemnity costs
“...some of the circumstances which have been thought to warrant the exercise of the discretion to award costs on an indemnity basis. some examples which may be of relevance to the present case are as follows: where it appears that an action has been commenced or continued in circumstances where a party properly advised should have known that he had no chance of success. in such cases the action must be presumed to have been commenced or continued for some ulterior motive or because of some wilful disregard of the known facts: see fountain selected meats (sales) pty ltd v international produce merchants pty ltd (1988) 81 alr 397. making allegations of fraud, knowing them to be false, and the making of irrelevant allegations of fraud: see fountain selected meats (sales) pty ltd. evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and to other parties: see tetijo holdings pty ltd v keeprite australia pty ltd (french j, fed c of a, 3 may 1991, unreported). the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions: see ragatta developments pty ltd v westpac banking corporation (davies j, fed c of a, 5 march 1993, unreported). an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise.”
“[in terms of] the power to order costs on an indemnity basis... ...that in an appropriate case, the court has a discretion to order costs on an indemnity basis and that such costs may be ordered where they have been incurred under a costs agreement which departs from the usual scale of costs. however, it is fundamental to the exercise of that discretion in the family court that the judge should not only understand that such an order is a very great departure from the normal standard, but also that the judge should know what the terms of the agreement are, to what extent it exceeds the parameters set by the scale and what its likely impact will be on the financial position of each of the parties. this impact is a relevant matter to which the trial judge should have had regard, when considering the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings under sec 117(2a)(a), or perhaps even more as a relevant matter under paragraph (g). the degree to which a costs agreement departs from the established norm and the actual financial significance of such a departure may itself be a reason for not ordering costs on an indemnity basis. [in terms of] the proper exercise of the discretion the intent of sec 117(1) and 117(2) is that in this jurisdiction costs should not follow the event as a matter of course. however, where the justice of the matter so requires, the court may make such order as the court considers just. as we have pointed out, the court may depart from the scale of costs prescribed under the rules... the court should not depart lightly from the ordinary rules relating to costs between party and party and the circumstances justifying the departure should be of an exceptional kind... indemnity costs orders are still an exception in this and other jurisdictions... insofar as an unaccepted offer of compromise which exceeds a judgment may justify an order for costs, the general practice in this jurisdiction so far has been to order no more than costs on a party and party basis. even in cases where there has been dishonest concealment of assets or income... no more than party and party costs have been awarded. when considering what is just in this case, one must bear in mind that a party who enters into a costs agreement should be warned and must anticipate in this jurisdiction that each party might well have to bear his or her own costs, and that even if an order for party and party costs is made, the difference between party and party costs and costs payable under a costs agreement may consume all, or a substantial part, of the property order. in this particular case the wife changed her solicitors in august 1990. it must then have been apparent to her, or at least to her new solicitors that this might become drawn out litigation and that a rate of costs which amounted to three times the scale, exposed the wife to great risks. if she was willing to assume these risks, it does not seem just to saddle the husband with them.
“all that is required is that the court asked to exercise the discretion be satisfied that some “particular facts and circumstances of the case in question warrant the making of an order for the payment of costs other than on a party and party basis”: per shepherd j in colgate-palmolive company v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536, (1993) 46 fcr 225 at 223”.
“...the category of cases in which it would be appropriate to make an order for indemnity costs does not appear to be fully defined.”
the court held that the failure to accept an offer to compromise was, without more, insufficient to justify the making of a costs order on an indemnity basis. they stated:
“in our opinion, the failure to accept an offer which in retrospect, perhaps should have been accepted is without more, insufficient to justify the making of a costs order on an indemnity basis. the rejection of the offer must be at the very least imprudent. we express no opinion as to when the rejection of an offer may be so classified...”
“94. we recognise that the rules now expressly refer to orders for costs on an indemnity basis. we recognise also that the rules in this court are not precisely the same as those in other courts, however, there is nothing in the rules which indicates that the fundamental principle applied in other jurisdictions should not also be applied in this jurisdiction. indeed rule 19.18 makes clear that the "default" position is that costs are awarded on a party/party basis. as we have pointed out, the "usual rule" relating to the basis upon which costs are ordered in this jurisdiction is well entrenched. we consider it would be most unsettling if we purported to depart from the existing practice. furthermore, we would not consider it desirable to do so ... " in particular, we respectfully agree with cooper and merkel jj that there are "two seemingly irreconcilable objectives" at stake. placing great emphasis on the importance of one objective, namely "relieving a successful litigant from the burden of costs which that litigant should not have been required to incur" will inevitably lead to insufficient emphasis being placed on the importance of the other objective of "protecting access to justice by only exposing an unsuccessful litigant in the usual course to an order for scale costs on a party and party basis”.
costs in a fixed sum
“we accept the practicality of the submission that, in an appropriate case, a judicial officer should make an order in sum certain, rather than put the parties to the expense and stress of further proceedings to assess costs.”
and in bolinger v ivy [2008] famca 274, where the judge stated:
“there is much to be said for fixing costs. the process of assessment of costs is in itself time consuming and expensive. there is also of course, the possibility of a later review”. the wife submitted that in independent children’s lawyer ss and anor [2009] famca 519 it was said “i have the power to order specific amounts of costs”.
the court accepts that the disbursement item was reasonably incurred.
conclusion
time to pay
associate: dated: 14 september 2022
dated: 14 september 2022