last updated: 20 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
horne & innes (deceased) (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1251
orders
the court orders:costs:
the court further orders:
application by the third respondent – regarding further participation in court appearances
trial directions  the final orders sought, fully particularized, (b) a chronology of relevant events in a table format, (c) a list of documents intended to be relied upon at the trial, (d) a tablet setting out all assets and liabilities, and (e) in relation to property matters, a statement of evidence relative to the relevant contributions and issues in dispute and respective percentages referring to section 79(4) and 75(2) (or de-facto equivalent provisions).   a chronology of relevant events in a table format, (c) a list of documents intended to be relied upon at the trial, (d) a tablet setting out all assets and liabilities, and (e) in relation to property matters, a statement of evidence relative to the relevant contributions and issues in dispute and respective percentages referring to section 79(4) and 75(2) (or de-facto equivalent provisions).   a list of documents intended to be relied upon at the trial, (d) a tablet setting out all assets and liabilities, and (e) in relation to property matters, a statement of evidence relative to the relevant contributions and issues in dispute and respective percentages referring to section 79(4) and 75(2) (or de-facto equivalent provisions).   a tablet setting out all assets and liabilities, and (e) in relation to property matters, a statement of evidence relative to the relevant contributions and issues in dispute and respective percentages referring to section 79(4) and 75(2) (or de-facto equivalent provisions).   in relation to property matters, a statement of evidence relative to the relevant contributions and issues in dispute and respective percentages referring to section 79(4) and 75(2) (or de-facto equivalent provisions).
notation:
reasons for judgment
financial circumstances of each of the parties.
the second respondent – ms merritt.
the executor of the estate – mr baxter
turning to the next consideration, whether a party has been wholly unsuccessful.
conduct of the parties.
any other matter.
future of this litigation.
associate: dated: 15 september 2022
dated: 15 september 2022