last updated: 3 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
filipe & rudd [2022] fedcfamc2f 1333
orders
until further order, the court orders that:  orders 3 to 15 (inclusive) of the orders made by the court on 15 november 2018, and (b) orders 1, 2 and 4 made with the consent of the parties by the court on 18 may 2021, are suspended for the duration of the time that the mother is away and orders 2 to 12 of these orders shall have immediate effect.   orders 1, 2 and 4 made with the consent of the parties by the court on 18 may 2021, are suspended for the duration of the time that the mother is away and orders 2 to 12 of these orders shall have immediate effect.
are suspended for the duration of the time that the mother is away and orders 2 to 12 of these orders shall have immediate effect.   change her residence (whether on a permanent basis or not) with such written notice to specify the mother’s date of departure (‘the date of departure’) and anticipated date of return (if applicable), and/or (b) return to her residence (whether on a permanent basis or not) with such written notice to specify the mother’s date of return (‘the date of return’).   return to her residence (whether on a permanent basis or not) with such written notice to specify the mother’s date of return (‘the date of return’).   the changeover location being either at the city d airport or the sydney airport, and (b) a copy of x’s travel itinerary,   a copy of x’s travel itinerary,
with each party to be responsible for the costs of delivering and returning x to the nominated airport and the mother to otherwise be responsible for the costs of x’s travel provided that if x is to travel by air as an unaccompanied minor, then such flights must not require a stopover and must specify that the return destination at the conclusion of the travel is either the city d airport or the sydney airport and the mother and the father are to keep each other informed by text message of any flight delays and/or cancellations as well as x’s safe arrival to either of them.  the mother’s telephone contact details, (b) x’s booking confirmation notice (if applicable), (c) x’s return airfare tickets (if applicable), and (d) the address details of the location(s) where x will be staying overnight and when he will be staying there, and (e) x’s telephone contact details.   x’s booking confirmation notice (if applicable), (c) x’s return airfare tickets (if applicable), and (d) the address details of the location(s) where x will be staying overnight and when he will be staying there, and (e) x’s telephone contact details.   x’s return airfare tickets (if applicable), and (d) the address details of the location(s) where x will be staying overnight and when he will be staying there, and (e) x’s telephone contact details.   the address details of the location(s) where x will be staying overnight and when he will be staying there, and (e) x’s telephone contact details.   x’s telephone contact details.
the court further orders that:
specific issues report
final hearing date/s:
liaising with the family consultant and any applicable single expert witness:  they will be required for cross-examination on the last day of the hearing, and (b) they may give their evidence by videolink.   they may give their evidence by videolink.
filing and service of trial material:  any amended initiating application or amended response to initiating application setting out with precision the final orders sought, (b) one (1) updated and consolidated trial affidavit of each party, and (c) one (1) updated and consolidated trial affidavit of any witness/es whose evidence the party intends to rely upon, (d) with all such affidavits to comply with the requirements of the rules, including as to spacing and font sizes.   one (1) updated and consolidated trial affidavit of each party, and (c) one (1) updated and consolidated trial affidavit of any witness/es whose evidence the party intends to rely upon, (d) with all such affidavits to comply with the requirements of the rules, including as to spacing and font sizes.   one (1) updated and consolidated trial affidavit of any witness/es whose evidence the party intends to rely upon, (d) with all such affidavits to comply with the requirements of the rules, including as to spacing and font sizes.   with all such affidavits to comply with the requirements of the rules, including as to spacing and font sizes.
the term “consolidated trial affidavit” is defined in notation j.   a list of the documents to be relied upon by that party, (b) a list of the issues for determination, (c) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (d) a brief summary of that party’s contentions with respect to ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 which are said to be relevant to the orders proposed by that party, (e) a list of authorities which that party intends to cite to the court during the presentation of any arguments, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended to refer, (f) a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.   a list of the issues for determination, (c) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (d) a brief summary of that party’s contentions with respect to ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 which are said to be relevant to the orders proposed by that party, (e) a list of authorities which that party intends to cite to the court during the presentation of any arguments, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended to refer, (f) a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.   a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (d) a brief summary of that party’s contentions with respect to ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 which are said to be relevant to the orders proposed by that party, (e) a list of authorities which that party intends to cite to the court during the presentation of any arguments, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended to refer, (f) a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.   a brief summary of that party’s contentions with respect to ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 which are said to be relevant to the orders proposed by that party, (e) a list of authorities which that party intends to cite to the court during the presentation of any arguments, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended to refer, (f) a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.   a list of authorities which that party intends to cite to the court during the presentation of any arguments, together with copies of any unreported decisions to which it is intended to refer, (f) a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.   a precise minute of the orders sought by the party.
objections to evidence:
subpoenas:  the court’s expectation being that the father (as the applicant) will attend to the preparation and filing of such subpoenas with the court, (b) the classes of documents sought to be produced to include all of x’s progress reports, parent-teacher communications about x, x’s naplan results and x’s counselling records (as may be applicable), (c) a production date that is not later than six (6) weeks prior to the scheduled appointments for the family report interviews.   the classes of documents sought to be produced to include all of x’s progress reports, parent-teacher communications about x, x’s naplan results and x’s counselling records (as may be applicable), (c) a production date that is not later than six (6) weeks prior to the scheduled appointments for the family report interviews.   a production date that is not later than six (6) weeks prior to the scheduled appointments for the family report interviews.   the mother is at liberty to do so forthwith, and/or (b) either party has liberty to approach the chambers of judge kearney (by email to associate.judgekearney@fcfcoa.gov.au) to seek the urgent re-listing of the proceedings for procedural hearing to resolve any outstanding issue regarding the issuing of subpoenas and/or the readiness of the matter for trial provided that any such request is contemporaneously sent to the other party.   either party has liberty to approach the chambers of judge kearney (by email to associate.judgekearney@fcfcoa.gov.au) to seek the urgent re-listing of the proceedings for procedural hearing to resolve any outstanding issue regarding the issuing of subpoenas and/or the readiness of the matter for trial provided that any such request is contemporaneously sent to the other party.
payment of hearing fee
costs notices  the client’s actual costs, both paid and owing, up to and including the final hearing. in the case of paid costs, the costs notice is to identify the source of the funds, (b) the estimated final costs of the party up to and including the final hearing, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of expenses.   the estimated final costs of the party up to and including the final hearing, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of expenses.   any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of expenses.
the court notes that:
which may entail careful consideration of the material produced on subpoena from x’s educators as well as direct communications between the family consultant and x’s educators.
example
a consolidated trial affidavit cannot be in these terms:
“i repeat and rely upon my earlier affidavit filed on dd/mm/yy” or “this affidavit is to be read with my earlier affidavit of dd/mm/yy”.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction  whether the mother’s application to commence parenting proceedings should be dismissed in full (or in part) in reliance of the principle espoused in the decision of rice and asplund [1978] famca 84, and (b) if the proceedings were not dismissed, then – (i) what (if any) parenting orders should be made in variation to the existing final orders in contemplation of the time x should spend with either party depending on whether x is to live with the mother when she is travelling around australia (‘the trip’), and (ii) whether any such orders should be made on a final or interlocutory basis.   if the proceedings were not dismissed, then – (i) what (if any) parenting orders should be made in variation to the existing final orders in contemplation of the time x should spend with either party depending on whether x is to live with the mother when she is travelling around australia (‘the trip’), and (ii) whether any such orders should be made on a final or interlocutory basis.   what (if any) parenting orders should be made in variation to the existing final orders in contemplation of the time x should spend with either party depending on whether x is to live with the mother when she is travelling around australia (‘the trip’), and (ii) whether any such orders should be made on a final or interlocutory basis.  ) whether any such orders should be made on a final or interlocutory basis.   dismiss all outstanding interlocutory proceedings, (b) suspend the final orders as they relate to with whom x lives and what time he spends with the other party in the event that the mother embarks on the trip, (c) make interlocutory parenting orders for x to live with the father and spend two-thirds of each school holiday with the mother in the event that the mother is away on the trip, (d) make procedural orders in preparation for a one-day trial including the family participating in a specific issues report and the allocation of trial dates in july 2023 in person.   suspend the final orders as they relate to with whom x lives and what time he spends with the other party in the event that the mother embarks on the trip, (c) make interlocutory parenting orders for x to live with the father and spend two-thirds of each school holiday with the mother in the event that the mother is away on the trip, (d) make procedural orders in preparation for a one-day trial including the family participating in a specific issues report and the allocation of trial dates in july 2023 in person.   make interlocutory parenting orders for x to live with the father and spend two-thirds of each school holiday with the mother in the event that the mother is away on the trip, (d) make procedural orders in preparation for a one-day trial including the family participating in a specific issues report and the allocation of trial dates in july 2023 in person.   make procedural orders in preparation for a one-day trial including the family participating in a specific issues report and the allocation of trial dates in july 2023 in person.
the applicable law
principle 1: the first principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings. principle 4: the fourth principle is that the proceedings are, as far as possible, to be conducted in a way that will promote cooperative and child-focused parenting by the parties.
in giving effect to the principles for conducting child related proceedings the court must: consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings. actively direct control and manage conduct of the proceedings. conduct proceedings in a way that will promote cooperation and child focused parenting by the parties. cause the proceedings to be conducted without undue delay with as little formality and legal technicality as possible.
the principles which, in my view, should apply in such cases are that the court should have regard to any earlier order and to the reasons for material on which that order was based. it should not lightly entertain an application to reverse an earlier custody order. to do so would be to invite endless litigation... change is an ever present factor in human affairs. therefore, the court would need to be satisfied by the applicant that... there is some changed circumstance which will justify such a serious step, some new factor arising or, at any rate, some factor which was not disclosed at the previous hearing which would have been material.   emphasis)
this court would not wish to subject children to the repeated intervention of court proceedings to the extent that they have to be reassessed every few months or every year by court counsellors to see if they maintain the same attitudes.
nevertheless, there are significant changes that occur and which do require a court to reconsider decisions previously made. whether in a particular case a court should be willing to embark upon another hearing concerning the child and parent, or whether to do so would itself be demonstrably contrary to the best interests of the child, is a decision to be made in each particular case. how is that decision to be made? the court must look at:   the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based. (2) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. (3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.   whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. (3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.   if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.
though sometimes unstated, the underlying conclusion will or ought be that the interests of the child in not being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s welfare than to allow the application to continue.  r emphasis)   dispose of all or part of the proceeding, or (b) make a trial unnecessary, or (c) make a trial substantially shorter, or (d) save substantial costs.   make a trial unnecessary, or (c) make a trial substantially shorter, or (d) save substantial costs.   make a trial substantially shorter, or (d) save substantial costs.   save substantial costs.
the evidence  affidavit of mr filipe filed 20 may 2022 (‘the father’s affidavit’), (b) outline of case of the father document filed 14 september 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’, (c) minute of orders sought filed by the father on 1 september 2022 – exhibit ‘f2’, (d) various exhibits marked from ‘f3’ to ‘f5’.   outline of case of the father document filed 14 september 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’, (c) minute of orders sought filed by the father on 1 september 2022 – exhibit ‘f2’, (d) various exhibits marked from ‘f3’ to ‘f5’.   minute of orders sought filed by the father on 1 september 2022 – exhibit ‘f2’, (d) various exhibits marked from ‘f3’ to ‘f5’.   various exhibits marked from ‘f3’ to ‘f5’.   affidavit of ms rudd filed 9 may 2022 (the mother’s affidavit), (b) outline of case of the mother document filed 14 september 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’, (c) minute of orders sought filed by the mother on 18 august 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m2’.   outline of case of the mother document filed 14 september 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’, (c) minute of orders sought filed by the mother on 18 august 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m2’.   minute of orders sought filed by the mother on 18 august 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m2’.
the parties’ proposals  x shall live with the father, (ii) x shall go to school at the c school, which i shall refer to as ‘c school, and (iii) x shall spend time with the mother for two-thirds of each school holiday period.  ) x shall go to school at the c school, which i shall refer to as ‘c school, and (iii) x shall spend time with the mother for two-thirds of each school holiday period.  i) x shall spend time with the mother for two-thirds of each school holiday period.
chronology  she identified that – and this is at paragraph 26 – that the lockdowns and restrictions had caused x to fall behind in his schoolwork but that she held the view that, with the additional work that her and her partner had been doing with x, he was now back up into grade level and possibly slightly ahead. this was despite there being a number of reports which identified that x rarely does his homework, so there’s three of these reports and i think two of them made that note. (b) then, in paragraph 30, the mother says that, during the 2021 new south wales covid lockdowns, x commenced home learning from 6 august 2021 and didn’t return back into the classroom until about two and a half months later, on 22 october 2021. she made comments to the effect that her and her partner were solely responsible for x’s educational progress and had some criticisms of the father about his non-engagement in that process of supporting x. (c) at paragraph 34, the mother says this: i am extremely proud of [x], myself and [mr g] – being her partner – for the work that we have all put into [x’s] education in times that he has been home-educated, as well as the additional work that we have put in whilst he has been at school since finding out he had fallen behind. in the time that [x] was home-educated, he went up two spelling levels from the lowest to the second-highest, and he has also received his first student of the week certificate, which was noted as being for excellent improvement in spelling and writing. so this all occurred in semester 2 of 2021.   then, in paragraph 30, the mother says that, during the 2021 new south wales covid lockdowns, x commenced home learning from 6 august 2021 and didn’t return back into the classroom until about two and a half months later, on 22 october 2021. she made comments to the effect that her and her partner were solely responsible for x’s educational progress and had some criticisms of the father about his non-engagement in that process of supporting x. (c) at paragraph 34, the mother says this: i am extremely proud of [x], myself and [mr g] – being her partner – for the work that we have all put into [x’s] education in times that he has been home-educated, as well as the additional work that we have put in whilst he has been at school since finding out he had fallen behind. in the time that [x] was home-educated, he went up two spelling levels from the lowest to the second-highest, and he has also received his first student of the week certificate, which was noted as being for excellent improvement in spelling and writing. so this all occurred in semester 2 of 2021.   at paragraph 34, the mother says this: i am extremely proud of [x], myself and [mr g] – being her partner – for the work that we have all put into [x’s] education in times that he has been home-educated, as well as the additional work that we have put in whilst he has been at school since finding out he had fallen behind. in the time that [x] was home-educated, he went up two spelling levels from the lowest to the second-highest, and he has also received his first student of the week certificate, which was noted as being for excellent improvement in spelling and writing. so this all occurred in semester 2 of 2021.
so this all occurred in semester 2 of 2021.
i just wanted to let you know [x] was a bit upset today about staying permanently at his dad’s.
he has made some great improvements to his schoolwork, most notably in his spelling and writing.
so i have got that evidence.
where an education authority has established that a discrepancy exists between the student’s intellectual potential and actual academic achievement, the department may approve payment for additional tuition.
over the past three years, [x’s] reading has not progressed as much as other year 3 students and maths, although stronger, is not consistent. school reports suggest generally working at grade level. note large absence semester 1.
interruptions to learning due to covid-19 and learning from home periods in 2020 and 2021 –
and then identifies forms of additional tuition that may be required, and that form is then countersigned by the father on 2 march 2022.   has continued to make steady progress this semester in all subject areas.
so that was back in may.
analysis – father’s application to dismiss   inconsistent outcomes as to x’s attitudes to learning around the completion of homework that are derived from x’s progress reports over three semesters during which there were periods when the mother was home schooling him, (b) the mother giving evidence to the effect that she and her partner have been solely responsible for x’s educational progress and development, (c) x’s current year 3 teacher completing an application for x’s to have access to additional tuition and support through the department of veterans’ affairs initiative as a result of identifying that a discrepancy existed between x’s intellectual potential and actual academic achievement particularly insofar as x’s reading progress is not in line with his peers and his progress in maths has been inconsistent with a note that in semester 1 there were large absences which appears to relate to lockdowns due to covid 19 and learning from home periods in both 2020 and 2021, (d) the mother being unaware of x being exposed to or receiving any benefits from the implementation (if any) of such additional formal supports, (e) the mother proposing that she will be responsible for x’s home schooling of the curriculum prepared by b school in the absence of any independent records from the school setting out their agreement to this regime (which, if i accept on its face what exhibit ‘f4’ says, would require a start and end date), and there being no evidence of any barrier to the mother making another application in time for the determination of these proceedings – and this had some weight in the sense of the first application being for about a two-month period whereas the mother’s current proposal is for the whole academic year, and how that home schooling would then actually be implemented, and whether there was any consideration or expectation of x participating remotely by way of audio visual means, for example, in any of his classroom activities, (f) the mother proposing that on four occasions in 2023, x would spend time with the father for a three-week holiday (during which on at least three occasions, the proposed block of time will at least partially fall during school terms) such that whatever classroom curriculum the mother was following for x, would necessarily be disrupted.   the mother giving evidence to the effect that she and her partner have been solely responsible for x’s educational progress and development, (c) x’s current year 3 teacher completing an application for x’s to have access to additional tuition and support through the department of veterans’ affairs initiative as a result of identifying that a discrepancy existed between x’s intellectual potential and actual academic achievement particularly insofar as x’s reading progress is not in line with his peers and his progress in maths has been inconsistent with a note that in semester 1 there were large absences which appears to relate to lockdowns due to covid 19 and learning from home periods in both 2020 and 2021, (d) the mother being unaware of x being exposed to or receiving any benefits from the implementation (if any) of such additional formal supports, (e) the mother proposing that she will be responsible for x’s home schooling of the curriculum prepared by b school in the absence of any independent records from the school setting out their agreement to this regime (which, if i accept on its face what exhibit ‘f4’ says, would require a start and end date), and there being no evidence of any barrier to the mother making another application in time for the determination of these proceedings – and this had some weight in the sense of the first application being for about a two-month period whereas the mother’s current proposal is for the whole academic year, and how that home schooling would then actually be implemented, and whether there was any consideration or expectation of x participating remotely by way of audio visual means, for example, in any of his classroom activities, (f) the mother proposing that on four occasions in 2023, x would spend time with the father for a three-week holiday (during which on at least three occasions, the proposed block of time will at least partially fall during school terms) such that whatever classroom curriculum the mother was following for x, would necessarily be disrupted.   x’s current year 3 teacher completing an application for x’s to have access to additional tuition and support through the department of veterans’ affairs initiative as a result of identifying that a discrepancy existed between x’s intellectual potential and actual academic achievement particularly insofar as x’s reading progress is not in line with his peers and his progress in maths has been inconsistent with a note that in semester 1 there were large absences which appears to relate to lockdowns due to covid 19 and learning from home periods in both 2020 and 2021, (d) the mother being unaware of x being exposed to or receiving any benefits from the implementation (if any) of such additional formal supports, (e) the mother proposing that she will be responsible for x’s home schooling of the curriculum prepared by b school in the absence of any independent records from the school setting out their agreement to this regime (which, if i accept on its face what exhibit ‘f4’ says, would require a start and end date), and there being no evidence of any barrier to the mother making another application in time for the determination of these proceedings – and this had some weight in the sense of the first application being for about a two-month period whereas the mother’s current proposal is for the whole academic year, and how that home schooling would then actually be implemented, and whether there was any consideration or expectation of x participating remotely by way of audio visual means, for example, in any of his classroom activities, (f) the mother proposing that on four occasions in 2023, x would spend time with the father for a three-week holiday (during which on at least three occasions, the proposed block of time will at least partially fall during school terms) such that whatever classroom curriculum the mother was following for x, would necessarily be disrupted.   the mother being unaware of x being exposed to or receiving any benefits from the implementation (if any) of such additional formal supports, (e) the mother proposing that she will be responsible for x’s home schooling of the curriculum prepared by b school in the absence of any independent records from the school setting out their agreement to this regime (which, if i accept on its face what exhibit ‘f4’ says, would require a start and end date), and there being no evidence of any barrier to the mother making another application in time for the determination of these proceedings – and this had some weight in the sense of the first application being for about a two-month period whereas the mother’s current proposal is for the whole academic year, and how that home schooling would then actually be implemented, and whether there was any consideration or expectation of x participating remotely by way of audio visual means, for example, in any of his classroom activities, (f) the mother proposing that on four occasions in 2023, x would spend time with the father for a three-week holiday (during which on at least three occasions, the proposed block of time will at least partially fall during school terms) such that whatever classroom curriculum the mother was following for x, would necessarily be disrupted.   the mother proposing that she will be responsible for x’s home schooling of the curriculum prepared by b school in the absence of any independent records from the school setting out their agreement to this regime (which, if i accept on its face what exhibit ‘f4’ says, would require a start and end date), and there being no evidence of any barrier to the mother making another application in time for the determination of these proceedings – and this had some weight in the sense of the first application being for about a two-month period whereas the mother’s current proposal is for the whole academic year, and how that home schooling would then actually be implemented, and whether there was any consideration or expectation of x participating remotely by way of audio visual means, for example, in any of his classroom activities, (f) the mother proposing that on four occasions in 2023, x would spend time with the father for a three-week holiday (during which on at least three occasions, the proposed block of time will at least partially fall during school terms) such that whatever classroom curriculum the mother was following for x, would necessarily be disrupted.   the mother proposing that on four occasions in 2023, x would spend time with the father for a three-week holiday (during which on at least three occasions, the proposed block of time will at least partially fall during school terms) such that whatever classroom curriculum the mother was following for x, would necessarily be disrupted.
the father’s proposal for final orders
the parties’ competing proposals for parenting orders  what is the impact of each party’s proposal on x and his relationships with the parties and members of their households? (b) what is the impact for x in transitioning into and out of b school and c school commencing in 2023 and then (perhaps) beyond? (c) would home schooling by the mother (whilst she and x are travelling) support x’s emotional and social and intellectual needs, and if so to what extent?   what is the impact for x in transitioning into and out of b school and c school commencing in 2023 and then (perhaps) beyond? (c) would home schooling by the mother (whilst she and x are travelling) support x’s emotional and social and intellectual needs, and if so to what extent?   would home schooling by the mother (whilst she and x are travelling) support x’s emotional and social and intellectual needs, and if so to what extent?
analysis – future case management
conclusion  x to live with the father, (b) x to be enrolled at c school, (c) x to spend two-thirds of all school holidays with the mother, (d) arrangements be put in place to support school holiday time based on the distance between the mother’s geographical location at the time, and the father’s residence including as to who pays for what costs, (e) x to have communication with the mother three times a week, (f) each party (whenever x is in their care) to comply with recommendations from specified health authorities/professionals involved in managing x’s serious medical condition.   x to be enrolled at c school, (c) x to spend two-thirds of all school holidays with the mother, (d) arrangements be put in place to support school holiday time based on the distance between the mother’s geographical location at the time, and the father’s residence including as to who pays for what costs, (e) x to have communication with the mother three times a week, (f) each party (whenever x is in their care) to comply with recommendations from specified health authorities/professionals involved in managing x’s serious medical condition.   x to spend two-thirds of all school holidays with the mother, (d) arrangements be put in place to support school holiday time based on the distance between the mother’s geographical location at the time, and the father’s residence including as to who pays for what costs, (e) x to have communication with the mother three times a week, (f) each party (whenever x is in their care) to comply with recommendations from specified health authorities/professionals involved in managing x’s serious medical condition.   arrangements be put in place to support school holiday time based on the distance between the mother’s geographical location at the time, and the father’s residence including as to who pays for what costs, (e) x to have communication with the mother three times a week, (f) each party (whenever x is in their care) to comply with recommendations from specified health authorities/professionals involved in managing x’s serious medical condition.   x to have communication with the mother three times a week, (f) each party (whenever x is in their care) to comply with recommendations from specified health authorities/professionals involved in managing x’s serious medical condition.   each party (whenever x is in their care) to comply with recommendations from specified health authorities/professionals involved in managing x’s serious medical condition.   x has a strong and loving relationship with both parties and i am satisfied that if x lives with the father, the mother’s relationship with her son will endure firstly, because of the significant communication i will order, secondly, because of the significant holiday time they will spend together, and thirdly, because i am satisfied that the father will support their relationship in circumstances which may become quite difficult to navigate as x processes his mother’s decision to travel away without him, (b) the mother’s proposal required significant changes to x’s living arrangements and, on balance, the potential adverse impacts on his educational progress derived from home schooling outweighed the benefits she foresaw in x exploring australia with his family. of particular concern to me was the mother’s inconsistent submissions to justify her position that x would be able to spend time with the father for four three-week periods in holidays, insofar as, on the one hand, she will be following the curriculum prepared by b school, (which appears to have been problematic if i consider the reasons given by x’s class teacher to apply for additional support earlier this year), but then tells the court that x would work at a different pace to the curriculum. (c) the mother’s submissions suggested to me that she was prioritising her needs to take her family away on the trip ahead of x’s needs, particularly when considering the background of, firstly, the court not having any documents from b school to support x being home schooled for a year, and, secondly, the inconsistencies between x’s progress reports versus the messages from his year 2 teacher and his award late last year, and then the application made by his year 3 teacher earlier this year, (and the background explanation which included periods of home schooling). in combination, the mother’s evidence was insufficient to persuade me that it would be in x’s best interests for me to permit the mother to home school him whilst on the trip. it may be that, with the benefit of further evidence from the parties, the production of subpoenaed documents and the forensic inquiries inherent in the specific issues report that this conclusion may alter. i have an open mind on that issue, but i have to work with the evidence i have now to make an interlocutory decision. (d) and, finally, i am satisfied that the father has the capacity to manage x’s health issues if x does live with him, and the mother has the capacity to manage x’s health issues if x spends extended holidays with her despite her location.   the mother’s proposal required significant changes to x’s living arrangements and, on balance, the potential adverse impacts on his educational progress derived from home schooling outweighed the benefits she foresaw in x exploring australia with his family. of particular concern to me was the mother’s inconsistent submissions to justify her position that x would be able to spend time with the father for four three-week periods in holidays, insofar as, on the one hand, she will be following the curriculum prepared by b school, (which appears to have been problematic if i consider the reasons given by x’s class teacher to apply for additional support earlier this year), but then tells the court that x would work at a different pace to the curriculum. (c) the mother’s submissions suggested to me that she was prioritising her needs to take her family away on the trip ahead of x’s needs, particularly when considering the background of, firstly, the court not having any documents from b school to support x being home schooled for a year, and, secondly, the inconsistencies between x’s progress reports versus the messages from his year 2 teacher and his award late last year, and then the application made by his year 3 teacher earlier this year, (and the background explanation which included periods of home schooling). in combination, the mother’s evidence was insufficient to persuade me that it would be in x’s best interests for me to permit the mother to home school him whilst on the trip. it may be that, with the benefit of further evidence from the parties, the production of subpoenaed documents and the forensic inquiries inherent in the specific issues report that this conclusion may alter. i have an open mind on that issue, but i have to work with the evidence i have now to make an interlocutory decision. (d) and, finally, i am satisfied that the father has the capacity to manage x’s health issues if x does live with him, and the mother has the capacity to manage x’s health issues if x spends extended holidays with her despite her location.   the mother’s submissions suggested to me that she was prioritising her needs to take her family away on the trip ahead of x’s needs, particularly when considering the background of, firstly, the court not having any documents from b school to support x being home schooled for a year, and, secondly, the inconsistencies between x’s progress reports versus the messages from his year 2 teacher and his award late last year, and then the application made by his year 3 teacher earlier this year, (and the background explanation which included periods of home schooling). in combination, the mother’s evidence was insufficient to persuade me that it would be in x’s best interests for me to permit the mother to home school him whilst on the trip. it may be that, with the benefit of further evidence from the parties, the production of subpoenaed documents and the forensic inquiries inherent in the specific issues report that this conclusion may alter. i have an open mind on that issue, but i have to work with the evidence i have now to make an interlocutory decision. (d) and, finally, i am satisfied that the father has the capacity to manage x’s health issues if x does live with him, and the mother has the capacity to manage x’s health issues if x spends extended holidays with her despite her location.   and, finally, i am satisfied that the father has the capacity to manage x’s health issues if x does live with him, and the mother has the capacity to manage x’s health issues if x spends extended holidays with her despite her location.
associate: dated: 13 october 2022
dated: 13 october 2022