last updated: 13 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
brenner & chessington [2022] fedcfamc2f 1354
orders
the court orders that:  the first respondent, ms chessington (for the child, mr b born 2000) for the period from 1 july 2017 to 10 july 2018, and (b) the second respondent, ms matthews (for the child, ms c born 2000) from 1 july 2017 to 12 august 2018.   the second respondent, ms matthews (for the child, ms c born 2000) from 1 july 2017 to 12 august 2018.   the first respondent, ms chessington (for the child, mr b born 10 july 2000) for the period from 1 july 2017 to 10 july 2018 and the annual rate of child support payable by the applicant be adjusted to the minimum annual assessment rate, and (b) the second respondent, ms matthews (for the child, ms c born 12 august 2000) from 1 july 2017 to 12 august 2018 and the annual rate of child support payable by the applicant be adjusted to the minimum annual assessment rate.   the second respondent, ms matthews (for the child, ms c born 12 august 2000) from 1 july 2017 to 12 august 2018 and the annual rate of child support payable by the applicant be adjusted to the minimum annual assessment rate.
and the court directs that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge monahan:introduction
background
procedural history
chronology
orders sought
“1. the applicant seeks the court to grant leave in pursuant to section 111 of the child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth) to vary his child support payments for a period of up to 5 years in support of section 112(6). specifically, the applicant seeks to adjust his taxable income in pursuant to section 118[1](g). 2. if the court grants leave under section 112(6), the applicant seeks to amend the calculation so that approximately $201,000 of his superannuation payments are not considered ‘taxable income’ within the last 5 years in pursuant with section 112(6).”
“the applicant seeks leave from the court for a departure application to amend the administrative assessment that is more than 18 months old. the applicant seeks the court to determine that no money is payable, and all penalties and interests are hereby waived.”
and assuming leave is granted,
evidence
law, discussion and findings
application for leave to apply for a departure order out of time
court’s discretionary power  a liable parent, or a carer entitled to child support, (the applicant) may apply to a court having jurisdiction under this act for leave for:   the registrar to make a determination under section 98s, or (b) the court to make an order under section 118,
in respect of a day in a child support period, being a day that is more than 18 months, and less than 7 years, earlier than the day on which the application under this section is made.
considerations for granting leave  if an application is made to a court under section 111, the court may grant leave for:   the registrar to make a determination under section 98s, or (b) the court to make an order under section 118.   the court may grant leave for an order to be made under section 118 if the court is satisfied that it would be in the interest of the parties to the proceeding for the court to consider, at the same time as it hears the application under section 111, whether an order should be made under section 118. if the court does so, the applicant is taken to have made an application to the court under section 116 for such an order.
...   in considering whether to grant leave under subsection (1), the court must have regard to:   any responsibility, and reason, for the delay in:  making an application under section 98b or 116, or (ii) making a determination under section 98s, as the case requires, and (b) the hardship to the applicant (other than the registrar) if leave is not granted, and (c) the hardship to the other party or parties (other than the registrar) if leave is granted.   the hardship to the applicant (other than the registrar) if leave is not granted, and (c) the hardship to the other party or parties (other than the registrar) if leave is granted.   the hardship to the other party or parties (other than the registrar) if leave is granted.   the court may have regard to any other relevant matter.
whether in the exercise of its discretion the court should grant leave
findings
and further noting that the respondents did not take up the opportunity to participate and put contrary evidence before the court, i find in favour of exercising the court’s discretion that the applicant be granted leave pursuant to section 111 of the act.
application for a departure order
where: (a) application is made to a court having jurisdiction under this act for an order under this division in relation to a child in the special circumstances of the case, and (b) the court is satisfied:   application is made to a court having jurisdiction under this act for an order under this division in relation to a child in the special circumstances of the case, and (b) the court is satisfied:   the court is satisfied:  that one or more of the grounds for departure mentioned in subsection (2) exists or exist, and (ii) that it would be:  just and equitable as regards the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent, and (b) otherwise proper, to make a particular order under this division,
the court may make the order.
grounds for departure  for the purposes of subparagraph (1)(b)(i), the grounds for departure are as follows:   that, in the special circumstances of the case, the capacity of either parent to provide financial support for the child is significantly reduced because of:  the duty of the parent to maintain any other child or another person, or (ii) special needs of any other child or another person that the parent has a duty to maintain, or (iii) commitments of the parent necessary to enable the parent to support: himself or herself, or (b) any other child or another person that the parent has a duty to maintain, or  high costs involved in enabling a parent to spend time with, or communicate with, any other child or another person that the parent has a duty to maintain, ) that, in the special circumstances of the case, the capacity of either parent to provide financial support for the child is significantly reduced because of the responsibility of the parent to maintain a resident child of the parent (see subsection (10)), (b) that, in the special circumstances of the case, the costs of maintaining the child are significantly affected:  because of high costs involved in enabling a parent to spend time with, or communicate with, the child, or (ia) because of special needs of the child, or (ib) because of high child care costs in relation to the child, or (ii) because the child is being cared for, educated or trained in the manner that was expected by his or her parents,  that, in the special circumstances of the case, application in relation to the child of the provisions of this act relating to administrative assessment of child support would result in an unjust and inequitable determination of the level of financial support to be provided by the liable parent for the child: (i) because of the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child, or (ia) because of the income, property and financial resources of either parent, or (ib) because of the earning capacity of either parent, or (ii) because of any payments, and any transfer or settlement of property, made or to be made (whether under this act, the family law act 1975 or otherwise) by the liable parent to the child, to the carer entitled to child support or to any other person for the benefit of the child.   because of the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child, or (ia) because of the income, property and financial resources of either parent, or (ib) because of the earning capacity of either parent, or (ii) because of any payments, and any transfer or settlement of property, made or to be made (whether under this act, the family law act 1975 or otherwise) by the liable parent to the child, to the carer entitled to child support or to any other person for the benefit of the child.  ) because of the income, property and financial resources of either parent, or (ib) because of the earning capacity of either parent, or (ii) because of any payments, and any transfer or settlement of property, made or to be made (whether under this act, the family law act 1975 or otherwise) by the liable parent to the child, to the carer entitled to child support or to any other person for the benefit of the child.  ) because of the earning capacity of either parent, or (ii) because of any payments, and any transfer or settlement of property, made or to be made (whether under this act, the family law act 1975 or otherwise) by the liable parent to the child, to the carer entitled to child support or to any other person for the benefit of the child.  ) because of any payments, and any transfer or settlement of property, made or to be made (whether under this act, the family law act 1975 or otherwise) by the liable parent to the child, to the carer entitled to child support or to any other person for the benefit of the child.
is it just and equitable to depart from the administrative assessment  in determining whether it would be just and equitable as regards the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable parent to make a particular order under this division, the court must have regard to: (a) the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child (as stated in section 3), and (b) the proper needs of the child, and (c) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child, and (d) the income, property and financial resources of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (da) the earning capacity of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (e) the commitments of each parent who is a party to the proceeding that are necessary to enable the parent to support:   the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child (as stated in section 3), and (b) the proper needs of the child, and (c) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child, and (d) the income, property and financial resources of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (da) the earning capacity of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (e) the commitments of each parent who is a party to the proceeding that are necessary to enable the parent to support:   the proper needs of the child, and (c) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child, and (d) the income, property and financial resources of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (da) the earning capacity of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (e) the commitments of each parent who is a party to the proceeding that are necessary to enable the parent to support:   the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child, and (d) the income, property and financial resources of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (da) the earning capacity of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (e) the commitments of each parent who is a party to the proceeding that are necessary to enable the parent to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (da) the earning capacity of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (e) the commitments of each parent who is a party to the proceeding that are necessary to enable the parent to support:  ) the earning capacity of each parent who is a party to the proceeding, and (e) the commitments of each parent who is a party to the proceeding that are necessary to enable the parent to support:   the commitments of each parent who is a party to the proceeding that are necessary to enable the parent to support:  himself or herself, or (ii) any other child or another person that the person has a duty to maintain, and (f) the direct and indirect costs incurred by the carer entitled to child support in providing care for the child, and (g) any hardship that would be caused: (i) to: ) any other child or another person that the person has a duty to maintain, and   the direct and indirect costs incurred by the carer entitled to child support in providing care for the child, and (g) any hardship that would be caused:   any hardship that would be caused:  the child, or (b) the carer entitled to child support,
by the making of, or the refusal to make, the order, and (ii) to: the liable parent, or (b) any other child or another person that the liable parent has a duty to support,
by the making of, or the refusal to make, the order, and i) to any resident child of the parent (see subsection (10)) by the making of, or the refusal to make, the order.
“4. the second principle that the court is to consider is whether it is just and equitable to make a departure order
4.1 in determining this, the court relies on principles set out in 117(4) of the child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth), namely, 4.2 the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a children,
4.2.1 the applicant has never had a relationship either child, but still paid the required child support payments until they reached the age of 18.
4.3 the proper needs of the children.
4.3.1 both children turned 18 in 2018 and at the time, had secured employment. 4.3.2 furthermore, the children were both 19 at the time that the applicant had been notified of his re-assessed taxable income.
4.4 the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the children,
4.4.1 the children had obtained employment in 2018 when child support employments initially ceased.
4.5 the income, property and financial resources of the parent who is a party to the proceedings,
4.5.1 the applicant possesses no substantial assets and has accrued a substantive liability owed to both the respondent’s. 4.5.2 he owns no real property. 4.5.3 he also has no funds in his superannuation. he is primarily supported by his wife.
4.6 the earning income capacity of each parent who is a party to the proceeding,
4.6.1 the applicant has no earnings including government payments. he is solely supported by his wife. 4.6.2 moreover, he has no superannuation left. it is noted that superannuation is not independent income.
4.7 the commitments of each parent that are necessary to enable the person to support either themselves, the children or the carer entitled to child support,
4.7.1 the applicant has no substantive means to support himself financially due to his ongoing health adversities. 4.7.2 the applicant also has no superannuation. 4.7.3 both of the children between him and the respondent’s are over the age of 18 and the applicant has been made aware that they were employed.
4.8 the direct and indirect costs incurred by the carer entitled to child support in providing for the children,
4.8.1 the applicant submits that there are no substantial entitlements that should be given to the carer in relation to child support with children who are: 4.8.1.1 over the age of 18, and 4.8.1.2 capable of employment.
4.9 whether any hardship would be caused to the children, the carer entitled to child support, or the liable parent.
4.9.1 the applicant submits that no hardship would be caused to the respondents and the children. 4.9.2 the applicant fulfilled his obligations by paying for child support until the children reached the ages of 18. 4.9.3 the applicant submits that no financial hardship should be considered with adults who are either employed or capable of employment in relation to child support proceedings. 4.9.4 the applicant has suffered severe financial hardship as a result of his liability and has no substantial assets. moreover, due to his health decline, he is unable to gain employment. 4.9.5 the applicant is also currently 62 years old, which also hampers his ability to obtain employment on top of his declining health.”
is it otherwise proper to depart from the administrative assessment  in determining whether it would be otherwise proper to make a particular order under this division, the court must have regard to: (a) the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child (as stated in section 3) and, in particular, the fact that it is the parents of a child themselves who have the primary duty to maintain the child, and (b) the effect that the making of the order would have on: (i) any entitlement of the child, or the carer entitled to child support, to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit, or (ii) the rate of any income tested pension, allowance or benefit payable to the child or the carer entitled to child support.   the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child (as stated in section 3) and, in particular, the fact that it is the parents of a child themselves who have the primary duty to maintain the child, and (b) the effect that the making of the order would have on: (i) any entitlement of the child, or the carer entitled to child support, to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit, or (ii) the rate of any income tested pension, allowance or benefit payable to the child or the carer entitled to child support.   the effect that the making of the order would have on: (i) any entitlement of the child, or the carer entitled to child support, to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit, or (ii) the rate of any income tested pension, allowance or benefit payable to the child or the carer entitled to child support.   any entitlement of the child, or the carer entitled to child support, to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit, or (ii) the rate of any income tested pension, allowance or benefit payable to the child or the carer entitled to child support.  ) the rate of any income tested pension, allowance or benefit payable to the child or the carer entitled to child support.
“5 the final principle for the court to have determination to is that a departure order would be otherwise proper
5.1 in determining this, the court relies on principles set out in 117(5) of the child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth), namely: 5.2 the nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a child,
5.2.1 the children in this matter do not need maintenance or priority as both are adults with capability of employment.
5.3 the effect that the order would have on the entitlements of the child, the carer entitled to child support, to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit,
5.3.1 the children as adults are capable of employment. the applicant submits that there are no entitlements in these proceedings. 5.3.2 because of the superannuation withdrawal, the applicant does not qualify for any pension or allowance.
5.4 the rate of any income tested pension allowance or benefit payable to the child of the carer entitled to child support.
5.4.1 as the applicant paid the required allowance to both children until the age of 18, no further benefit is required.”
departure orders that may be made   the orders that a court may make under this division are as follows: (a) an order varying the annual rate of child support payable by a parent, (b) an order varying a parent's or non-parent carer's cost percentage for a child, (c) an order varying a parent's child support income, (d) an order varying the parents' combined child support income, (e) an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply, (f) an order varying a parent's child support percentage, (g) an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order varying the annual rate of child support payable by a parent, (b) an order varying a parent's or non-parent carer's cost percentage for a child, (c) an order varying a parent's child support income, (d) an order varying the parents' combined child support income, (e) an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply, (f) an order varying a parent's child support percentage, (g) an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order varying a parent's or non-parent carer's cost percentage for a child, (c) an order varying a parent's child support income, (d) an order varying the parents' combined child support income, (e) an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply, (f) an order varying a parent's child support percentage, (g) an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order varying a parent's child support income, (d) an order varying the parents' combined child support income, (e) an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply, (f) an order varying a parent's child support percentage, (g) an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order varying the parents' combined child support income, (e) an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply, (f) an order varying a parent's child support percentage, (g) an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply, (f) an order varying a parent's child support percentage, (g) an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply, (f) an order varying a parent's child support percentage, (g) an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.  ) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply, (f) an order varying a parent's child support percentage, (g) an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order varying a parent's child support percentage, (g) an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order varying the costs of the children. (2) an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.   an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period.  ) a court may only make an order under this division in respect of a day in a child support period, being a day that is more than 18 months earlier than the day on which the application for the order is made under section 116, if the court has granted leave under section 112 for the order to be made. (2c) if the court has granted leave under section 112, the court may only make an order under this division in respect of a day in a child support period if the day is within the period specified by the court, under subsection 112(6), in the order granting the leave.   if the court makes an order under this section, the court must: (a) give reasons for making the order (including reasons for its satisfaction as required by paragraph 117(1)(b)), and (b) cause the reasons to be entered in the records of the court. (4) subsection (3) does not apply in relation to an order if: (a) it is an order made by consent, and (b) the carer entitled to child support concerned is not in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. (5) a contravention of subsection (3) in relation to an order does not affect the validity of the order.   give reasons for making the order (including reasons for its satisfaction as required by paragraph 117(1)(b)), and (b) cause the reasons to be entered in the records of the court. (4) subsection (3) does not apply in relation to an order if: (a) it is an order made by consent, and (b) the carer entitled to child support concerned is not in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. (5) a contravention of subsection (3) in relation to an order does not affect the validity of the order.   cause the reasons to be entered in the records of the court. (4) subsection (3) does not apply in relation to an order if: (a) it is an order made by consent, and (b) the carer entitled to child support concerned is not in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. (5) a contravention of subsection (3) in relation to an order does not affect the validity of the order.   subsection (3) does not apply in relation to an order if: (a) it is an order made by consent, and (b) the carer entitled to child support concerned is not in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. (5) a contravention of subsection (3) in relation to an order does not affect the validity of the order.   it is an order made by consent, and (b) the carer entitled to child support concerned is not in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. (5) a contravention of subsection (3) in relation to an order does not affect the validity of the order.   the carer entitled to child support concerned is not in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. (5) a contravention of subsection (3) in relation to an order does not affect the validity of the order.   a contravention of subsection (3) in relation to an order does not affect the validity of the order.
conclusion
associate: dated: 6 october 2022
dated: 6 october 2022
schedule 1
orders made on 25 may 2022
pending further order the court orders that:   any amended initiating application setting out with particularity the precise final orders sought, (b) an updated single consolidated trial affidavit,   an updated single consolidated trial affidavit,   any amended response setting out with particularity the precise final orders sought, (b) an updated single consolidated trial affidavit,   a list of the material relied upon, (b) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court,   a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court,
schedule 2
orders made on 14 july 2022
the court finds that:
and the court orders pending further order that:
and the court further orders that:
and the court directs that:
and the court notes that:
[1] page 4 of the applicant’s initiating application, order 2 of the final orders sought[2] a reference to “ia” is to the initiating application filed 6 september 2021; a reference to “tb” is to the applicant’s tender bundle; and a reference to “affidavit” is to the applicant’s affidavit filed on 6 september 2021. [3] applicant’s written submissions, 27 february 2022, page 3. [4] review number 2020/bc020316.[5] applicant’s written submissions, paragraph 3.3.1. [6] application filed on 6 september 2021. [7] applicant’s written submissions, 27 february 2022, page 3.