last updated: 10 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
briggs & briggs [2022] fedcfamc2f 1356
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  receive, directly from x’s school, all school reports, notices, photographs (both of x and her class), newsletters, and any other information relevant to x’s education and school events, (b) receive, directly from the organising entity or individual, all details as to x’s extra-curricular activities or events including, but not limited to, any information as to x’s dance classes or dance concerts, (c) be listed as emergency contacts at x’s school (or any other institution or organisation which requires emergency contacts to be listed), with the mother to be listed first and the father to be listed second, (d) be permitted to access and receive medical information about x from x’s treating general practitioner or from any other medical practitioner upon which x attends, either on one occasion or on a continuing basis, and (e) be permitted to access and receive details of x’s attendance at any medical specialist, with both parents at liberty to contact such medical specialist for any details pertaining to x’s attendance thereupon, and (f) any and all other information relevant to x’s education, health, extracurricular activities.   receive, directly from the organising entity or individual, all details as to x’s extra-curricular activities or events including, but not limited to, any information as to x’s dance classes or dance concerts, (c) be listed as emergency contacts at x’s school (or any other institution or organisation which requires emergency contacts to be listed), with the mother to be listed first and the father to be listed second, (d) be permitted to access and receive medical information about x from x’s treating general practitioner or from any other medical practitioner upon which x attends, either on one occasion or on a continuing basis, and (e) be permitted to access and receive details of x’s attendance at any medical specialist, with both parents at liberty to contact such medical specialist for any details pertaining to x’s attendance thereupon, and (f) any and all other information relevant to x’s education, health, extracurricular activities.   be listed as emergency contacts at x’s school (or any other institution or organisation which requires emergency contacts to be listed), with the mother to be listed first and the father to be listed second, (d) be permitted to access and receive medical information about x from x’s treating general practitioner or from any other medical practitioner upon which x attends, either on one occasion or on a continuing basis, and (e) be permitted to access and receive details of x’s attendance at any medical specialist, with both parents at liberty to contact such medical specialist for any details pertaining to x’s attendance thereupon, and (f) any and all other information relevant to x’s education, health, extracurricular activities.   be permitted to access and receive medical information about x from x’s treating general practitioner or from any other medical practitioner upon which x attends, either on one occasion or on a continuing basis, and (e) be permitted to access and receive details of x’s attendance at any medical specialist, with both parents at liberty to contact such medical specialist for any details pertaining to x’s attendance thereupon, and (f) any and all other information relevant to x’s education, health, extracurricular activities.   be permitted to access and receive details of x’s attendance at any medical specialist, with both parents at liberty to contact such medical specialist for any details pertaining to x’s attendance thereupon, and (f) any and all other information relevant to x’s education, health, extracurricular activities.   any and all other information relevant to x’s education, health, extracurricular activities.
x’s living arrangements
x’s regular alternate weekend time with the father  each alternate weekend from 4:00pm saturday until 4:00pm sunday, to commence on the same weekend upon which x would next have spent time with the father pursuant to the orders of 1 september 2020, subject to the following terms: (i) changeover at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c, or other such location as is agreed by the parents in writing, (ii) for the first four (4) instances of x’s time with the father pursuant to order 5(a), the overnight portion of each instance of time (between 7:00pm until 7:00am) shall occur in the substantial presence of any, or either, of x’s paternal grandparents, ms d, or ms e, (b) following six (6) occasions of time pursuant to order 5(a), each alternate weekend from 10:00am saturday until 4:00pm sunday, subject to the following terms: (i) changeover at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c, or other such location as is agreed by the parents in writing, (c) following six (6) occasions of time pursuant to order 5(b), each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on the preceding friday (or 4:00pm on friday if the friday is a non-school day) until 4:00pm on sunday, subject to the following terms: (i) changeover at the commencement of x’s time with the father shall occur at x’s school if the friday is a school day, (ii) changeover at the commencement of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c if the friday is a non-school day, and (iii) changeover at the conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c,   changeover at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c, or other such location as is agreed by the parents in writing, (ii) for the first four (4) instances of x’s time with the father pursuant to order 5(a), the overnight portion of each instance of time (between 7:00pm until 7:00am) shall occur in the substantial presence of any, or either, of x’s paternal grandparents, ms d, or ms e,  ) for the first four (4) instances of x’s time with the father pursuant to order 5(a), the overnight portion of each instance of time (between 7:00pm until 7:00am) shall occur in the substantial presence of any, or either, of x’s paternal grandparents, ms d, or ms e,   following six (6) occasions of time pursuant to order 5(a), each alternate weekend from 10:00am saturday until 4:00pm sunday, subject to the following terms: (i) changeover at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c, or other such location as is agreed by the parents in writing, (c) following six (6) occasions of time pursuant to order 5(b), each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on the preceding friday (or 4:00pm on friday if the friday is a non-school day) until 4:00pm on sunday, subject to the following terms: (i) changeover at the commencement of x’s time with the father shall occur at x’s school if the friday is a school day, (ii) changeover at the commencement of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c if the friday is a non-school day, and (iii) changeover at the conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c,   changeover at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c, or other such location as is agreed by the parents in writing,   following six (6) occasions of time pursuant to order 5(b), each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on the preceding friday (or 4:00pm on friday if the friday is a non-school day) until 4:00pm on sunday, subject to the following terms: (i) changeover at the commencement of x’s time with the father shall occur at x’s school if the friday is a school day, (ii) changeover at the commencement of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c if the friday is a non-school day, and (iii) changeover at the conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c,   changeover at the commencement of x’s time with the father shall occur at x’s school if the friday is a school day, (ii) changeover at the commencement of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c if the friday is a non-school day, and (iii) changeover at the conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c,  ) changeover at the commencement of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c if the friday is a non-school day, and (iii) changeover at the conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c,  i) changeover at the conclusion of x’s time with the father shall occur at the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c,
noting that the parents may agree in writing to vary the changeover location to somewhere other than the locations listed at order 5(c)(i)–(iii),   following six (6) occasions of time pursuant to order 5(c), each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on the preceding friday (or 4:00pm on friday if the friday is a non-school day) until the commencement of school on the succeeding monday (or until the commencement of school on the succeeding tuesday if the monday is a non-school day).
changeovers  x’s school, if the father’s time commences or concludes on a school day, (b) the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c, if the father’s time commences or concludes on a non-school day, or (c) such other location as agreed by the parents in writing.   the car park of the mcdonald’s restaurant at suburb c, if the father’s time commences or concludes on a non-school day, or (c) such other location as agreed by the parents in writing.   such other location as agreed by the parents in writing.
time during school holidays
time on special days  on her birthday in each year: (i) with the father from 3:30pm until 6:00pm if x is not otherwise in the father’s care, and (ii) with the mother from 3:30pm until 6:00pm if x is not otherwise in the mother’s care, (b) at christmas time in each year as follows: (i) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter: with the mother from 5:00pm in christmas eve until 3:00pm on christmas day, and with the father from 3:00pm on christmas day until 5:00pm on 26 december, (ii) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter: with the father from 5:00pm in christmas eve until 3:00pm on christmas day, and with the mother from 3:00pm on christmas day until 5:00pm on 26 december, (c) on father’s day with the father (the first sunday in september) in each year from 10:00am until 5:00pm, (d) on mother’s day with the mother (the second sunday in may) in each year from 10:00am until 5:00pm, and (e) on such other special dates or occasions as agreed between the parents in writing.   with the father from 3:30pm until 6:00pm if x is not otherwise in the father’s care, and (ii) with the mother from 3:30pm until 6:00pm if x is not otherwise in the mother’s care,  ) with the mother from 3:30pm until 6:00pm if x is not otherwise in the mother’s care,   at christmas time in each year as follows: (i) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter: with the mother from 5:00pm in christmas eve until 3:00pm on christmas day, and with the father from 3:00pm on christmas day until 5:00pm on 26 december, (ii) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter: with the father from 5:00pm in christmas eve until 3:00pm on christmas day, and with the mother from 3:00pm on christmas day until 5:00pm on 26 december, (c) on father’s day with the father (the first sunday in september) in each year from 10:00am until 5:00pm, (d) on mother’s day with the mother (the second sunday in may) in each year from 10:00am until 5:00pm, and (e) on such other special dates or occasions as agreed between the parents in writing.   in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter: with the mother from 5:00pm in christmas eve until 3:00pm on christmas day, and with the father from 3:00pm on christmas day until 5:00pm on 26 december, (ii) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter: with the father from 5:00pm in christmas eve until 3:00pm on christmas day, and with the mother from 3:00pm on christmas day until 5:00pm on 26 december,  ) in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter: with the father from 5:00pm in christmas eve until 3:00pm on christmas day, and with the mother from 3:00pm on christmas day until 5:00pm on 26 december,   on father’s day with the father (the first sunday in september) in each year from 10:00am until 5:00pm, (d) on mother’s day with the mother (the second sunday in may) in each year from 10:00am until 5:00pm, and (e) on such other special dates or occasions as agreed between the parents in writing.   on mother’s day with the mother (the second sunday in may) in each year from 10:00am until 5:00pm, and (e) on such other special dates or occasions as agreed between the parents in writing.   on such other special dates or occasions as agreed between the parents in writing.
therapeutic counselling  within seven (7) days of the date of these orders, provide to mr f a copy of these orders and the accompanying reasons dated 7 october 2022, (b) attend at least eight (8) sessions with mr f during the six-month minimum treatment period, with such sessions to occur approximately once every three weeks, (c) solely meet the cost of any sessions with mr f and the report produced pursuant to order 15 below.   attend at least eight (8) sessions with mr f during the six-month minimum treatment period, with such sessions to occur approximately once every three weeks, (c) solely meet the cost of any sessions with mr f and the report produced pursuant to order 15 below.   solely meet the cost of any sessions with mr f and the report produced pursuant to order 15 below.   alcohol addiction, (b) family violence, and (c) impulse control.   family violence, and (c) impulse control.   impulse control.   the father’s level of openness and insight, (b) any goal or goals of the father’s therapy, and (c) the degree to which the father has satisfactorily addressed his goal or goals of therapy,   any goal or goals of the father’s therapy, and (c) the degree to which the father has satisfactorily addressed his goal or goals of therapy,   the degree to which the father has satisfactorily addressed his goal or goals of therapy,
and, specifically with respect to the issue of alcohol addiction listed in order 13(a):  the father’s level of openness and insight into his positive breathalyser readings on 20 december 2020 (0.026% bac) and 17 january 2021 (0.032% bac), and his admitted alcohol consumption on 25 september 2020, for which no bac reading was obtained at the time, which the father had not previously disclosed to mr f, and which constitute breaches of the injunction made by consent on 1 september 2020 that the father be restrained from consuming alcohol for twenty-four (24) hours prior to and during x’s time with him.
communication between x and the father
the parents’ communication and joint attendances
injunctions  denigrating each other to x, or in x’s hearing or presence, (b) allowing any third party to denigrate either of x’s parents to x, or in x’s hearing or presence, (c) discussing allegations (proved or otherwise) made in these proceedings with x, or in x’s hearing or presence, (d) allowing any third party to discuss allegations (proved or otherwise) made in these proceedings with x, or in x’s hearing or presence, or (e) publishing on any social media, either totally or partially, these orders, the judgment delivered 7 october 2022, or any document filed in these proceedings.   allowing any third party to denigrate either of x’s parents to x, or in x’s hearing or presence, (c) discussing allegations (proved or otherwise) made in these proceedings with x, or in x’s hearing or presence, (d) allowing any third party to discuss allegations (proved or otherwise) made in these proceedings with x, or in x’s hearing or presence, or (e) publishing on any social media, either totally or partially, these orders, the judgment delivered 7 october 2022, or any document filed in these proceedings.   discussing allegations (proved or otherwise) made in these proceedings with x, or in x’s hearing or presence, (d) allowing any third party to discuss allegations (proved or otherwise) made in these proceedings with x, or in x’s hearing or presence, or (e) publishing on any social media, either totally or partially, these orders, the judgment delivered 7 october 2022, or any document filed in these proceedings.   allowing any third party to discuss allegations (proved or otherwise) made in these proceedings with x, or in x’s hearing or presence, or (e) publishing on any social media, either totally or partially, these orders, the judgment delivered 7 october 2022, or any document filed in these proceedings.   publishing on any social media, either totally or partially, these orders, the judgment delivered 7 october 2022, or any document filed in these proceedings.
travel  the travel to new zealand shall not overlap with either christmas day or x’s birthday unless otherwise agreed by the parents in writing, (b) the mother shall provide an itinerary to the father one month prior to the departure date, or at such other time as agreed by the parents in writing, (c) the mother shall provide the father with compensatory time for any time, as ordered, which is lost by the father as a result of the mother’s travel to new zealand, with such make-up time to occur no later than six (6) weeks following the mother and x’s return to australia.   the mother shall provide an itinerary to the father one month prior to the departure date, or at such other time as agreed by the parents in writing, (c) the mother shall provide the father with compensatory time for any time, as ordered, which is lost by the father as a result of the mother’s travel to new zealand, with such make-up time to occur no later than six (6) weeks following the mother and x’s return to australia.   the mother shall provide the father with compensatory time for any time, as ordered, which is lost by the father as a result of the mother’s travel to new zealand, with such make-up time to occur no later than six (6) weeks following the mother and x’s return to australia.
other
reasons for judgment
judge turnbull
overview
matters for determination  the nature and progression of x’s time with the father during school terms and school holidays, (2) the time arrangements for christmas 2022, (3) the time arrangements for father’s day and mother’s day in each year, (4) the degree to which, if at all, the father should engage in counselling with mr f, his clinical psychologist, with respect to alcohol addiction, family violence, and/or impulse control, (5) whether the progression of the father’s time with x should be conditional upon obtaining a ‘positive report’ from mr f, as sought by the mother, (6) whether, and if so for how long, the father must take a breathalyser test prior to spending time with x, with the mother at liberty to terminate the scheduled time if the father returns a positive blood alcohol reading, (7) whether, and if so for how long, the father’s time with x should be wholly or partly supervised, (8) the time at which changeover should no longer occur inside the suburb r police station, (9) the nature and quantum of time which x and the mother may spend in new zealand (or any other overseas jurisdiction) each year, and any conditions associated with such time including make-up time, notice periods, and information to be provided to the father, and (10) whether the injunction restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with her former partner, mr p, and his step-son q should be made on a final basis and, if so, the proper form of the injunction.   the time arrangements for christmas 2022, (3) the time arrangements for father’s day and mother’s day in each year, (4) the degree to which, if at all, the father should engage in counselling with mr f, his clinical psychologist, with respect to alcohol addiction, family violence, and/or impulse control, (5) whether the progression of the father’s time with x should be conditional upon obtaining a ‘positive report’ from mr f, as sought by the mother, (6) whether, and if so for how long, the father must take a breathalyser test prior to spending time with x, with the mother at liberty to terminate the scheduled time if the father returns a positive blood alcohol reading, (7) whether, and if so for how long, the father’s time with x should be wholly or partly supervised, (8) the time at which changeover should no longer occur inside the suburb r police station, (9) the nature and quantum of time which x and the mother may spend in new zealand (or any other overseas jurisdiction) each year, and any conditions associated with such time including make-up time, notice periods, and information to be provided to the father, and (10) whether the injunction restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with her former partner, mr p, and his step-son q should be made on a final basis and, if so, the proper form of the injunction.   the time arrangements for father’s day and mother’s day in each year, (4) the degree to which, if at all, the father should engage in counselling with mr f, his clinical psychologist, with respect to alcohol addiction, family violence, and/or impulse control, (5) whether the progression of the father’s time with x should be conditional upon obtaining a ‘positive report’ from mr f, as sought by the mother, (6) whether, and if so for how long, the father must take a breathalyser test prior to spending time with x, with the mother at liberty to terminate the scheduled time if the father returns a positive blood alcohol reading, (7) whether, and if so for how long, the father’s time with x should be wholly or partly supervised, (8) the time at which changeover should no longer occur inside the suburb r police station, (9) the nature and quantum of time which x and the mother may spend in new zealand (or any other overseas jurisdiction) each year, and any conditions associated with such time including make-up time, notice periods, and information to be provided to the father, and (10) whether the injunction restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with her former partner, mr p, and his step-son q should be made on a final basis and, if so, the proper form of the injunction.   the degree to which, if at all, the father should engage in counselling with mr f, his clinical psychologist, with respect to alcohol addiction, family violence, and/or impulse control, (5) whether the progression of the father’s time with x should be conditional upon obtaining a ‘positive report’ from mr f, as sought by the mother, (6) whether, and if so for how long, the father must take a breathalyser test prior to spending time with x, with the mother at liberty to terminate the scheduled time if the father returns a positive blood alcohol reading, (7) whether, and if so for how long, the father’s time with x should be wholly or partly supervised, (8) the time at which changeover should no longer occur inside the suburb r police station, (9) the nature and quantum of time which x and the mother may spend in new zealand (or any other overseas jurisdiction) each year, and any conditions associated with such time including make-up time, notice periods, and information to be provided to the father, and (10) whether the injunction restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with her former partner, mr p, and his step-son q should be made on a final basis and, if so, the proper form of the injunction.   whether the progression of the father’s time with x should be conditional upon obtaining a ‘positive report’ from mr f, as sought by the mother, (6) whether, and if so for how long, the father must take a breathalyser test prior to spending time with x, with the mother at liberty to terminate the scheduled time if the father returns a positive blood alcohol reading, (7) whether, and if so for how long, the father’s time with x should be wholly or partly supervised, (8) the time at which changeover should no longer occur inside the suburb r police station, (9) the nature and quantum of time which x and the mother may spend in new zealand (or any other overseas jurisdiction) each year, and any conditions associated with such time including make-up time, notice periods, and information to be provided to the father, and (10) whether the injunction restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with her former partner, mr p, and his step-son q should be made on a final basis and, if so, the proper form of the injunction.   whether, and if so for how long, the father must take a breathalyser test prior to spending time with x, with the mother at liberty to terminate the scheduled time if the father returns a positive blood alcohol reading, (7) whether, and if so for how long, the father’s time with x should be wholly or partly supervised, (8) the time at which changeover should no longer occur inside the suburb r police station, (9) the nature and quantum of time which x and the mother may spend in new zealand (or any other overseas jurisdiction) each year, and any conditions associated with such time including make-up time, notice periods, and information to be provided to the father, and (10) whether the injunction restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with her former partner, mr p, and his step-son q should be made on a final basis and, if so, the proper form of the injunction.   whether, and if so for how long, the father’s time with x should be wholly or partly supervised, (8) the time at which changeover should no longer occur inside the suburb r police station, (9) the nature and quantum of time which x and the mother may spend in new zealand (or any other overseas jurisdiction) each year, and any conditions associated with such time including make-up time, notice periods, and information to be provided to the father, and (10) whether the injunction restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with her former partner, mr p, and his step-son q should be made on a final basis and, if so, the proper form of the injunction.   the time at which changeover should no longer occur inside the suburb r police station, (9) the nature and quantum of time which x and the mother may spend in new zealand (or any other overseas jurisdiction) each year, and any conditions associated with such time including make-up time, notice periods, and information to be provided to the father, and (10) whether the injunction restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with her former partner, mr p, and his step-son q should be made on a final basis and, if so, the proper form of the injunction.   the nature and quantum of time which x and the mother may spend in new zealand (or any other overseas jurisdiction) each year, and any conditions associated with such time including make-up time, notice periods, and information to be provided to the father, and (10) whether the injunction restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with her former partner, mr p, and his step-son q should be made on a final basis and, if so, the proper form of the injunction.  ) whether the injunction restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with her former partner, mr p, and his step-son q should be made on a final basis and, if so, the proper form of the injunction.
chronology  briggs] was so drunk. the police suggested i really look at who i’m [sharing] my life with. [mr briggs] & i were fighting and he pushed me through the wall that it made a large body print in it. he called the police & i was advised to go for safety. ... stayed @ s’s police called. [13]
> he was still in bed
facetimed [mr briggs] ... at 8:45am. [x] said [q] was going to play with her today at 9. [mr briggs] knocked at the door, he still appeared under the influence. he said [x hadn’t seen q] or had any sort of relationship with him to look after her and she should be with him as it was his weekend. i said you need to leave and that i’d call the police. i called and gave all my details and his and she advised to say to him “i’m not comfortable with you being here without prior arrangement and please leave”. if he didn’t then the police would have come. he was probably afraid he would get breath tested and left straight away. [x] didn’t even know he was here thank goodness. it would have upset her.[28]
mother: [7/7/2018, 9:26:11 am] im not comfortable for ur being here without prior arrangements and if u come bk then police will intervene father: [7/7/2018, 10:00:32 am] a 15 year old boy that has not been part of [x]’s life should not be in a room babysitting our 3 year old while you have 2 clients at your house as it was my weekend to care for her[29]
to my baby girl this is just a post that in this new age world where records that are saved in a phone for when you need to know the truth your daddy and your sisters will always be hear [sic] and love you mummy may keep you from us for a bit as people are saying the wrong things to her but always know we will never stop fighting with the law on our side and when you are old enough to ask about the truth you family will show you we miss you every minute of the day xx ❤????????
mother: [5/6/2018, 11:43 pm] hi [mr briggs], i have been and will continue to following court orders for phone calls at 5pm (your late calls for the past 3 weeks have not been answered) and visits every 2nd sunday as per your compliance to alco tests. ... father: [6/7/2018, 5:21:31 pm] [ms m] has just got hear [sic] can she ft [facetime] x please mother: [6/7/2018, 6:04:24 pm] i will ask again to keep ur emotions to urself when u r facetiming [x]. and pls dont entice [x] by saying things like [ms m] will be hear [sic] soon or that she wld like to see [x]. this is the last time i will ask u to keep this in check. ... [8/7/2018, 4:42:49 pm] i hve left it up to u today to facetime [x] and will continue to do so after ur not answering twice this morning ... father: [12/7/2018, 10:59:37 am] it is not fair on [x] that you keep hanging up when i say that daddy and sisters love and miss you please think of [x] ...[31]
... police called by suspect, ... regarding concerns for his 3 yr old daughter ... he stated that the child told him earlier that morning whilst on a ‘facetime” call, that the victim, [ms briggs] (mother), leaves the child home unattended whilst she allegedly goes out to work as an escort. attended the premises and upon speaking with the victim, would suggest the allegations made by [briggs] to be completely false. child was asleep, but sighted and no concerns. house tidy and clean and victim presented well. victim states that her and the suspect have ongoing custody matters which are now due before a judge in november. she stated that [briggs] is clutching at straws due to prev reports of dv regarding [briggs] which are going to be made known to the court. victim also alleged prev stalking type behaviour by the suspect where he would show up to the park near her home/local playgroup etc. advice given regarding any further incidents of such behaviour in the future. victim stated that the stalking type incidents had not occurred since april 2018. suggest that behaviour of the suspect may escalate/eventuate to similar behaviour again as victim is considering ceasing phone contact due to today’s events/ongoing psychological/emotional abuse by the susp, which is also affecting her daughter. victim is linked in with support serv[i]ces. for information.
mother: [17/1/2021, 9:31 pm] the horrible situation today of you stating you had lost your breath machine and holding [x] when i said sorry then [x] will not be going with you as orders state above, you left with [x] against these orders and tried to put her in the car. this is unacceptable for [x]'s emotional and psychological wellbeing. it is alarming that you are unable to control yourself and your drinking to comply with the orders and still attempt to traumatize [x] by using her as shield to breach orders placing [x] in a vulnerable position of confusion, hurt and fear. you told me you were going to purchase a new breath machine at 11am when the shops open but at 1038am you sent me your zero reading on your do [sic] called lost device. i agreed for the police officer to perform a breath test today as an attempt for [x] to still visit in line with orders but the result showed 0.032 resulting in the police officer informing you that due to orders stating no alcohol within 24 hours of [x]’s visit the visit was not to go ahead. today was just another attempt to manipulate the situation by using you holding [x] as a way to breach the court order. this is not healthy for [x] [mr briggs] and i will be speaking with my lawyer on current handover procedures which are not working to maintain smooth and healthy handovers for [x]. father: [1/18/2021, 9:29 am] i agree and this will not happen again[36]
... she knew this because ‘when dad lost his blower at the police station they had a fight and dad got angry and screamed at mum and they took me and it was against the law’. she added, ‘i knew that without his blower he couldn’t take me, mum told me’.[37]
to [ms y] date of letter: 11/3/21 re: [mr briggs] since the last report on 16/7/20, [mr briggs] has gained significant insights into his behaviour and its impact upon others. he understands the necessities and strategies required for co-parenting and in observing healthy boundaries between himself and his ex-partner. he is aware of the need to always be aware and competent while in the company of children or while responsible for children and to my knowledge he has been observing this while caring for his other daughter. he is aware of the necessity of maintaining a respectful attitude towards his ex-partner and to ensure that he always maintains this respect while in the company of his child and or his ex-partner. [mr briggs] has developed insight into any behavioural flaws and he has demonstrated that he is able to accept, acknowledge and change any problematic behaviours. at this point, it is my expert opinion as the treating clinical psychologist for [mr briggs], that there are no barriers, that i am aware of, to him having extended and unsupervised access to his daughter [x].
mother: [30/06/2018, 8:11:19 am] i advised u tuesday that when the care plan is in place and when i talk to my lawyer u will see [x]. as nothing is legally in place [x]’s safety is paramount. u hve broken a stat dec agreement on property settlement and broken once again my trust in what u agree to. ur lies are mounting up. as u hve threatened to with hold [x] previously i can not trust u to uphold ur agreements to the care of [x] will b determined with the help of legal aid. if u r unable to maintain ft [facetime] with [x] where u r not making promises that can not be kept or blaming me for u not seeing [x] then for [x]’s emotional wellbeing ft [facetime] with her will have to cease until appropriate care orders are in place. u hve clear indication now of [x]’s care and safety so pls stop sending me txt messages as we hve nothing further to discuss or it becomes harassment. father: [30/06/2018, 8:30:55 am] i did not keep her and i don’t plan to i am waiting to sort that legally stopping her seeing me is only hurting [x] which you have claimed is your main concern please stop using [x] as a weapon[43] ... mother: [by email dated 3 july 2018] ... your inability to follow your own agreement in the stat dec is anough [sic] to let me know that you cannot be trusted. in regards to [x]’s care arrangements that was agreed in a separate stat dec there is no reason for you to honor your word in that either. ...ased on the continued drinking problem that plagued our relationship that inevitably has led to the breakdown of our relationship with the discontinuation of counselling as an atempt [sic] to resolve things and the incident on the 18th may where i ended up leaving at 11pm taking [x] with me. the safety of [x] is always my priority and since on the 18th of may and nearing the end of our relationship closer to our separation where the police responded to the house at [af street] i will be keep [x] in my care until further notice. these are supported grounds for withholding [x] from your care as advised by my lawyer. she has let me know that legal aid proceedings are underway and may be a couple of months off she can not tell unless you or i begin court proceedings. i will seek further legal advise [sic] to ensure that i am best informed in all area’s [sic] and i suggest you do the same.[44]
mother: [26/09/2021, 9:02 am] hi [mr briggs], [x] has been off school since thursday with a runny nose, cough and this morning she had a bit of a sore stomach. please make sure she eats healthy (fruits, berries of course, she likes small cucumbers and cherry tomatoes). eating healthy will ensure she recovers quickly and does not get worse. as i have said previously refined sugar shuts down the immune system and renders a person vulnerable to sickness so please no sweets today and lots of water. she has been at home the whole time resting with me but if she ran to her room this causes her to cough so please no running around too much. [x]'s health is the priority here and i appreciate your assistance on maintaining her health while in your care. thanks. [ms briggs][46] ... mother: [26/02/2022, 3:31 pm] hi [mr briggs], on the 21 & 22 a student in [x]'s class was at school with covid-19. [x] developed symptoms on thursday of a sore throat and stayed home friday from school. she tested negative for covid friday but in going to the doctor today they have prescribed her antibiotics for a sinusitis. she has rested all day friday and today. i would like her to still take it easy tomorrow too so her immune system can recover. i have said she can go in the pool for a couple of hours (2) but because being in the pool really uses up alot of energy i am asking for you to please have her taking it easy for the rest of the day and not to overload her with sugar which will not help her immune system at all. vitamin c based fruits will strengthen her system. can you please respond to this message in agreement with my request so that [x] is able to visit and i am in confidence that you will help her to strengthen her immune system with healthy foods, the 2 hours in the pool and taking it easy please? thank you [ms briggs] [26/02/2022, 6:17 pm] [mr briggs] i am waiting for your response to confirm you agreement for [x]'s health. when i receive your response it will also confirm [x]'s visit tomorrow. father: [26/02/2022, 6:27 pm] yes [ms briggs] i totally agree mother: [26/02/2022, 6:39 pm] thank you. we will see you in the morning[47] ... mother: [13/03/2022, 7:46 pm] hi [mr briggs], i would like to remind you about having healthy eating options for [x] when she is visiting you. she has had a very erratic behavior after being at your house and became very emotional. i suspected it was a sugar high and asked her what sweets she had today and she told me she had 2 ice-blocks, chocolate, lollies and macdonalds. i have messaged you previously of the effect of sugar on a child’s immune system, and find i must remind you again that too much sugar shuts down the immune system rendering children vulnerable to sickness. as a parent you are responsible for [x]'s health and under current circumstances you are being irresponsible in promoting healthy eating and immune system. [x] has 11 children left in her class due the rest being in isolation with covid and strengthening her immune system is a major priority. please make sure you maintain healthy eating for [x]. i have said she is allowed 2 sweets so if you can do the same it would support [x]’s health. you are still required to have a supervisor with you whilst [x] is in your care and that includes when going out for macdonalds which [x] said [ms e] and [mr ab] went and got whilst you and [x] stayed at the house. this is a breach of order again. please follow correct orders. can you please respond to confirm your acknowledgement and agreement of this message. thanks [ms briggs] father: [13/03/2022, 8:09 pm] hi [ms briggs], thank you for your feedback. do you think that her "behavioural issues" may have something to do with the fact she is confused, wondering why she can't spend more time with people that love her and want nothing more than the best for her? i love her as much as you do, i want nothing more than for her to be a happy person. there's a saying i've heard lately that i think is kinda appropriate, it is, "a child's shoulders are not broad enough to carry the burdens of an adult." do you ever wonder if you are doing more harm than good? you knew when we reversed the vasectomy to have her that she would never, ever want for love because she is surrounded by it. i guess that what makes it hard when you say "follow orders." i have her for one meal a fortnight, which is 1 out of 42, hardly a health risk, particularly when i want nothing more than for her to be healthy, well adjusted child just like you do. as a father of 5 girls, i reckon i've got this covered. thanks, [mr briggs].[48]
the parties’ proposals and submissions
issue 1: time during school terms and school holidays
... [x] shall spend time with the father as follows:
weekend time each alternate saturday night from 3 pm saturday until 3 pm sunday for a period of three visits. each alternate saturday from 10 am until 3 pm sunday for a period of three visits. thereafter each alternate weekend from friday from the conclusion of school (or 4 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on the monday (or tuesday should the monday be a public holiday and/or pupil free day. short term school holidays for each of the short-term school holidays commencing in the third term school holidays of 2022 from the first saturday (being 1 october 2022) at 11 am until the following saturday at 11 am with alternate weekend time in accordance with paragraph [3] iii herein to resume on the first friday after commencement of the next school term. christmas /new year school holidays for the christmas/new year school holidays on a week about basis commencing 11 am on the first saturday of the school holiday period and concluding at 11 am on the following saturday and thereafter each alternate week on the same basis.
issue 2: christmas 2022 ther’s proposal] subject to compliance by the father with any conditions in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of these orders which may operate at the time, that from the date of these orders [x] spend time with the father on special occasions as follows:
... on christmas day from 10.00 am until 2.00 pm, for christmas as and from 2023: in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from 5 pm christmas eve until 3 pm christmas day provided that [x] shall be in the mother’s care from 3 pm christmas day until 5 pm on 26 december, in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from 3 pm christmas day until 5 pm on 26 december provided that [x] shall be in the mother’s care from 5 pm christmas eve until 3 pm christmas day,  l’s proposal] from the date of these orders the child shall spend time with the father on special occasions as follows:
... on christmas day from 10.00 am until 4.00 pm, for christmas as and from 2023: in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from 5.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day provided that the child shall be in the mother’s care from 3.00pm christmas day until 5.00pm on 26 december, in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 5.00pm on 26 december provided that the child shall be in the mother’s care from 5.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day,
christmas eve/ day time spending from 3 pm on 24 december 2022 until 3 pm on 25 december 2022 and each even numbered year thereafter provided that [x] shall spend time with the mother from 3 pm christmas day until 3 pm boxing day. from 3 pm 25 december 2023 (christmas day) until 3 pm 26 december 2023 (boxing day) and each odd numbered year thereafter provided that [x] shall be in the care of the mother from 3 pm 24 december 2023 (christmas eve) until 3 pm 25 december 2023 (christmas day).
issue 3: father’s day and mother’s day
... on father’s day from 10.00 am until 5.00 pm provided that [x] shall be in the mother’s care from 10.00 am until 5.00 pm on mother’s day, ...
... on father’s day from 10.00 am until 5.00 pm provided that the child shall be in the mother’s care from 10.00 am until 5.00 pm on mother’s day, ...
special occasion time spending each father’s day from 4 pm until the return to school on the monday [sh]ould [x] not already be in the father’s care and should the child [x] be in the father’s care on the mother’s day weekend in the child shall be returned to the mother at 4 pm on the saturday preceding mother’s day.
issue 4: the father’s counselling with mr f
1.[50] the father forthwith engage in therapeutic counselling with [mr f], clinical psychologist, as follows: the father provide [mr f] with a copy of these orders and any reasons for decision of the court, the father attend at least 8 sessions, the sessions be at the sole cost of the father, the sessions focus on the following issues: alcohol addiction, family violence, and impulse control, the mother attend at least 1 session with [mr f] (including for an opportunity for her to provide [mr f] with her perspective on the above issues) and at any further sessions that [mr f] may request, with any individual sessions for the mother to be at the sole cost of the mother, at the conclusion of the therapeutic counselling process the father obtain a written report from [mr f] at the father’s sole cost, and provide a copy of the report to the mother, the report must separately address, in relation to each of the issues in paragraph 1d hereof, the following: the father’s level of openness and insight in relation to each issue, in relation to the issue of alcohol addiction, also his level of openness insight into his positive breathalyser readings at handovers on 20 december 2020 (0.026) and 17 january 2021 (0.032) which he had not previously disclosed to mr f and which were in breach of a court order made by consent on 1 september 2020 that he not consume alcohol for 24 hours prior to and during his time with [x], any goal/s of therapy and the degree to which the father has satisfactorily addressed that goal/s, and
[mother’s proposal] whether [mr f] considers the father poses an unacceptable risk to [x] in having unsupervised time with [x]. [icl’s proposal] whether [mr f] considers the father poses an unacceptable risk to the child in having unsupervised overnight time with her.
issue 5: ‘positive’ psychological report as a condition of time progressing to unsupervised day time
issue 6: alcohol breath testing, and alcohol consumption generally
issue 7: supervision of time
issue 8: changeover location
issue 9: travel
10.[54] the mother be at liberty to travel to new zealand (or such other overseas country) with the child [x] for the purposes of a holiday for no more than 3 weeks in any twelve month period, and the father shall take all steps necessary to sign any documents and provide any authorisations to enable the child to travel with the mother, subject to the following conditions: the overseas holiday referred to herein shall not overlap with either christmas day or the child’s birthday unless otherwise agreed, other than in the event of an emergency, the mother shall provide an itinerary to the father one month prior to her travel, and the mother provide the father with make-up time for any time he was due to spend with [x] whilst the mother was overseas under the terms of these orders provided that such make-up time will occur no later than 6 weeks following the mother and child’s return from travel.
issue 10: injunction against the mother bringing x into contact with mr p and q
documents and evidence
the father’s evidence
the mother’s evidence
the icl’s documents relied upon
ms k’s evidence
mr f’s evidence
parenting orders: the law
unacceptable risk  for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to): (a) an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty. (3) for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to): (a) an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty. (3) for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child, or (b) a person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child.   a person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child.   causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child.   serious neglect of the child.
the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary. the statement to the contrary by the full court in bant & clayton [2019] famcafc 198, (2019) flc 93-924 at [52] is rejected as being incorrect. sometimes it can be difficult to discern the difference between the exercise of discretion and an evaluative judgment ..., though a discretionary decision is one in which no single factor or combination of considerations will necessarily dictate the result .... the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion. that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations enumerated within s 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one.[92]
x’s best interests: the s 60cc factors
section 60cc(2)(a): the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents  appeared happy, playful and relaxed in her mother's care. [ms briggs] appeared attentive, attuned, confident and caring in her approach to [x]. both shared close physical contact and eye contact. free flowing age-appropriate play and discussion were observed throughout the morning of the assessment. [x] appeared eager to spend time with her father and easily transitioned into his care with the assistance of the consultant. she ran to her father who received and reciprocated affectionate hugs. he immediately gifted [x] a little chocolate egg with a toy inside and told [x] that she could maybe eat this after, when her mother told it was okay to do so. [x] later said that her mum wouldn't mind if she ate the egg "now" and she proceeded to happily do so. [mr briggs][s] brought with him a small chess set. he stated how happy he was to see [x] 2 days in a row and how happy he was that they could share a game of chess. [x] also appeared happy about this. they quietly sad side by side playing the game, which appeared natural and familiar to both, and both were observed to share eye contact, free flowing discussion (mainly about the game), as well as smiles and at times quiet laughter. the play was age-appropriate and [mr briggs][s’] quiet tone and general temperament was conducive to a settled play environment. later, the shared interactions shifted to centre around imaginary play involving the wooden play kitchen, doll set, and drawing activities. [mr briggs] allowed [x] to guide the play and [x] appeared familiar with this. at the end of the play session [x] approached her father and asked him to pinkie swear, which he did, to organise to go and collect the rabbits for her soon. [x] then ran happily to her mother to show her the toy turtle she received inside her chocolate egg gifted from her father, with [ms briggs] sharing in [x]'s excitement with her.[96]
section 60cc(2)(b): the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence   understood that her parents did not get along. she knew this because "when dad lost his blower at the police station they had a fight and dad got angry and screamed at mum and they took me and it was against the law". she added, "i knew that without his blower he couldn't take me, mum told me". [x] stated that her mother felt "bad" when she spent time with her father "because he lies a lot and she knows it". she understood that her mother wanted "me to be just with her and have a new father who plays with me and keeps me healthy". when asked if she thought her mother liked her spending time with her father, [x] stated, "no". she did think, however, that her mother would be happy for her to spend time with her father in the future if he changed.[105]
section 60cc(3)(a): any views expressed by the child, and the weight to be accorded to those views given their age and level of maturity   reported that she did not feel safe in her father's care "because he lies to me and gives me lots of chocolate and doesn't keep me healthy like mum". she added that he also lied about buying her smiley fritz "but then said he'd been too busy" to get it. when asked if she had any worries when in her father's care, [x] stated that she worried "that he'll never play with me because he doesn't play with me anymore''. she stated that instead "he talks to lots of people because he invites lots of grown ups over so he can talk and not play with me". she went on to say, "they just laugh and smoke and adult drink". when asked what she meant by this, [x] stated, "alcohol". she added, "when i'm with him he smokes and when i'm with him he sleeps in the day and i don't like that". she added that she tried to wake him to play with her, but he doesn't play, he drinks alcohol, then he smokes". she stated that whilst her father was sleeping, she was cared for by her "nanny and poppy" who were "not fun" because they were "too old and i want younger people to play with me".[106]
section 60cc(3)(b): the nature of the relationship of the child with each of their parents
section 60cc(3)(c): the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child
section 60cc(3)(ca): the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
section 60cc(3)(d): the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect to the child from any separation from either of their parents
section 60cc(3)(e): the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time and communicating with a parent
section 60cc(3)(f): the capacity of each of the child’s parents to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
section 60cc(3)(g): the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and each of the child’s parents
section 60cc(3)(i): the attitude to the child and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the parents  briggs] remained reluctant [on 18 january 2019] to engage in any meaningful form of self-reflection or critique in relation to the issues raised in judge mead’s orders (19/11/18) concerning ‘anger, alcohol and/or domestic violence’... [mr briggs] presented in a manner that appeared arrogant, contemptuous and overly-entitled. he was completely dismissive of all of [ms briggs’ [sic] expressed concerns and allegations and maintained a preoccupation with describing his ex­ partner as, 'a controlling manipulative person' who 'just wants to control my life.' [mr briggs] impressed on me several times, 'there is nothing wrong with me' and asserted, 'i am determined to prove my innocence', 'the truth will eventually out.' [mr briggs] denied that he had ever acted in any violent or abusive manner towards [ms briggs]. however, he did assert that [ms briggs] had acted in ways that were violent and controlling and that he had needed to call the police for assistance. he did agree that there were 'rocky times' and 'arguments.' however, he regarded dispute in the relationship as being initiated and caused by [ms briggs] and cast himself as a victim of her 'controlling and manipulative' behaviour."[107]
section 60cc(3)(j): any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family
section 60cc(3)(k): if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter.
section 60cc(3)(l): whether it would be preferable to make orders that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
parenting plans
agreement of child parenting plan between: [ms briggs] and [mr briggs] parenting plan to be in place until a formal agreement is reached through either mediation or legal aid assistance. parenting responsibility the [ms briggs] is the primary carer of [x]. that [mr briggs] will have [x] every second weekend from friday afternoon to sunday afternoon. that each parent will maintain contact with the other on behalf of [x] through facetime when in their care as this has successfully enabled over-night stays with minimal disruption to [x]’s well-being. both parents agree to maintain sleep routines to keep a predictable and known routine for [x] that ensures her well-being. neither parent will with-hold [x] from the other at any point in time and return times are to be adhered to as per the arrangement in this document. requests for extra time need to be communicated with as much time as possible and more than 48 hours’ notice, is dependent on the parent with whom [x] is schedulable to be with at the time. [x]’s birthday [2018]
1. [x] will have half the day with each parent in the morning with [ms briggs] up until and including [x]’s morning sleep from 11am to around 1230-1pm. [mr briggs] will have pick up [sic] [x] from [ae street, suburb u] for a 2pm event start time at [mr briggs]’s residence of [af street, suburb h]. [x] will be picked up by [ms briggs] at the agreed time of 6pm where handover will take place at [af street, suburb h] between [mr briggs] and [ms briggs] only. no other party is to be present during handover.
during these times the following list of expectations for the above: there will be no negative speaking or conversations regarding either parent, the details of relationship issues, family opinions, and the incident with the facebook video posted by [ms l], or in relation to the parent’s attempts to resolve their differences or the nature of [x]’s place of residence in the presence of [x]. in respect to [x]’s care with [mr briggs], [x] is to be supervised by an adult 18 years and up when with [ms l]. at no point will [ms l] be with [x] unsupervised. moving forward [ms briggs] has an appointment 23/04/18 with legal aid to ascertain the direction for organising a parental plan through the appropriate legally binding government agencies. upon sourcing information on appropriate sources of parenting plan, both parties have agreed to sign the parenting plans and property settlement as per the details agreed below the [motor vehicle 1] will be paid out by [mr briggs] and be transferred in ownership to [ms briggs] without any cost or stamp duty as per a jp signed document detailing the transfer is to [mr briggs] [sic] wife [ms briggs]. at such time [ms briggs] [sic] name will be removed from the anz home loan on [af street, suburb h]. [ms briggs] will maintain her superannuation in full. all furniture and contents at each property will remain. as [mr briggs] purchased a [motorbike] after [ms briggs] moved out of [af street, suburb h] this remains his responsibility in full. if the above agreement is not upheld for property settlement then the asset split will proceed along the normal line of division of all assets including the house at [af street, suburb h]. this letter of intent is private and confidential between [ms briggs] and [mr briggs] and may not be shared with any other party unless the agreement has been breached and the intended party is law enforcing. this agreement will be superseded by the legally binding agreement once it has been completed through the appropriate channels. [signature] [signature] [ms briggs] [mr briggs] date: 19/4/18 date: 19/4/18
equal time or substantial and significant time?
assessment of whether an equal time arrangement is in x’s best interests and reasonably practicable
assessment of whether a substantial and significant time arrangement is in x’s best interests and reasonably practicable  for the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend substantial and significant time with a parent only if:   the time the child spends with the parent includes both:  days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and (b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:   the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   subsection (3) does not limit the other matters to which a court can have regard in determining whether the time a child spends with a parent would be substantial and significant.
conclusion  x should spend substantial and significant time with the father which, after a period of building time, culminates in three nights per fortnight (or four nights per fortnight if monday is a non-school day), and half of school holidays (again, after a period of building holiday time), (2) for christmas day in 2022, x should spend time with the father between from 3:00pm on christmas day until 5:00pm on boxing day, (3) for father’s day and mother’s day in each year, x should spend time with each parent (if not already in the relevant parent’s care) from 1:00pm on the sunday until before school on monday, (4) the father shall, as a condition of his time with x, undertake a course of therapy with mr f for a minimum of eight sessions over the course of six months, noting also that the mother shall attend at least one session with mr f, (5) the progression of the father’s time, at any point during the building stages, shall not depend upon a ‘positive’ report from mr f, (6) the father is no longer required to undertake alcohol breathalyser tests at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with him, but he remains subject to an injunction restraining him from consuming any alcohol in the 24 hours prior to or during that time, with that injunction to remain in place until x attains the age of 18 years, (7) for the first four instances of x’s time with the father, the overnight portion of each instance of time shall occur in the substantial presence of any, or either, of x’s paternal grandparents, ms d, or ms e, (8) changeover shall no longer occur at the suburb r police station and, instead, shall occur either at the mcdonald’s car park at suburb c or at x’s school, (9) x and the mother will be permitted to travel to new zealand for up to three weeks per year with the father’s make-up time to occur within six weeks of the mother and x’s return to australia, and (10) it is not necessary for there to be an injunction, on a final basis, restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with mr p or mr p’s stepson q.   for christmas day in 2022, x should spend time with the father between from 3:00pm on christmas day until 5:00pm on boxing day, (3) for father’s day and mother’s day in each year, x should spend time with each parent (if not already in the relevant parent’s care) from 1:00pm on the sunday until before school on monday, (4) the father shall, as a condition of his time with x, undertake a course of therapy with mr f for a minimum of eight sessions over the course of six months, noting also that the mother shall attend at least one session with mr f, (5) the progression of the father’s time, at any point during the building stages, shall not depend upon a ‘positive’ report from mr f, (6) the father is no longer required to undertake alcohol breathalyser tests at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with him, but he remains subject to an injunction restraining him from consuming any alcohol in the 24 hours prior to or during that time, with that injunction to remain in place until x attains the age of 18 years, (7) for the first four instances of x’s time with the father, the overnight portion of each instance of time shall occur in the substantial presence of any, or either, of x’s paternal grandparents, ms d, or ms e, (8) changeover shall no longer occur at the suburb r police station and, instead, shall occur either at the mcdonald’s car park at suburb c or at x’s school, (9) x and the mother will be permitted to travel to new zealand for up to three weeks per year with the father’s make-up time to occur within six weeks of the mother and x’s return to australia, and (10) it is not necessary for there to be an injunction, on a final basis, restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with mr p or mr p’s stepson q.   for father’s day and mother’s day in each year, x should spend time with each parent (if not already in the relevant parent’s care) from 1:00pm on the sunday until before school on monday, (4) the father shall, as a condition of his time with x, undertake a course of therapy with mr f for a minimum of eight sessions over the course of six months, noting also that the mother shall attend at least one session with mr f, (5) the progression of the father’s time, at any point during the building stages, shall not depend upon a ‘positive’ report from mr f, (6) the father is no longer required to undertake alcohol breathalyser tests at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with him, but he remains subject to an injunction restraining him from consuming any alcohol in the 24 hours prior to or during that time, with that injunction to remain in place until x attains the age of 18 years, (7) for the first four instances of x’s time with the father, the overnight portion of each instance of time shall occur in the substantial presence of any, or either, of x’s paternal grandparents, ms d, or ms e, (8) changeover shall no longer occur at the suburb r police station and, instead, shall occur either at the mcdonald’s car park at suburb c or at x’s school, (9) x and the mother will be permitted to travel to new zealand for up to three weeks per year with the father’s make-up time to occur within six weeks of the mother and x’s return to australia, and (10) it is not necessary for there to be an injunction, on a final basis, restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with mr p or mr p’s stepson q.   the father shall, as a condition of his time with x, undertake a course of therapy with mr f for a minimum of eight sessions over the course of six months, noting also that the mother shall attend at least one session with mr f, (5) the progression of the father’s time, at any point during the building stages, shall not depend upon a ‘positive’ report from mr f, (6) the father is no longer required to undertake alcohol breathalyser tests at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with him, but he remains subject to an injunction restraining him from consuming any alcohol in the 24 hours prior to or during that time, with that injunction to remain in place until x attains the age of 18 years, (7) for the first four instances of x’s time with the father, the overnight portion of each instance of time shall occur in the substantial presence of any, or either, of x’s paternal grandparents, ms d, or ms e, (8) changeover shall no longer occur at the suburb r police station and, instead, shall occur either at the mcdonald’s car park at suburb c or at x’s school, (9) x and the mother will be permitted to travel to new zealand for up to three weeks per year with the father’s make-up time to occur within six weeks of the mother and x’s return to australia, and (10) it is not necessary for there to be an injunction, on a final basis, restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with mr p or mr p’s stepson q.   the progression of the father’s time, at any point during the building stages, shall not depend upon a ‘positive’ report from mr f, (6) the father is no longer required to undertake alcohol breathalyser tests at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with him, but he remains subject to an injunction restraining him from consuming any alcohol in the 24 hours prior to or during that time, with that injunction to remain in place until x attains the age of 18 years, (7) for the first four instances of x’s time with the father, the overnight portion of each instance of time shall occur in the substantial presence of any, or either, of x’s paternal grandparents, ms d, or ms e, (8) changeover shall no longer occur at the suburb r police station and, instead, shall occur either at the mcdonald’s car park at suburb c or at x’s school, (9) x and the mother will be permitted to travel to new zealand for up to three weeks per year with the father’s make-up time to occur within six weeks of the mother and x’s return to australia, and (10) it is not necessary for there to be an injunction, on a final basis, restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with mr p or mr p’s stepson q.   the father is no longer required to undertake alcohol breathalyser tests at the commencement and conclusion of x’s time with him, but he remains subject to an injunction restraining him from consuming any alcohol in the 24 hours prior to or during that time, with that injunction to remain in place until x attains the age of 18 years, (7) for the first four instances of x’s time with the father, the overnight portion of each instance of time shall occur in the substantial presence of any, or either, of x’s paternal grandparents, ms d, or ms e, (8) changeover shall no longer occur at the suburb r police station and, instead, shall occur either at the mcdonald’s car park at suburb c or at x’s school, (9) x and the mother will be permitted to travel to new zealand for up to three weeks per year with the father’s make-up time to occur within six weeks of the mother and x’s return to australia, and (10) it is not necessary for there to be an injunction, on a final basis, restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with mr p or mr p’s stepson q.   for the first four instances of x’s time with the father, the overnight portion of each instance of time shall occur in the substantial presence of any, or either, of x’s paternal grandparents, ms d, or ms e, (8) changeover shall no longer occur at the suburb r police station and, instead, shall occur either at the mcdonald’s car park at suburb c or at x’s school, (9) x and the mother will be permitted to travel to new zealand for up to three weeks per year with the father’s make-up time to occur within six weeks of the mother and x’s return to australia, and (10) it is not necessary for there to be an injunction, on a final basis, restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with mr p or mr p’s stepson q.   changeover shall no longer occur at the suburb r police station and, instead, shall occur either at the mcdonald’s car park at suburb c or at x’s school, (9) x and the mother will be permitted to travel to new zealand for up to three weeks per year with the father’s make-up time to occur within six weeks of the mother and x’s return to australia, and (10) it is not necessary for there to be an injunction, on a final basis, restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with mr p or mr p’s stepson q.   x and the mother will be permitted to travel to new zealand for up to three weeks per year with the father’s make-up time to occur within six weeks of the mother and x’s return to australia, and (10) it is not necessary for there to be an injunction, on a final basis, restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with mr p or mr p’s stepson q.  ) it is not necessary for there to be an injunction, on a final basis, restraining the mother from bringing x into contact with mr p or mr p’s stepson q.
associate: dated: 7 october 2022
dated: 7 october 2022
[1] family report, family consultant ms k, 23 november 2021 (‘family report’), [59].[2] affidavit, mr briggs, 17 march 2022 (‘affidavit (father)’) [44].[3] the mother says that final separation occurred on 31 january 2018, and the father says in his affidavit that separation occurred on 19 may 2018. the father conceded under cross-examination that the mother moved out of the suburb h home on 31 january 2018. it appears, however, that they attended counselling between january and may 2018 in an attempt to salvage their relationship. in any event their relationship, since commencement of cohabitation in 2012, was one of approximately six years.[4] family report (n 1) [70].[5] affidavit (father) (n 2) [40]; affidavit, ms briggs, 9 march 2022 (‘affidavit (mother)’), [51].[6] affidavit (mother) (n 5) [68], [78]–[79].[7] orders dated 9 may 2019, requiring the father to file a report from mr o, and order dated 30 april 2020, requiring the father to obtain a referral to and report from mr f, and order dated 1 september 2020, requiring the father to continue engagement with mr f, who was to produce and file a report.[8] the orders since 19 november 2018 show an increase in time, a decrease in supervision requirements, and a continuing obligation for the father to engage in treatment for his mental health, undergo drug and alcohol testing, and provide reports as to these issues. the order of 9 may 2019 introduced the alternate sunday time (following six visits at a contact centre) from 9:00am until 12:00 noon, which continued to be in effect until the order of 1 september 2020. the mother has been required to share certain information about x’s school, extra-curricular activities, and health since the orders of 13 august 2020, made by consent.[9] orders dated 27 january 2022.[10] briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34; (1938) 60 clr 336, 361–362 (dixon j); evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140.[11] affidavit (mother) (n 5) [15]–[16], noting ms l’s mental health and substance use issues from 2015 and the mother’s confrontation with ms l in 2018 about an inappropriate facebook post about x.[12] affidavit (father) (n 2) [57].[13] mother’s tender bundle (stated as annexures to affidavit) annex -2, 8.[14] affidavit (mother) (n 5) [22].[15] ibid [30]–[33].[16] affidavit (father) (n 2) [15].[17] ibid [17]–[20].[18] m13 (received 14 june 2022), showing that the image titled ‘img_8482’ was taken on 24 july 2017 at 6:36pm.[19] affidavit (father) (n 2) [23].[20] ibid [20]–[28].[21] m13 (n 18), showing that the image titled ‘img_9542’ was taken on 22 january 2018 at 7:04pm.[22] i am unsure of the veracity of this allegation as the mother did not address it at trial, and the father’s evidence about it was in the context of his capacity to take up paid employment and, therefore, pay child support.[23] affidavit (mother) (n 5) [48]–[50].[24] affidavit (father) (n 2) [33].[25] affidavit (mother) (n 5) [53]–[55].[26] ibid [58].[27] affidavit (father) (n 2) annex -02.[28] m16 (received 14 june 2022).[29] affidavit (father) (n 2) annex -02.[30] mother’s tender bundle (n 13) annex -16.[31] affidavit (father) (n 2) annex -02.[32] affidavit, mr f, 22 march 2022 (‘affidavit (mr f)’) annex -02, 4.[33] ibid annex -03, 11.[34] affidavit (mother) (n 5) [97].[35] ibid [106].[36] affidavit (father) (n 2) annex -03, 12.[37] family report (n 1) [67].[38] affidavit (mother) (n 5) [139]–[140].[39] ibid [144].[40] family report (n 1) [91].[41] ibid [157].[42] ibid [88].[43] affidavit (father) (n 2) annex -02, 9.[44] ibid 10.[45] ibid annex -03, 13 (message of 2 january 2021 concerning sunscreen), 17 (message of 18 july 2021 concerning x’s cough and diet), 19 (message of 26 september 2021 concerning x’s cough, runny nose, and diet), 22 (message of 26 february 2022 concerning x’s diet and immune system), 23 (message of 13 march 2022 concerning x’s behaviour and diet).[46] ibid annex -03, 19.[47] ibid 22.[48] ibid 23.[49] m15 (tender bundle, 36).[50] mother’s proposal, [1]; icl’s proposal, [3].[51] oberlin & infeld [2021] famcafc 66, [51]–[52], [59], at which the full court explain that ‘self-standing’ orders (that is, orders without a source of power in s 64b as ‘parenting orders’) must adhere to the limits of power in s 67zc instead, and find that such a self-standing order was made without power in the appeal before them. in addressing another ground of appeal their honours state the following at [59], citing l & t [1999] famca 1699; (1999) flc 92-875, 86,390–86,393: ‘[s]ection 64b(2) of the act enables a parenting order to “deal with” the time a child is to spend with a party and any aspect of a child’s care, welfare or development ... sub-orders (b)(iii) and (b)(iv) are evidently the manifestation of her honour’s conclusion concerning the safeguards needed to condition the way in which the children spend time with the mother so as to promote their best interests. the children’s welfare is liable to be compromised if the mother suffers psychological degradation, as would be implied by her future hospitalisation for psychological ill-health or her criminal prosecution. as such, sub-orders (b)(iii) and (b)(iv) were made within power as integral parts of the parenting orders’. [52] fardon v attorney-general (qld) (2004) clr 223 575, 657–658 (callinan and heydon jj). their honours discuss the meaning of ‘unacceptable risk’ in m v m (1998) 166 clr 69, including remarks about the paramountcy principle and the somewhat ‘undefinable’ nature of the assessment at 657, and said the following of such exercises of judicial power at 658 (emphasis added): ‘... courts are on occasions required to decide matters on evidence of less than desirable quality and volume, and that they may have to do so, will not necessarily deprive their function of its judicial character’.[53] family report (n 1) [20].[54] mother’s proposal, [10]; icl’s proposal, [21].[55] affidavit (father) (n 2) [54]–[55].[56] family report (n 1) [49].[57] m9 (south australia police subpoenaed material, 1–5), 2.[58] m1 (tender bundle, 93–95).[59] m2 (tender bundle, 98, 145, 163).[60] family report (n 1) [40].[61] m4 (tender bundle, 159–162) 162.[62] m3 (tender bundle, 154).[63] m5 (tender bundle, 102).[64] m6 (tender bundle, 107).[65] m7 (tender bundle, 111).[66] m8 (tender bundle, 125–126).[67] affidavit (father) (n 2) [52]. i note that the father referred to the ‘low reading’ of 0.095% blood alcohol content since he said that, at the time, the legal blood alcohol content limit to drive in south australia was 0.08%. [68] family report (n 1) [35].[69] m3 (n 62); m4 (n 61).[70] affidavit (father) (n 2) [33], at which the father says that the report number is .... i could not locate this report number in the subpoenaed documentation from south australia police.[71] ibid [31].[72] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4ab.[73] m1 (n 58); m2 (n 59); m3 (n 62); m4 (n 61); m5 (n 63); m6 (n 64); m7 (n 65); m8 (n 66); m9 (n 57); m10 (tender bundle, 59–61); m11 (tender bundle, 73); m12 (tender bundle, 173–175); m13 (n 18); m14 (tender bundle, 16); m15 (n 49); m16 (n 28); m17 (received 15 june 2022).[74] concerning incidents of 22 july 2017 and 19 january 2018, set out at paragraphs 26 and 29 of these reasons.[75] affidavit (mother) (n 5) [43], stating that the photograph of her arm in exhibit m15 was taken ‘in the days following the said incident’.[76] ibid [28], with the mother stating that she ‘decided to record incidents of note in my diary in the event that [the father] ever sought to challenge my version of events in the future’, although she says that she did not record all events in this way. the diary entries are included in the mother’s tender bundle (n 13) at annex -2 (10–15 november 2014), -3 (13–19 july 2015), -4 (2–8 may 2016), -5 (13–19 march 2017), -9 (20–21 january 2018). the entries are referred to as annexures in the document itself, and each appear to have been sworn alongside the mother’s affidavit, but were not included in the sealed copy of the affidavit.[77] allied pastoral holdings pty ltd v federal commissioner of taxation [1983] 1 nswlr 1, 16 (hunt j); sullivan v civil aviation safety authority (2014) 226 fcr 555, 568–569 (logan j).[78] affidavit (father) (n 2) [54].[79] family report (n 1) [87]–[88]. ms k observed that x has been overly exposed to adult issues, and is acutely aware of the mother’s mistrust of the father which, in turn, influences x’s perception of the father.[80] affidavit (mother) (n 5) [34].[81] affidavit (mr f) (n 32), annex -02, 11.[82] ibid 12, 15. mr f described the father in his report dated 17 april 2020 as ‘reluctant to admit to minor faults and perhaps even reluctant to acknowledge these faults himself’ and observed that he ‘portrayed himself as being exceptionally free of shortcomings’. at that time mr f reported that the father ‘consistently denies and minimises his behaviours and trivialises the impact upon others’ and that he was ‘not sure if it was possible for [the father] to achieve this insight’.[83] ibid annex -04, 22. mr f, in his report of 11 march 2021, states that the father ‘has developed insight into any behavioural flaws and ... has demonstrated that he is able to accept, acknowledge and change any problematic behaviours’.[84] family law act 1975 (n 72) s 60ca.[85] ibid s 65d(1).[86] ibid s 60b(1), (2), (4), noting the expression of responsibility at subs (1), the expression of the child or children’s rights at subs (2), and the additional object at subs (4) to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child.[87] withers & russell [2016] famca 793, [315]-[318] at which watts j confirms that there is no preferred approach, there being ‘more than one suggested pathway through the legislature’.[88] mrr & gr (2010) 240 clr 461, [6]-[9] (french cj, gummow, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[89] m v m (n 52), 76 (mason cj, brennan, dawson, toohey and gaudron jj); bant & clayton [2019] famcafc 198, [38]–[41].[90] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97, [46]–[51], [86]; briginshaw v briginshaw (n 10), 361–362 (dixon j); evidence act 1995 (n 10) s 140.[91] isles & nelissen (n 90) [83].[92] ibid [85]. citations omitted.[93] m v m (n 52) 77–78, at which their honours state that, ultimately, the court’s task is to assess the magnitude of risk and that ‘[a]fter all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child’ a court of this jurisdiction ‘is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child’s welfare’, and that ‘[t]he existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access’. i note also the first instance decision of mcguire j in isles & nelissen [2021] fedcfamc1f 295, in which at [267] his honour explains the ‘separate and predictive’ inquiry, based off ‘“possibilities” in a prospective sense’, affirmed by the full court on appeal.[94] murphy & murphy [2007] famca 795, [318]–[319].[95] godfrey & sanders [2007] famca 102, [36] (kay j), remarking that a ‘meaningful relationship’ does not mean an ‘optimal relationship’. see also mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520, [26], in which brown j describes ‘meaningful relationship’ as a relationship which is ‘important, significant and valuable to the child’.[96] family report (n 1) [72]–[75], noting also [55] at which ms k reports that x loves spending time with the father and that she was disappointed when he did not attend changeover for her birthday.[97] ibid [49]; m9 (n 57) 4.[98] m3 (n 62); m4 (n 61).[99] m3 (n 62).[100] m4 (n 61) 4.[101] m9 (n 57) 4, noting the father’s charge of driving with excess blood alcohol in 2007, for which he was convicted.[102] ibid, convictions 2007 (for the incident of 2007), 19 april 2011 (for the incident of 7 august 2010), and 1 march 2017 (for the incident of 15 december 2016), noting the total fines from all three convictions as $3,597.00 and total police impounding costs of $2,370.20.[103] the father conceded that he would drink beer regularly, but not as much as the mother alleges, and denied drinking spirits or other drinks in addition to the beers he consumed. the mother said that he would drink six bottles of beer per night, and that he would drink other alcoholic beverages on top of that on occasion. the father’s claim of frequent but measured alcohol consumption is difficult to accept in light of the police records, which indicate a longstanding and significant issue with alcohol and impulse control — the latter was conceded by the father in that he said he often made poor decisions when he was intoxicated.[104] family law act 1975 (n 72) s 68b(1).[105] family report (n 1) [67]–[68].[106] ibid [65]–[66].[107] m12 (n 73) 4.[108] m9 (n 57) 4–5; family law act 1975 (n 72) s 4 (definition of ‘family violence order’); domestic violence act 2004 (sa) s 4, as at 13 january 2002 and 4 september 2006.[109] family law act 1975 (n 72) s 65dab.[110] affidavit (father) (n 2) annex -01.[111] family law act 1975 (n 72), s 61b.[112] ibid s 61c.[113] goode & goode [2006] famca 1346, [39].[114] family law act 1975 (n 72) s 61da(2).[115] koyroyshs & koyroyshs [2020] famca 626, [84] (harper j), at which his honour cites marvel & marvel (no 2) [2009] famcafc 101 and states that ‘if the presumption applies, an order for equal shared parental responsibility will generally be made, thus displacing s 61c and triggering consideration of the provisions of s 65daa’, and further stated his own view that trial judges should order equal shared parental responsibility when the presumption applies.[116] robertson & sento [2009] famcafc 49, [41] (warnick j): ‘[s 61da(2)] does not say that, if there are reasonable grounds to believe one of the nominated circumstances exists, equal shared parental responsibility, qualified or unqualified, shall not be ordered, but merely that the presumption does not apply (at all)’. i have extracted his honour’s reasoning because his assessment is consistent with the wording of s 61da(2), and with the concept of the presumption as a legal mechanism which does not prevent an order being made in pursuance of s 60ca.[117] mrr & gr (n 88), [37]; family law act 1975 (n 72) s 65daa.[118] family law act 1975 (n 72) ss 65daa(2), 65daa(5).