last updated: 20 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
binjori & darmadi [2022] fedcfamc2f 1503
orders
the court orders that:  the father having completed his anger management counselling and men’s behavioural change course, and (b) the father having completed six months of supervised time with the children, and (c) the father having obtained a report from the supervision service that indicates the children’s time with the father has gone well, in that the father and the children appear relaxed and happy in their relationship with one another.   the father having completed six months of supervised time with the children, and (c) the father having obtained a report from the supervision service that indicates the children’s time with the father has gone well, in that the father and the children appear relaxed and happy in their relationship with one another.   the father having obtained a report from the supervision service that indicates the children’s time with the father has gone well, in that the father and the children appear relaxed and happy in their relationship with one another.   each alternate weekend, collection at school on a friday, return to school on a monday, or otherwise at 3 pm friday till 9 am monday. (b) where the children are not otherwise spending time with the father: (i) for three hours on each of the childrens and father’s birthdays as agreed, or otherwise between 4:00pm to 7:00pm, (ii) on the father’s day weekend at times as set out in order 11(a) above, (iii) despite the provision of any other order for a period of three hours on christmas day as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, from 2:00pm to 5:00pm, (iv) upon the children having spent time with the father pursuant to order 11 above for a period of 18 months, then the children shall spend half of each of the school holidays with the father as agreed, and where not agreed, in the second week of term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, and the first, third and sixth week of the christmas school holidays. for the purposes of this order, holiday weeks shall commence on a saturday at 9:00am and conclude on sunday at 5:00pm, (v) at such other time as agreed.   where the children are not otherwise spending time with the father: (i) for three hours on each of the childrens and father’s birthdays as agreed, or otherwise between 4:00pm to 7:00pm, (ii) on the father’s day weekend at times as set out in order 11(a) above, (iii) despite the provision of any other order for a period of three hours on christmas day as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, from 2:00pm to 5:00pm, (iv) upon the children having spent time with the father pursuant to order 11 above for a period of 18 months, then the children shall spend half of each of the school holidays with the father as agreed, and where not agreed, in the second week of term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, and the first, third and sixth week of the christmas school holidays. for the purposes of this order, holiday weeks shall commence on a saturday at 9:00am and conclude on sunday at 5:00pm, (v) at such other time as agreed.   for three hours on each of the childrens and father’s birthdays as agreed, or otherwise between 4:00pm to 7:00pm, (ii) on the father’s day weekend at times as set out in order 11(a) above, (iii) despite the provision of any other order for a period of three hours on christmas day as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, from 2:00pm to 5:00pm, (iv) upon the children having spent time with the father pursuant to order 11 above for a period of 18 months, then the children shall spend half of each of the school holidays with the father as agreed, and where not agreed, in the second week of term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, and the first, third and sixth week of the christmas school holidays. for the purposes of this order, holiday weeks shall commence on a saturday at 9:00am and conclude on sunday at 5:00pm, (v) at such other time as agreed.  ) on the father’s day weekend at times as set out in order 11(a) above, (iii) despite the provision of any other order for a period of three hours on christmas day as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, from 2:00pm to 5:00pm, (iv) upon the children having spent time with the father pursuant to order 11 above for a period of 18 months, then the children shall spend half of each of the school holidays with the father as agreed, and where not agreed, in the second week of term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, and the first, third and sixth week of the christmas school holidays. for the purposes of this order, holiday weeks shall commence on a saturday at 9:00am and conclude on sunday at 5:00pm, (v) at such other time as agreed.  i) despite the provision of any other order for a period of three hours on christmas day as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, from 2:00pm to 5:00pm, (iv) upon the children having spent time with the father pursuant to order 11 above for a period of 18 months, then the children shall spend half of each of the school holidays with the father as agreed, and where not agreed, in the second week of term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, and the first, third and sixth week of the christmas school holidays. for the purposes of this order, holiday weeks shall commence on a saturday at 9:00am and conclude on sunday at 5:00pm, (v) at such other time as agreed.  ) upon the children having spent time with the father pursuant to order 11 above for a period of 18 months, then the children shall spend half of each of the school holidays with the father as agreed, and where not agreed, in the second week of term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, and the first, third and sixth week of the christmas school holidays. for the purposes of this order, holiday weeks shall commence on a saturday at 9:00am and conclude on sunday at 5:00pm, (v) at such other time as agreed.   at such other time as agreed.
oral reasons for judgment
myers j:
screened in for ‘threats to kill and injure’. given that there is a history of persistent domestic violence and previous threats made by the father to harm [x], five, and [y], four. dad has threatened to kill himself and the children if mum ever left the relationship, which has been deemed as credible.   and [y] were interviewed together. they perceived that the interview had “something to do with their father” but did not understand the context. [x] remained reserved throughout while [y], the more confident child, chatted freely. they initially discussed school and friends, as well as swimming lessons organised by their mother, and seemed happy and contented. when discussing [mr binjori], both children referred to him as a “bad man”. [x] said he remembered his father hitting him in the past. further, the child had been told by [ms darmadi] that [mr binjori] punched her in the stomach when she was pregnant with him. [y] stated that although she could not remember [mr binjori], "i know he is a bad person”. contrasting the mother with the father, the children then mentioned how “good” she is and told me she looks after them very well, and is never mean to them. [x] and [y] expressed apprehension about seeing their father but this appeared primarily associated with fear of being kidnapped by him. they maintained that if they spent any time with him (either with or without supervision by another adult) he would forcibly remove them from their mother.
dr e went on to note:
the children impressed as healthy and well-groomed, and were observed interacting naturally with [ms darmadi]. however, their current perceptions of, and comments about [mr binjori], appeared significantly influenced by her.
dr e further comments at paragraph 74:
given this, one felt reluctant to place much objective weight on their views.
ms kaiti: now, ma’am, you have said bad things about [mr binjori] to the children, haven’t you? response: i never said anything bad things about – bad things about the father. ms kaiti: yes, you have, ma’am, haven’t you? response: i haven’t. ms kaiti: ma’am, you told the family report-writer – and i’m going to read the family report. do you remember mr [e]? response: yes. [mr e]. yes, i remember. ms kaiti: [mr e] said at paragraph 69 of the report that [x] said he remembered his father hitting him in the past. further, the child has been told by [ms darmadi] that [mr binjori] punched her in the stomach when she was pregnant with him. did you tell your son that [mr binjori] punched you in the stomach when you were pregnant with [x]? response: yes. ms kaiti: okay. so you have said bad things about the father to your children, haven’t you, ma’am? response: yes. ms kaiti: okay. now, if the children were to start spending time with their father again, supervised, would you refrain from saying bad things about him? response: no. ms kaiti: what do you mean, no? will you start saying bad things about him again? response: say – say – again, what did you say? ms kaiti: if the children were to start spending time with their father in a supervised setting, so in a contact centre, supervised, would you start saying bad things about the father to the children? response: i will not say bad things. ms kaiti: thank you. now, ma’am, you have told the children that the father tried to kidnap them, didn’t you? response: yes, about [x] – [x]. ms kaiti: right. so you told him that the father tried to kidnap him? response: yes. ms kaiti: okay. and you’ve also told him that he tried to hit him with a stick, didn’t you? response: yes. ms kaiti: okay. and is there anything – i’m going to ask you about the children again. is there anything positive you have to say about the father to the children? response: i do say positive things, “your dad do this, he do these things. it doesn’t matter if your dad do those things to you. he’s always going to be your father”. ms kaiti: ma’am, would you accept from me the children may be curious as to their father? response: not really.
during the interviews, the parties made strong mutual allegations which were not possible to substantiate during the assessment.
paragraph 76:
according to [ms darmadi], the father is a violent man who perpetrated ongoing family violence during the relationship and physically mistreated [x]. although the mother has suffered depression and continues to attend counselling, she cites the previous relationship as the cause. but it does not seem that the current state of mental health detracts from her day-to-day parenting.
dr e notes:
according to [mr binjori], all the mother’s allegations are untrue. he claims her alleged mental health problems had nothing to do with him or their former relationship. while [mr binjori] does appear to have come to the attention of police in the past, he maintains all such occasions were due to [ms darmadi’s] false reports.
dr e goes on to comment:
given the above situation, there seems little or no room for self-reflection or compromise. the parties remain adamant, each seeking to prove the other ‘guilty’.
paragraph 79, dr e sets out:   and [y] have not had contact with their father going on for three years. whilst their actual memories of [mr binjori] are somewhat vague, both children regard him as a threat to their security, arguably reinforced by [ms darmadi].
dr e sets out at paragraph 80:
if the father has been violent as alleged by the mother, one would need to be extremely careful in re-establishing time with the children. anger management counselling or completion of a program such as ‘taking responsibility’ would seem an essential prerequisite to any contact resuming. however, unless it is decided by the court that [mr binjori] does pose a real threat to the children’s physical or emotional security, spend time arrangements would appear in their future interests. they share a number of physical characteristics with their father, and as they develop they can be expected to become more curious about their paternal ancestry.
i would probably change that recommendation now from at least six months, and i would say that he would had to have completed the anger management counselling, as well as the taking responsibility course before consideration of supervised contact occurs. in terms of the contact centre support, i would need to look at the contact centre records up to that stage to see how the father and the children’s relationship had progressed, and the contact centre is usually in a pretty good position in my experience to know whether it’s appropriate now to commence some unsupervised contact. often what happens with situations where there has been ongoing contact for six to 12 months, the contact centre will then agree to be the changeover agent after a period of time and start off with, say, some day contact where the changeover occurs at the contact centre and the change-back occurs at the contact centre. so i would envisage something along those lines happening.   the father has completed his anger management counselling and men’s behavioural change course, (b) the father has completed six months of supervised time, and (c) the father has obtained a report from the supervision service that indicates the children’s time with the father has gone well, in that the father and the children appear relaxed and happy in their relationship with one another.   the father has completed six months of supervised time, and (c) the father has obtained a report from the supervision service that indicates the children’s time with the father has gone well, in that the father and the children appear relaxed and happy in their relationship with one another.   the father has obtained a report from the supervision service that indicates the children’s time with the father has gone well, in that the father and the children appear relaxed and happy in their relationship with one another.
associate: dated: 10 october 2022
dated: 10 october 2022